<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981122.0117 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Hayes Williams is haunted by closed doors. In the long, narrow house 
on Lopez Street, what people here call a shotgun house, every inside 
door is ajar, cabinets are open, kitchen drawers are pulled half open. 
His fiancee, Linda Wilson, will come home from her job at the pharmacy 
and find the house this way, and she thinks about scolding him a little. 
``But I'll stop when I think about why he does it,'' Ms. Wilson said. 
He is not messy, she said. He is just a man who knows what the inside 
of a box looks like, when it closes shut. ``I don't like closing up 
nothing,'' said Williams, who served 30 years in Angola Prison for 
a killing he played no part in, except to stand outside a filling 
station as an argument between two acquaintances and the station owner 
escalated into a gun battle that the courts called second-degree murder. 
A federal judge, taking into consideration a 1997 state court ruling 
in which a judge found that prosecutors withheld evidence from the 
1967 case that could have proved Williams' innocence, freed him 18 
months ago. Williams, who has a prison tattoo of a cross on his right 
forearm, went straight to Rampart Street and lit a candle at the shrine 
of St. Jude, the saint of lost causes. He prayed, and wondered why, 
in the grip of such joy, he was so afraid. The next day, as he thought 
about going for a walk, as his fingers touched the doorknob, he knew. 
He knew, Williams said, that being turned loose and actually living 
free, free in his own mind, were not the same. He walked into prison 
at 19. Now he is almost 50, living in a world he does not remember, 
constantly afraid some minor blunder, some innocent mistake, will 
make people laugh at him, and even more afraid that a trivial brush 
with the law, some bad luck, will steal his freedom again. ``Inside, 
I used to pray,'' Williams said. ``I wanted freedom. I didn't care 
if I lived face-down in a sewage ditch, if I was a bum on a railroad 
track. Lord, let me be on a corner, begging for food. But let me be 
free. ``That first morning, you go to the door, your hand hits the 
knob, and you say, `I can do this.' And you open it, a crack, but 
you don't go out. You peek. Because you don't know how to act. So 
you just stand there, looking out. I'll go out, you say to yourself, 
eventually.'' It is freedom, but 18 months later it still feels brittle 
and paper thin. ``You're afraid someone will say, `Look at that fool,' 
'' he said, if he is seen reaching for the handle of an automatic 
door that has already opened, or seen walking for blocks along Canal 
Street with a wadded-up sandwich wrapper in his hand, because he did 
not not recognize the new garbage cans. ``It's important to me,'' 
he said, ``not to look like a fool.'' Inside the prison, he had become 
a hero. A trim, thoughtful man, his name is now synonymous with prison 
reform in Louisiana. The son of a middle-class family who pleaded 
guilty to second-degree murder to spare his family the embarrassment 
of a trial, Williams and four other state prisoners filed landmark 
lawsuits in the 1970s that forced an overhaul of the prison that the 
federal courts called the most brutal and corrupt in the country. 
Rape, stabbings, sickness, bodies stuffed under barracks, pieces of 
rat in biscuits all swirl in his head. ``Imagine the worst moment 
of your life, and then think of living that moment every minute, every 
hour, every day, of every year, and that's Angola,'' said Williams, 
who carried a rolled-up magazine with a six-inch blade inside to survive 
the first day. As the reforms he helped force took hold, he only got 
older. ``I go to sleep and I dream about Angola,'' he said, sitting 
in that house with the open doors, where a man can stand inside the 
front door and throw a baseball all the way through it. ``I guess 
I'll dream about it till the day I die.'' But like any dream, of falling 
off a cliff or stepping on a snake, he wakes to a reality, to a house 
where doors lock from the inside. And freedom, he has learned, is 
just another dream he has awakened from. ``You always feel,'' he said, 
``like you're not living up to the expectations of the free people.'' 
He walks through it so, so softly, determined to do everything right. 
In 18 months, his only offense has been a parking ticket. He has a 
good job, on an oil rig out in the Gulf of Mexico. He has Ms. Williams, 
and friends, and some family. It will take time, his friends believe, 
for him to feel at home again, for that anxiety to fade. ``That's 
a hellish transition, when you're trying to show you can belong,'' 
said John Lewis, the assistant deputy director of Project Return, 
a program at Tulane University to help former inmates make the transition 
to the free world. ``You're lost, completely lost.'' Lewis knows. 
He served 20 years at Angola on a narcotics conviction. ``It's just 
that everything is so new,'' Ms. Wilson said of Williams. Neighborhoods 
that once rang with rhythm and blues now throb with rap, and whole 
streets, whole sounds and sights and sensations, just seem wrong: 
crack dealers working the sidewalks of neighborhoods where he used 
to go to fish fries; houses, the ones in his old neighborhoods that 
people worked a lifetime to buy, in ruins; his father and mother dead, 
long before his freedom; interstate highways, which he is still afraid 
to navigate, crisscross the city on elevated lanes, their giant concrete 
columns reaching up from where neighborhoods had stood. Some days, 
New Orleans is like the dark side of the moon. ``Who ever heard of 
a carjacking?'' Williams said. He grew up in the 9th and 7th wards, 
the Catholic-school son of respected parents. Until that night in 
1967, he had never been in trouble; no one in his family had. According 
to trial records, he was standing outside the gas station when Larry 
Hudson and John Duplessis, men he had been out drinking with, argued 
inside with the station owner, Oscar Meeks, over the price of fixing 
a flat tire. Duplessis and Meeks pulled pistols and fired at each 
other, according to trial testimony. Meeks was mortally wounded. Williams 
said there was no robbery, but all three men, on the word of one witness, 
who later changed his story, were charged with robbery and murder. 
The three are black. Meeks was white. A lawyer, who was later disbarred 
for alcoholism, told Williams he could be free in 10 years and 6 months 
if he pleaded guilty, and he warned him that if he did not, he could 
get the electric chair, said Williams' new lawyer, A.F. Armond, who 
handled the case for free. Williams said he had heard that the electric 
chair ``made the blood in your body boil,'' but he still refused to 
plead guilty until his family, embarrassed by news accounts and afraid 
he would get the chair, begged him to put a stop to the publicity. 
But Williams' 10-year sentence stretched into life under his sentencing 
guidelines. The two other men were given the death penalty, but as 
it turned out, both were released from prison long before Williams 
was. A state judge ruled that witnesses had lied and prosecutors had 
withheld other evidence in the case. Duplessis, the shooter, was pardoned 
in 1988. Hudson's conviction was overturned in 1993. Williams rode 
to Angola in chains on March 27, 1968, sitting on the floor of what 
seemed to be a converted ice cream truck. As the new inmates lined 
up, a guard with tobacco juice running down his chin started using 
a racial epithet as he ordered one black inmate to tell another ``to 
run and look on the dash of my truck and bring me my tobacco knife,'' 
said Williams, who, as one of the lighter-skinned blacks in the New 
Orleans social strata, had seldom heard the epithet in his presence. 
``I said to myself, `Lord have mercy, Jesus. Where am I at now?' '' 
An inmate who had befriended him in the parish jail in New Orleans, 
Arthur Mitchell, handed him a magazine with a sharp blade inside. 
The other inmates noticed how the magazine seemed not to bend the 
way a magazine should, and left him alone in those crucial first days, 
when new inmates either fought for their lives, or became someone's 
``gal boy,'' Williams said. An escape attempt, one year later, taught 
him the true brutality of Angola. He was thrown into what some called 
the dungeon, a tiny cell supposedly for one man but sometimes packed 
with so many prisoners there was room only to stand, with just a hole 
in the floor for a toilet and bread and water to eat. It was pitch-black, 
and at night the rats and roaches swarmed. Marked as a troublemaker, 
Williams felt sure he would become one of the inmates who just disappeared 
or were beaten or stabbed to death. He felt he had nothing to lose 
when he began collecting information about the abuses at Angola, information 
that would become fodder in a series of successful lawsuits. In 1975, 
U.S. District Court Judge E. Gordon West ruled that conditions at 
Angola ``shock the conscience,'' and he placed the prison under federal 
control. After that, Williams was rejected again and again by the 
parole board, still under state control, even as his lawyers piled 
up evidence that he had had no direct involvement in the killing and 
even after his co-defendants had been released. Finally, two years 
ago, lawyers won a new trial for Williams, and the district attorney's 
office in New Orleans decided not to prosecute him anew. A judge then 
dismissed the murder charge. It took another few months for a federal 
judge to order him released, for time served, on charges relating 
to one of two escape efforts. He walked out in May 1997, to see a 
daughter, who had been 6 months old when he was locked away, and a 
niece, and a few other people who had not forgotten him. When he was 
freed, The Angolite, the respected prison publication at Angola, wrote 
this: ``Williams, during his confinement, earned a place in penal 
history by becoming the catalyst that turned Angola from a slaughterhouse 
into the safest maximum-security prison in the nation.'' When Williams 
walked from the federal courthouse in New Orleans a free man, he paused 
and closed his eyes. ``I didn't want them to see the fear,'' he said. 
It did not matter that it was unreasonable, that he would not take 
a walk because he was afraid some woman would point him out at random 
and yell ``rape.'' The fear was real. As a sort of shield, he held 
his niece's infant in his arms when he went on walks. No one could 
accuse him of a crime, he reasoned, with a baby in his arms. Finally, 
he walked alone, then walked farther, then got a car and drove tentatively 
around neighborhoods half-remembered. He attended group therapy sessions 
in the Project Return program at Tulane. He inched back into freedom, 
inched away from fear. He was terrified of women, of intimacy, he 
said. It had, after all, been 30 years. He needed work, real work, 
to build a life. This past summer, through a friend, he met Ms. Wilson, 
who understands the bad days. He got the job on the oil rig, hard, 
real work. Most people work 14 days on and 7 off, because it is confining 
and lonely at the same time, men marooned by all that blue water. 
Williams has worked as long as eight weeks in a row. He is an expert 
at confinement. But before he goes to his cramped bunk, he sits on 
the deck at night, black sky melting into black water, 300 miles out 
in the Gulf. ``And all I can see are twinkling lights of another rig, 
in the distance,'' he said. He thinks about what was lost, and tries, 
as he tries every day, to keep his bitterness buried deep inside. 
``I have my freedom,'' he said, but of being truly free, ``I pray 
to God that can happen.'' Even free people, he knows, are prisoners 
of their own anxiety. But they, he said with a smile, are not usually 
terrified of a department store. ``I hate,'' he said, ``those revolving 
doors.'' 
</TEXT>
</DOC>