<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981122.0190 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
In the history of women in politics, November may go down as the month 
Rep. Deborah Pryce, R-Ohio, was re-elected secretary of the Republican 
House leadership conference. Ms. Pryce won by a unanimous vote, possibly 
nailing down the secretary job for years to come. The post-election 
theme for women in politics is stasis. The number of female senators 
is frozen at nine, and governors at three. In the House, which added 
a couple of new women, Republicans elected Ms. Pryce and Rep. Tillie 
Fowler of Florida to the same bottom two spots women held last term. 
Rep. Jennifer Dunn of Washington took a shot at majority leader but 
came in third. Ms. Fowler, a positive thinker, feels this should still 
be regarded as progress: ``She's paving the way. No woman had ever 
run before.'' Barbara Sinclair, a professor of political science at 
the University of California at Los Angeles, put the matter rather 
more directly. At least a woman ran for a power post and ``people 
aren't laughing at her.'' Some people believed Ms. Dunn's quest for 
the majority leader's post was doomed because she is pro-choice, at 
least in the extremely narrow version that favors legal abortion but 
does not worry much about who has access to it. The choice issue has 
been a stumbling block for Republican women who get near the top of 
the food chain, where the right-to-life lobby has considerable veto 
powers. Others, including Ms. Fowler, say Ms. Dunn lost because she 
got in the race late. That would fit rather tidily into the theory 
that one of the reasons women have failed to reach the very top levels 
of political power is that they are hesitant about running for a job 
until the last detail of preparation is in place. But Ms. Dunn also 
had a lot of detractors who have not been reading up on the theory 
of gender parity in politics. Some of them claimed she was unsubstantial 
_ good at glossing over differences and honey-coating political unpleasantness, 
but unwilling to make hard choices. The downside of Ms. Dunn has to 
be taken in context. This is a race in which the person who won was 
Dick Armey of Texas, one of the participants in a plot to oust Speaker 
Newt Gingrich a while back that failed after Armey got cold feet and 
ratted out his fellow plotters. After he won a rather grueling re-election 
to the No. 2 job in the House last week, Armey described the fight 
as a ``race of enthusiasm and energy and commitment to principles 
to which we all have a good subscription.'' His powers of speech had 
clearly been weakened by the strain of trying to look like a gracious 
winner. Ms. Dunn's remarks were very brief _ just a few sentences. 
But she managed to fit in the word ``great'' three times, as well 
as a ``wonderful'' and a ``delighted.'' On the other hand, the guy 
who came in second, Rep. Steve Largent of Oklahoma, sounded positively 
sullen. Although his statement was even briefer than Ms. Dunn's, Largent 
did take time to refer to his former career as a football player. 
There are days when it seems as if the House of Representatives has 
more jocks than the Dallas Cowboys' locker room. The point here is 
not that the world is a darker place today because Jennifer Dunn is 
not in the House leadership, but that when a woman and a man compete 
for what has always been seen as a man's job, the flaws in the woman's 
character seem more noticeable and disturbing. They tend to be new 
flaws, and people who had gotten used to being led by a right-wing 
bully who can't be relied on in a pinch got very nervous at the idea 
of replacing him with a mealy-mouthed woman who spins too much. The 
Democratic minority, meanwhile, has elected an all-male team. Rep. 
Rosa DeLauro of Connecticut lost a fight for the third-ranking post 
of conference chair to Martin Frost of Texas, who turned out to be 
the first Jewish member elected to the party's House leadership. That 
raised the dispiriting possibility that the Democrats were still involved 
in carrying out their inclusionary agenda for 1958. But the underlying 
dynamic was actually pretty simple. A woman who is known for her speeches 
on bills before the House was competing against the man who led the 
fund-raising effort for Democrats running for re-election. She lost. 
This is not chauvinism. This is life as we know it. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>