<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981122.0148 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
When the CIA uncovered what its analysts considered to be conclusive 
evidence of the personal corruption of Prime Minister Viktor Chernomyrdin 
of Russia in 1995, they sent it to the White House, expecting Clinton 
administration officials to be impressed with their work. Instead, 
when the secret CIA report on Chernomyrdin arrived in the office of 
Vice President Al Gore, it was rejected and sent back to the CIA with 
a barnyard epithet scrawled across its cover, according to several 
intelligence officials familiar with the incident. At CIA headquarters 
in Langley, Va., the message seemed clear: The vice president did 
not want to hear allegations that Chernomyrdin was corrupt and was 
not interested in further intelligence reports on the matter. As a 
result, CIA analysts say they are now censoring themselves. When, 
for instance, the agency found that it cost a German business executive 
$1 million just to get a meeting with Chernomyrdin to discuss deals 
in Russia, it decided not to circulate the report outside the CIA, 
officials said. Gore, who held regular talks with Chernomyrdin that 
became an important channel for relations with Russia, declined to 
comment on the handling of the report. ``I never discuss top-secret 
documents,'' Gore said in an interview. Yet a senior aide to Gore 
said his office always wants more intelligence, not less. ``The real 
attitude around here about intelligence is, can't do business without 
it,'' the aide said. But that was not the lesson learned at the CIA. 
The incident has fostered a perception in the agency's ranks that 
the administration is dismissive of ``inconvenient'' intelligence 
about corruption among the Russian leaders with whom White House and 
State Department officials have developed close personal relationships. 
These complaints seem unrealistic to the White House and foreign policy 
officials who insist that they could not allow allegations of corruption 
to deter them from working with the Russian leadership on a range 
of issues, from curbing the spread of weapons to increasing U.S. trade 
with Russia. Some add that making corruption among the Russian leadership 
a high priority would be a losing battle. ``What does the CIA want 
us to do, not deal with the prime minister of Russia?'' a senior administration 
official said. This disagreement between the CIA and the White House 
has flared during Russia's economic crisis, and CIA officials argue 
that the White House should be more interested in unvarnished information 
about corruption in Moscow, especially as the United States and other 
nations were trying to determine whether Russia deserved billions 
more in Western aid money. Instead, these critics say the administration 
seems willing to try to deal with the crisis with one eye closed. 
``They never want to hear this stuff,'' complained an intelligence 
official who asked not to be identified. Another said: ``They don't 
ignore it. But they don't want to have to act on it.'' Several senior 
administration officials acknowledged in interviews that they had 
received a number of reports from the CIA alleging corruption by Chernomyrdin, 
who was ousted as prime minister in March and made an unsuccessful 
bid to return to the post this fall. Officials also say the agency 
has submitted many other reports alleging corruption among other senior 
Russian leaders, including Anatoly Chubais, who until recently was 
considered by administration officials to be one of their closest 
and most important Russian allies on economic reform. But the administration 
officials contend that the CIA reports never contained enough evidence 
to prompt them to distance themselves from Chernomyrdin, Chubais or 
other senior Russian officials who had become important counterparts 
in diplomatic and economic relations. In fact, several administration 
officials were dismissive of the CIA reports, saying they were often 
inconclusive and thinly sourced. Those officials also said that they 
had frequently asked the CIA for more conclusive proof, but that the 
agency never delivered. ``To my knowledge, they have never presented 
us with a smoking gun,'' an administration official said. ``I would 
describe some of the agency's material as being in the realm of rumor.'' 
CIA officials counter that the administration established impossibly 
high standards of proof to make it easier for the White House and 
State Department officials to dismiss their reports. ``These people 
have expected something no one in the intelligence community could 
provide _ judicial burden of proof,'' an agency official said. ``Did 
we have an authenticated videotape of the person actually receiving 
a bribe? No. But reporting from established, reliable sources was 
written off as `vague and unsubstantiated.''' Agency analysts refused 
to describe much of the classified evidence they provided to the administration 
against Chernomyrdin and Chubais. But they insisted that it was more 
detailed and conclusive than allegations of bribery and insider dealing 
that have been made in the Russian media and elsewhere. In response, 
Andrei Trapeznikov, a spokesman for Chubais in Moscow, complained 
that if the CIA had evidence against Chubais, the agency should make 
it public. ``If they have something, they should tell it officially,'' 
said Trapeznikov, head of press relations for Unified Energy Systems, 
the Moscow company where Chubais is now president. ``We haven't seen 
these reports.'' Told that administration officials had been dismissive 
of much of the CIA reporting, Trapeznikov said, ``I think that shows 
the situation.'' Chernomyrdin was unavailable for comment, and his 
staff refused to discuss the matter when reached in Moscow. The administration 
never even paid much attention to the many allegations that have been 
made publicly against both men over the last several years. Chubais, 
unpopular in Russia for his management of the economic reforms, was 
ousted from the Yeltsin government for a time last year after reports 
that he and four other government officials had each accepted $90,000 
in advances for a proposed book on the country's privatization efforts. 
The publisher was partly owned by a bank that had made several successful 
bids in privatization sales. The privatization program itself has 
also been at the center of charges of insider dealing benefiting a 
handful of the new Russian oligarchs. Meanwhile, Chernomyrdin, the 
former head of Russia's huge natural-gas monopoly, Gazprom, has been 
publicly accused of using his influence over Gazprom's privatization 
program to make himself one of the country's richest men. His personal 
fortune has been estimated to be as high as $5 billion, his Russian 
critics have said. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>