<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981122.0143 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Driven by budget constraints as much as diminishing security threats, 
Pentagon officials are quietly recommending that the Clinton administration 
consider unilateral reductions in the nation's nuclear arsenal. Since 
the United States has already committed itself to drastic cuts in 
its nuclear arsenal, the Pentagon believes that the unilateral reductions 
would have no effect on America's ability to deter a nuclear adversary. 
The recommendations, if adopted, would reduce the American arsenal 
below the 6,000 nuclear warheads allowed by the first strategic arms 
reduction treaty, or START I, senior administration officials said. 
The United States and Russia have signed a second arms treaty, START 
II, that would cut their arsenals even more sharply, to between 3,000 
and 3,500 warheads. But for nearly six years, Russia's Parliament 
has refused to approve START II. Because of Russia's delay, and U.S. 
legislation blocking unilateral cuts, the Pentagon faces the prospect 
of paying hundreds of millions of dollars to maintain _ and soon to 
rebuild _ nuclear weapons that the United States has already agreed 
to scrap. The Pentagon has spent $95 million more over the past two 
years than it would have if START II had taken effect. Next year it 
would cost $100 million more, and the year after that, $1 billion. 
The Navy, in particular, could be forced to pay more than $5 billion 
between now and 2003 to refuel nuclear reactors and install new missiles 
on four Trident ballistic-missile submarines that would otherwise 
be dismantled. With this budget crunch looming, the Pentagon submitted 
to Congress a highly classified report last April that outlined nine 
proposals for reducing the strategic arsenal unilaterally. Neither 
President Clinton nor Secretary of Defense William Cohen has made 
a decision on the recommendations, and a senior White House official 
said they would not do so until Russia's Communist-dominated Parliament 
completes its latest deliberations on START II, which was signed in 
1993. Although Russia's nationalists and Communists have vehemently 
opposed the treaty, the lower house has begun debate and could vote 
as soon as December. The Pentagon's recommendations underline the 
stakes: START II's ratification would not only rid the world of thousands 
of nuclear warheads, but would also save the United States billions 
of dollars that the Pentagon would rather spend elsewhere or that 
Congress might allocate to other programs. Officials in Washington 
and Russia agree that prospects for ratification have improved as 
the realization sinks in that Russia's economic problems have left 
the country hard pressed to maintain a nuclear force as large as that 
allowed by START I. ``I'm reluctant to discuss at all Plan B,'' one 
White House official said of the Pentagon's recommendations, ``when 
we have the best on-course momentum here in a long, long time for 
Plan A.'' But if the Russian Parliament again rejects the treaty, 
officials in the Pentagon plan to recommend that Clinton seek permission 
from Congress to move ahead with unilateral reductions. The officials 
said a decision could come as part of the budget Clinton will submit 
to Congress early next year. Adm. Richard Mies, the new commander 
of the nation's strategic arsenal, said the United States was committed 
to maintaining a ``robust and credible force.'' But he suggested that 
this effort did not preclude unilateral cuts in warheads or the systems 
to deliver them. ``I think you will inevitably see us take some unilateral 
actions that we have to take to modernize our forces and maybe streamline 
our forces to some degree,'' Mies said in an interview last week at 
the U.S. Strategic Command headquarters at Offutt Air Force Base in 
Nebraska. ``We're driven by our own imperatives.'' Mies did not elaborate 
on what steps were under consideration. In recent weeks, however, 
Pentagon and administration aides have begun discussions with congressional 
staff members as they draw up next year's budget and decide whether 
to set aside enough money for a larger nuclear force, the officials 
said. In each of the last two years, Republicans in Congress have 
put language in the Department of Defense's budget bills explicitly 
prohibiting reductions below START I levels by the United States alone. 
Some administration officials and members of Congress have argued 
that the legislation is necessary to press the Russians to ratify 
START II. Others dispute the effect that such legislation has had 
on the Russian Parliament's deliberation, and argue that unilateral 
reductions could revive a stagnant arms control process. ``The issue 
is, how much longer are we going to pay to stay at a higher level 
to retain some leverage over the Russians to ratify the treaty,'' 
a senior defense official said. Under START I, which was signed in 
1991, the United States has drastically reduced its arsenal of strategic 
nuclear warheads, from more than 10,000 to about 7,000 today. In Helsinki, 
Finland, in March 1997, Clinton and President Boris Yeltsin agreed 
that once the lower house approved START II, the United States and 
Russia would begin talks on still further reductions, to 2,000 to 
2,500 warheads. Political pressures for slashing the number of warheads 
have begun to grow here. In a speech to the Council on Foreign Relations 
in New York last week, Sen. Bob Kerrey, D-Neb., called on the administration 
to make unilateral reductions and take other steps that would reassure 
Russia, including removing remaining warheads from the highest state 
of alert. Kerrey said he would seek to repeal the congressional limits 
on further reductions, arguing that among other things, the higher 
levels of weapons sapped money from efforts to combat ``newer threats'' 
like terrorism and ethnic wars. ``Our old policies of arms control 
and deterrence no long work and may be increasing the danger,'' he 
said, ``both by making nuclear threats worse and by diverting money 
and resources away from the conventional forces that are the key to 
our safety in the post-Cold War world.'' In its budgets, the Pentagon 
has already anticipated reducing the arsenal to START II levels over 
the next several years. Likewise, strategists have concluded that 
a nuclear force as small as that planned under START III, which has 
not yet been negotiated, can adequately defend the United States, 
making spending on anything more seem wasteful. Administration officials 
declined to spell out the proposals under consideration should the 
Russian Parliament fail to ratify START II. But one senior military 
official said some options would allow the Pentagon to reduce the 
number of warheads to 5,000 to 6,000 and reduce or eliminate some 
categories of strategic weapons. Under these plans, the Navy would 
move ahead with its current plan to reduce its fleet of 18 Trident 
submarines by retiring the four oldest by 2003. The Air Force would 
be able to reduce or eliminate the stockpile of 50 intercontinental 
ballistic missiles that it is now financing in its budget year to 
year. In both cases, Congress has prohibited reductions in those forces. 
The senior military official called the money spent on updating those 
forces as ``rat hole dollars.'' ``We don't necessarily feel we should 
be locked into a certain force structure,'' the official said. ``We 
want to have flexibility.'' 
</TEXT>
</DOC>