<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981122.0177 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
In this season of possibilities, the Jets broke out with three impressive 
second-half touchdowns against the Oilers after being frustrated in 
the early going Sunday, and they went on to produce one of their best 
games of the year. The Jets defeated Tennessee, 24-3, to bring their 
record to 7-4, matching the Buffalo Bills. That will be good enough 
for a three-way tie for first place in the American Football Conference 
East if the Miami Dolphins lose their Monday night game with the New 
England Patriots. The victory ended what Coach Bill Parcells described 
as a critical six-game stretch that could have left the Jets poised 
for a stretch run _ or in serious trouble. The Jets won five of the 
six. ``I was anxious,'' Parcells said, reflecting on last week's last-minute 
loss to the lowly Colts, ``but now I really look forward to coming 
home.'' The Jets play the 2-9 Carolina Panthers at the Meadowlands 
next Sunday. The cast of characters on offense is becoming familiar, 
and good, for the Jets these days. Quarterback Vinny Testaverde woke 
up this morning with a stomach virus. He got here five hours before 
game time, received an intravenous injection and medicine before the 
game, and started. Curtis Martin saw him holding his stomach and wondered 
if Testaverde would be all right. Testaverde was, he said later, ``feeling 
lousy'' when the game began. Still, he tossed two touchdown passes 
in his life-begins-at-34 comeback. The Jets are 7-1 with him starting. 
Sunday's numbers included 21-for-33 passing for 237 yards and no interceptions. 
With Martin adding 123 yards rushing on 27 carries _ with 96 yards 
after halftime _ the usually disruptive Oiler defense did not know 
which way to turn or how much to pressure for the run. The Jets' defense 
recovered from some early problems in recognizing what the Oilers 
were up to. Tennessee had won five of its last six games. And in the 
second quarter, the Jets could not quite get to Eddie George on the 
ground, or prevent Steve McNair from making something happen with 
his physical approach to quarterbacking. ``We just had to settle down,'' 
linebacker Mo Lewis said. ``They showed us things we hadn't seen.'' 
Still, the Oilers failed to capitalize on those early Jet problems. 
Essentially, the Jets' defense did exactly what the clever game plan 
called for: halt George and contain McNair. The play that produced 
the first touchdown, after almost three quarters of play, seemed to 
spark the Jets and dishearten the Oilers. It has become a Jet favorite: 
Testaverde to the 6-foot-3-inch Keyshawn Johnson, who was six inches 
taller than the Oilers' defender, cornerback Darryll Lewis. ``Like 
taking candy from a baby,'' the always-confident Johnson said of the 
3-yard scoring catch, which gave the Jets a 10-3 lead. It was the 
third time this season he had scored on the play. Johnson caught a 
career-high 10 passes Sunday for 112 yards. Within five minutes of 
Johnson's score, Testaverde found Keith Byars in the end zone for 
a 2-yard score. Finally, with the Oilers' defense not knowing whether 
to play the run or the pass, Testaverde made a simple pitchout to 
Martin that produced a 31-yard touchdown. Before the game, three of 
the Jets' offensive linemen had been growling. Left guard Todd Burger 
had complained to center Kevin Mawae and right tackle Jason Fabini 
that they had failed to spring Martin for a run longer than 17 yards. 
They probably did not know that Martin had not generated a run longer 
than 20 yards in more than 300 carries going back to last year at 
New England. So they blocked enough for him to produce his touchdown 
run. Much of this season he has been cutting to the outside after 
taking the pitchout, usually because the hole did not materialize. 
``I could see it developing clearly today,'' he said following his 
sixth 100-yard game as a Jet. Despite a remarkable possession time 
of 13 minutes 40 seconds, the Jets failed to amass any points in the 
opening period. Their first drive consumed 6:12 and moved with Testaverde 
connecting with a variety of receivers. But the drive stalled on the 
Oilers' 21. From there, John Hall was asked to deliver a 39-yard field 
goal. But he mis-hit the ball, and it wobbled off to the left. Now 
it was the Oilers' turn to wobble. George bobbled a pitchback from 
McNair on their first play, and tight end Jackie Harris dropped a 
McNair pass on the second. It was three-and-out, and the Jets controlled 
the ball the rest of the period. The Jets carried their second drive 
over to the second quarter and finally generated points when Hall 
converted a 43-yard field goal. It took the Jets 14 plays to go the 
55 yards to position the score. The Oilers still could not get out 
of their own way until their third drive. McNair fumbled a snap the 
second time they got the ball, and they even were given two straight 
penalties on punt attempts. Finally, on their third drive, the Oilers, 
with George running powerfully and McNair moving and passing well, 
got down to the Jets' 9. Then Frank Wycheck fumbled on third and 3, 
and the Oilers produced only a 34-yard field goal by Al Del Greco. 
The Oilers dominated the second period, possessing the ball for 12:17, 
but had only 3 points. The first major break for either side came 
the Jets' way in the third quarter, when wide receiver Wayne Chrebet 
benefited from a pass interference penalty on cornerback Samari Rolle. 
The 35-yard penalty on a pass from Testaverde took the Jets to the 
Tennessee 27. From there, Martin's running helped get them to the 
3. That is when Testaverde and Johnson converted on what has become 
one of the significant strategies in the entire league: the mismatch. 
Johnson leaped, and Lewis could not leap higher. Testaverde tossed 
his 18th touchdown of the season (to only four interceptions) early 
in the fourth quarter when the Jets took a 17-3 edge on another smart 
drive. At the end, Testaverde faked a handoff at the 2 to Martin. 
The play-action worked and Byars was in the end zone for the touchdown 
pass. There was no faked handoff on the next Jet drive, which led 
to the crushing score. Instead, Testaverde collaborated on his favorite 
play with Martin: the pitchout. It has worked well throughout the 
season, but never so well as Sunday when it was good for the 31-yard 
score. It was Martin's longest run of the season. ``If we win our 
remaining games,'' Testaverde said, ``we'll win the division. It's 
as simple as that.'' He didn't look so bad going to the bus. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>