<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981122.0115 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
With the House moving quickly toward a series of critical decisions 
on whether to impeach President Clinton, the White House signaled 
on Sunday that it was open to any ``serious and reasonable'' compromise 
that would allow the president to put the year-long scandal behind 
him. The comments by Gregory Craig, a White House special counsel, 
were similar to past statements opening the door to some kind of censure 
or rebuke short of removing Clinton from office. But the remarks took 
on added significance, because the appearance of Kenneth Starr before 
the House Judiciary Committee last week cleared the way for the House 
to move toward the conclusion of its inquiry. ``The president has 
said _ and I want to repeat _ that we are in favor of any serious 
and reasonable proposition that has the promise of bringing this to 
a prompt and just conclusion,'' Craig said on NBC's ``Meet the Press.'' 
Craig did not elaborate. And he also stuck uncompromisingly to the 
White House contention _ widely derided by Republicans and Democrats 
alike _ that Clinton never lied under oath about his relationship 
with Monica Lewinsky. In his own appearance on NBC, Robert Livingston, 
the incoming speaker, did not close the door to a censure vote, saying 
such a proposal could originate through the House Judiciary Committee 
and the House Rules Committee. But the Louisiana Republican appeared 
to indicate that such a course was not his first preference. ``If 
the House should decide to proceed with articles of impeachment, which 
means all they do is to charge the president, then the plea bargain 
in my mind seems to me more appropriately a question for the Senate 
rather than for the House,'' Livingston said. The stepped-up discussions 
of Clinton's fate came as the ideologically polarized House Judiciary 
Committee is almost certain to vote along party lines to approve at 
least one article of impeachment against the president for perjury. 
That vote, according to Capitol Hill Republicans, is now expected 
in the week of Dec. 7. But it remains questionable whether impeachment 
would be approved by the full House in the face of the midterm election 
results, in which the House Republican majority was clipped to six 
seats, and overwhelming public opinion against removing Clinton from 
office. Six Republicans thus far have said definitively that they 
will oppose impeachment. Rep. Christopher Shays, R-Conn., has said 
he thinks that number could grow to 20 _ which would be enough votes 
to defeat impeachment on the House floor. Senior Democratic staffers 
say only a handful of House Democrats will vote for the president 
to be impeached. With even Democrats still wanting the president to 
face some punishment for his affair with a White House intern and 
misleading testimony about it, Rep. Martin Meehan, D-Mass., on Sunday 
appealed for Livingston to negotiate a compromise on censure. Otherwise, 
he said on ABC's ``This Week,'' ``Republicans will have no one to 
blame but themselves if the president gets off without anything at 
all.'' Rep. Martin Frost of Texas, who has just been elevated to the 
third-ranking position in the House Democratic leadership, said this 
weekend that any censure agreement would likely require the president 
to come to the well of the House and make a public statement.``Clearly 
something should be done,'' he said on Fox News. ``Most Democrats 
recognize that.'' But Democrats also acknowledge that censure needs 
to be a bipartisan option with at least some significant Republican 
support. And it is far from clear whether a coalition can be formed 
around such a compromise. Some of the Republicans who oppose impeachment 
have also expressed doubts about censure, saying it is not a constitutional 
procedure and could set a dangerous precedent for subjecting future 
presidents to the whims of Congress. Some moderate Democrats have 
been quietly sounding out fellow Republicans, and White House officials 
have begun trying to gauge the mood of a handful of moderate Republicans. 
The White House is also looking to open some communication with Livingston, 
perhaps early this week. Livingston so far has been scrupulous about 
letting Rep. Henry Hyde, the chairman of the Judiciary Committee, 
take the lead in impeachment proceedings. Every time his predecessor 
as speaker, Rep. Newt Gingrich, became involved in the process, he 
was accused by Democrats of politicizing it. Livingston said Sunday 
that if the Judiciary Committee sends articles of impeachment to the 
House in the next few weeks, he will ask Gingrich, who remains speaker 
until the 106th Congress convenes in January, to call the current 
Congress back into special session. Gingrich's aides have said he 
will defer to Livingston on impeachment. ``I wouldn't imagine that 
it would take a lot of debate,'' Livingston said of a vote on articles 
of impeachment, suggesting that two to three hours would suffice. 
``Vote on the issue up or down and be done with it.'' He added, ``If 
we did not have the votes to sustain the charge, that would be it.'' 
He left the door open to an alternative to impeachment, such as censure, 
if impeachment did not pass, saying that would be a matter for the 
Judiciary and Rules committees in conjunction with the current House 
leadership. ``I would think that that would certainly be a possibility,'' 
he said, ``but I wouldn't prejudge that at this time.'' Livingston, 
once a prosecutor himself, noted that perjury is a felony. ``If it 
is shown that the president of the United States is guilty of perjury, 
we have a major problem,'' he said. ``What to do about it is a political 
problem and should be weighed again by each member when it's presented 
to them.'' Craig on Sunday asked House members to consider, in the 
face of strong public opinion against removing the president from 
office, ``Do you push the automatic impeachment button, or do you 
exercise some discretion and use your judgment as to what should be 
done?'' He did not spell out what alternative Clinton would accept 
or whether the president would seek guarantees that he would not be 
prosecuted for perjury after leaving office. Jim Kennedy, a White 
House spokesman, said in a telephone interview after Craig's appearance 
that ``the details of any solution are not for us to dictate or decide.'' 
Craig also said on Sunday that the president would respond this week 
to 81 questions sent him by Hyde on November 5 asking him to admit 
or deny findings gleaned from the independent counsel's 445-page report, 
which cited evidence of 11 possibly impeachable offenses. The Judiciary 
Committee is planning to continue its investigation on Monday by taking 
a closed-door deposition from Daniel Gecker, a lawyer for Kathleen 
Willey. Ms. Willey, a former White House volunteer, has said Clinton 
made a sexual advance toward her outside the Oval Office. Committee 
Republicans say they hope Gecker and several other witnesses will 
shed light on whether the president or his allies sought to influence 
her testimony. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>