<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981122.0063 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
This, as you probably know, is Thanksgiving week, the week signaling 
the headlong rush toward the holidays that increases the exasperation 
factor in most New Yorkers' lives tenfold. It's the time when you 
have to shop and you least want to, when traffic moves at mere inches 
a minute, when pedestrians start bumping into one another like bats 
without radar. People respond differently to this cruel and dangerous 
time. Some go to bed, some go to bars, some go to tropical islands. 
But the most sensible response is to go to ``Fool Moon,'' the wordless 
comedy revue that finds the poetry in life's most basic frustrations, 
at the Brooks Atkinson Theater. ``Fool Moon,'' created by and starring 
Bill Irwin and David Shiner, has been to Broadway twice before, in 
1993 and 1995, and it returns for an engagement that runs through 
Jan. 3, considerately covering the span of holiday hell. This isn't 
a themed seasonal show of the kind provided by Radio City Music Hall 
or Madison Square Garden, nor is it even particularly topical. Much 
of it could have been performed, with only limited revisions, in a 
town square in Italy during the Renaissance, and the audience would 
have gotten it. Yet through a series of mimed sketches, in which Irwin 
plays sweet to Shiner's sour, these fine physical clowns produce an 
evening that, in its deceptively silly way, bears the same relationship 
to contemporary urban dwellers that Sophoclean tragedy did to ancient 
Athenians. It's catharsis that's offered here, and not of a trivial 
order. ``Fool Moon'' is in the tradition of the silent movies of Chaplin, 
Keaton and Lloyd, works in which life is a nonstop maddening wrestling 
match with the world at large. The show's first moments, in which 
the bellicose Shiner fights through rows of audience members to find 
a seat, are a canny, fun-house mirror of what most theatergoers have 
to go through just to see a play. Then suddenly there's Irwin, up 
on the stage, fighting against a recalcitrant microphone cord and 
losing the battle. Nothing, on either side of the proscenium arch, 
is going right. Through the remaining, fleet-footed two hours, Irwin 
and Shiner face adversaries ranging from a plate of spaghetti to their 
own backup band, the charmingly poker-faced Red Clay Ramblers, whose 
music is usually directly at odds with the stars' aspirations to dance. 
Even Irwin's and Shiner's arms and legs can't be trusted; they have 
lives of their own, though you've rarely seen helpless awkwardness 
rendered with such balletic grace. Audience members are recruited 
for several sketches, yet these are never the exercises in humiliation 
you fear they could be. Shiner's hatchet-man hostility (he seems to 
embody every nasty thought you've ever had about your fellow humans) 
and Irwin's gentle bewilderment counteract each other, defusing the 
potential for both the sticky whimsy and mean-spiritedness often associated 
with mime. For the show's penultimate sequence, Shiner plays silent 
movie director (with Irwin kibitzing) to four audience recruits, and 
somehow their self-consciousness and anxiety is shaped into charming 
theater, something with its own rhythms and comic form. It's a bit 
like the famous sequence in the musical ``Sunday in the Park With 
George'' in which all the animate and inanimate elements onstage converge 
into Seurat's masterpiece painting. Art has been allowed to triumph 
over chaos, at least temporarily. When you walk out of ``Fool Moon,'' 
the crowds and the noise seem less threatening and certainly far less 
annoying. Of course, that feeling only lasts for a couple of minutes. 
But what a relief it was. PRODUCTION NOTES: `FOOL MOON' Created by 
Bill Irwin and David Shiner; sets by Douglas Stein; costumes by Bill 
Kellard; lighting by Nancy Schertler; sound by Tom Morse; flying effects 
by Foy; technical supervisor, Unitech II Corp.; producing associate, 
Nancy Harrington; associate producer, Sammi Rose Cannold. Presented 
by James Freydberg, Jeffrey Ash, Dori Berinstein and CTM Productions. 
At the Brooks Atkinson Theater, 256 W. 47th St. With: David Shiner, 
Bill Irwin and the Red Clay Ramblers. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>