<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981122.0089 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
The city that never sleeps is feeling drowsy in the opening moments 
of ``On the Town.'' Leonard Bernstein's score for this 1944 show begins 
with the musical equivalent of a yawn and a stretch, the sense of 
dormant urban energies slowly surfacing. The lazy, purring harmonies 
of a group of workmen just out of bed are set off by more dissonant, 
abrupt sounds from the orchestra, and they are sounds that tingle 
with anticipation. New York, New York, is about to wake up, and when 
New York wakes up, it explodes. It's impossible not to be stirred 
by the rhythms of expectation in this music, a preface to the entrance 
of three sailors on shore leave in Manhattan, dizzy with the possibilities 
of the day ahead. Similar feelings of anticipation are sure to be 
shared by the audiences of the new incarnation of ``On the Town,'' 
which opened Sunday night at the Gershwin Theater. And for those familiar 
with the troubled history of this revival, the feelings are edged 
with anxiety. A question hovers that, while unspoken, seems as pronounced 
as the brass in the orchestra: Can the director, George C. Wolfe, 
for whom this show has been an obsessive labor of devotion, bring 
an admittedly dated period piece into immediate, pulsing life? Will 
``On the Town'' itself fully wake up in 1998? That the answer is no 
is perhaps the saddest part of what has been a particularly disheartening 
season on Broadway. From the moment the chorus of sailors bursts onstage 
belting the show's most famous song, ``New York, New York,'' there's 
an aura of exertion that is only rarely translated into the effervescence 
that is the lifeblood of both cities and musicals. Indeed, most of 
what follows feels strangely somnolent, despite the presence in the 
cast of two rousing human alarm clocks named Lea DeLaria and Mary 
Testa. There were high hopes when it was announced that Wolfe, the 
artistic director of the Joseph Papp Public Theater/New York Shakespeare 
Festival, would be staging ``On the Town'' as part of the Public's 
series of alfresco performances at the Delacorte Theater in Central 
Park last year. The show was the product of four impudent talents 
just beginning to make their names in the 1940s: Bernstein, the choreographer 
Jerome Robbins and the show's lyricists and book writers, Betty Comden 
and Adolph Green. A bouncy serenade to both a flashy, pushy city and 
to the musical theater, it seemed an appropriate vehicle for the director 
who had brought brilliant contemporary verve to productions ranging 
from Shakespeare's ``Tempest'' to the historical dance musical ``Bring 
In da Noise, Bring In da Funk.'' It was Wolfe's expressed intention 
to rechannel the youthful exuberance of the original ``On the Town'' 
into a bright, ethnically mixed tapestry to match the New York of 
today. Yet in the park, ``On the Town'' was far from a complete success. 
The dances, by the experimental choreographer Eliot Feld, had an oddly 
listless quality that hardly lived up to memories of Robbins' dynamic 
production numbers. The show felt joltingly incomplete; much of its 
fresh-faced cast seemed correspondingly uncertain. The group of producers 
who had planned to take ``On the Town'' to Broadway changed their 
minds. Wolfe proceeded on his own, with the New York Shakespeare Festival 
as the sole producer of the $5 million show. He hired a new choreographer, 
Keith Young, best known for his work in music videos and concert tours, 
and recast several of the key roles. A few weeks before the opening, 
rumors flared about Wolfe's continuing dissatisfaction with the dances, 
and Joey McKneely, the choreographer of ``The Life,'' was brought 
in as a consultant. The resulting production certainly looks vibrant, 
awash in hard-candy colors and spangles of light. And Bernstein's 
eclectic score still throbs with a purely urban intensity. Yet often 
the show resembles the giant reproductions of hand-painted tourist 
postcards that figure prominently in Adrianne Lobel's sets. They're 
eye-catching; they're amusing; they're flat. This latest edition of 
``On the Town'' is a definite improvement on what was seen in the 
park, but it largely remains trapped in two picturesque dimensions, 
vividly underscored by Paul Tazewell's comic-book costumes and Paul 
Gallo's lighting. In telling the story of three sailors who meet and 
fall in love with three very different women during a 24-hour shore 
leave, the production fails to convey the urgency of romance set to 
a ticking clock. Young's choreography is smooth, with lots of twirls 
and perky leaps; but it is not sharply focused, and it doesn't give 
off much heat. Similarly, Wolfe's staging, including a tedious Keystone 
Kops-style chase sequence, can be frantic without being funny. And 
the cast members often fail to find a revivifying connection with 
the revue-style, period wit of the Comden and Green book. They seem 
to deliver the jokes at arm's length. Perry Laylon Ojeda and Tai Jimenez, 
newly cast as the ingenuous sailor Gabey and the winner of the Miss 
Turnstiles pageant with whom he falls in love, are charming presences. 
Ojeda has a wistful tenor that shimmers fetchingly through the ballads 
``Lonely Town'' and ``Lucky to Be Me,'' and Ms. Jimenez is a sweetly 
lissome dancer. But they are also blankly passive, and you forget 
about them when they aren't onstage. The same can be said, to a lesser 
extent, of Jesse Tyler Ferguson and Robert Montano as Gabey's bell-bottomed 
pals. Ferguson, in particular, has a boyish likability, but you get 
the feeling that all three sailors are marking time, looking for direction, 
when what's demanded is a seize-the-day aggressiveness. This most 
un-sailorlike mildness is party built into the script. In social terms, 
the most fascinating aspect of ``On the Town'' today is that its women 
are the active romantic partners, a mirror of changing sexual roles 
in the war years. Ozzie ( Montano) is taken in hand by Claire DeLoone 
(Sarah Knowlton, in an initially shrill performance that improves 
greatly as the evening goes on), an anthropologist whose primal instincts 
get the better of her. And scrawny Chip ( Ferguson) is picked up, 
in more ways than one, by a steamroller of a taxi driver named Hildy. 
Hildy, praises be, is played by Lea DeLaria, a large, loud stand-up 
comedian who turns out to have been born for the musical comedy stage. 
She was the jewel of the park production, and she is also this one's 
glittering center. She is now pushing the comedy harder than she has 
to in her opening scenes, but once she starts singing, in that big 
brass voice of hers, she is in complete and confident control. Working 
through the saucy double-entendres and scat embellishments of ``I 
Can Cook Too,'' Hildy's mating call of a solo, Ms. DeLaria makes an 
obliging captive of anyone watching her. Indeed, this actress seems 
to grab the audience by the lapels, demanding and then justifying 
its attention. In this sense, she does what the show itself doesn't, 
and there's an electric buzz when she's onstage that makes you pointedly 
aware of what you've been missing otherwise. There are lively caricatures 
from Annie Golden, as Hildy's snuffling roommate, and Jonathan Freeman, 
as Clare's starchy, masochistic fiance. But only Ms. Testa, as an 
alcoholic Italian voice teacher, is on Ms. DeLaria's top-shelf level. 
Looking like Anna Magnani as drawn by Walt Disney, Ms. Testa gives 
a risky, outrageously florid performance that pays off at every step. 
Whether turning a simple ``good morning'' into an operatic aria or 
recoiling at the sight of her own monkey-fur coat, this actress makes 
a fine art of comic exaggeration. The go-for-broke zeal she brings 
to her performance makes her lines seem newly minted, just as Ms. 
DeLaria creates the illusion that she is inventing the songs she sings. 
By contrast, there's a self-consciousness about most of the other 
performances; they bring to mind a group of kids who have put on their 
grandparents' clothes and aren't quite sure how to wear them. This 
may partly come from the tensions that have beset the opening of this 
revival, which has undergone considerable last-minute revisions. You 
often have the sense of voices inside the performers' heads yelling, 
``Be funny!,'' something hardly conducive to spontaneity. It's possible 
the actors will relax into their roles more as the show continues 
its run. As it is, this ``On the Town'' only rarely makes 1944 feel 
like the present. More often, the production seems to be looking over 
its shoulder with a faint perplexity at what is definitely, to borrow 
the title of the evening's most poignant song, ``some other time.'' 
PRODUCTION NOTES: `ON THE TOWN' Music by Leonard Bernstein; book and 
lyrics by Betty Comden and Adolph Green; based on a concept by Jerome 
Robbins; choreographed by Keith Young; directed by George C. Wolfe; 
sets by Adrianne Lobel; lighting by Paul Gallo; costumes by Paul Tazewell; 
sound by Jon Weston; hair by David H. Lawrence; orchestrations by 
Bruce Coughlin; musical direction by Kevin Stites; music coordinator, 
Seymour Red Press; production manager, Peter Fulbright; production 
supervisor, Bonnie Panson; general management, 101 Productions, Ltd.; 
general manager, New York Shakespeare Festival, Michael Hurst; associate 
producer, Wiley Hausam. Presented by the Joseph Papp Public Theater/New 
York Shakespeare Festival, Wolfe, producer; Rosemarie Tichler, artistic 
producer; Mark Litvin, managing director. At the Gershwin Theater, 
222 W. 51st St. With: Jesse Tyler Ferguson (Chip), Tai Jimenez (Ivy 
Smith), Sarah Knowlton (Claire DeLoone), Robert Montano (Ozzie), Perry 
Laylon Ojeda (Gabey), Lea DeLaria (Hildy Esterhazy), Jonathan Freeman 
(Pitkin W. Bridgework), Annie Golden (Lucy Schmeeler) and Mary Testa 
(Little Old Lady and Madame Maude P. Dilly). 
</TEXT>
</DOC>