<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981122.0212 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
By next weekend it will be evident that we are all, to quote Woody 
Allen's closing lines in ``Antz,'' getting in touch with our inner 
maggots. No need to go to the ant, thou sluggard. The ants are coming 
to us. No sooner has colonialization been given new meaning by the 
Dreamworks fall movie fantasy, than Disney and Pixar are polishing 
off their creatures' mandibles for Wednesday's release of ``A Bug's 
Life.'' Of course, this feast of cinematic myrmecology is no accident; 
behind the scenes competition preceded these two meticulously detailed 
computer animations. And there is a tradition of sci-fi fantasy to 
draw on: giant ants surviving nuclear tests (``Them!'') or giant ant 
aliens attacking humans (``Starship Troopers''). Now, in these new 
films, the ants are the heroes, while humans are evident mainly from 
the piles of trash within which bohemian bugs find paradise. Why shouldn't 
ants have a glorious day in the cinematic sun, after defending their 
way of life from a megalomaniacal warrior ant (``Antz'') or marauding 
grasshoppers (``A Bug's Life'')? Maybe it's only surprising that it 
has taken so long. Edward O. Wilson and Bert Holldobler, authors of 
the 1990 study ``The Ants,'' estimate that there are 19,000 trillion 
ants in the world, divided into more than 9,500 species. Some queen 
ants, who can live more than 20 years, give birth to 150 million worker 
ants, with 2 to 3 million of them alive at any one time. The entire 
earth's surface, the authors have suggested, is really a ``network 
of ant colonies.'' Given that this must also include much of Hollywood, 
we probably should be seeing even more ant movies. But there is one 
problem: It is difficult to create a sympathetic ant colony by accurately 
portraying all worker ants as female, all males as short-lived inseminators 
and all queens earning their pride of place not through wise leadership 
but through fecundity. Wilson and Holldobler may admire the ``highly 
developed, self-sacrificial colonial existence,'' of ants, but it 
is hard to imagine a movie audience feeling anything but fear of what 
these specialists call the ``ecological juggernaut'' of the colony, 
with its ruthless drive for survival of the group and its complete 
indifference to the fate of the individual. Woody Allen's character 
in ``Antz'' learns from his psychiatrist that he has good reason to 
feel insignificant: He really is. But the movie itself wouldn't have 
six legs to stand on if it accepted that judgment, and neither would 
``A Bug's Life'' (which, anyway, reduces the number of ant legs to 
four). So maybe we really do need to get in touch with our inner maggots 
to see what we are making of ants. We tend to take over any animal 
life we examine and remake it into forms we find congenial. We fill 
the cribs of our infants with cuddly versions of creatures that would 
mangle intruders into their own mangers: we turn lions into lambs, 
dinosaurs into treacly purple pals. Nature documentaries about the 
mating habits of penguins or the stalking strategies of tigers mix 
comedy and tragedy, awe and ridicule. Animals become human reflections. 
For instance, in a provocative new study, ``The Last Dinosaur Book'' 
(University of Chicago Press), W.J.T. Mitchell, the editor of the 
journal Critical Inquiry, takes on the cultural obsession with dinosaurs. 
He uses Marx, Levi-Strauss and Freud to strip away dinosaurs' cultural 
flesh, arguing that these extinct creatures have become mythic representations 
of the forces of capitalist production and state power, tapping into 
notions of racism and social Darwinism along the way. Of course, many 
excursions into what is now called ``cultural studies,'' round up 
the very same suspects no matter what aspect of culture is examined. 
But there is also much insight in the midst of Mitchell's explorations. 
The dinosaur really has had a mythic force, far out of proportion 
to its scientific importance. Nineteenth-century excavations were 
sponsored by captains of industry like Andrew Carnegie; the brontosaurus 
even came to grace cans of Sinclair Motor Oil (``mellowed 80 million 
years''). Thomas Jefferson himself collected bones of an ancient skeleton 
of the American ``mastodon,'' seeing them as symbols of United States 
power (and used the East Room of the White House as his ``bone room''). 
In popular culture the dinosaur has become a ``totem animal,'' associated 
both with our worst fears and our most innocent affections. As Mitchell 
shows, in films dinosaurs have even had an effect on modern human 
relationships, ranging from ``Bringing Up Baby'' (in which Cary Grant's 
character is so obsessed with finding an intercostal clavicle to complete 
his brontosaurus skeleton that he may be marrying the wrong woman) 
to ``Jurassic Park'' (where, if the dinosaurs do nothing else, they 
inspire family feeling in the survivors). One wouldn't expect this 
much mythic weight from ants. But it is unusual how similarly the 
new ant films remake the ant colony's ``ecological juggernaut.'' Both 
plots hinge on challenges to the ant order. The hero ants are nebbishes, 
eccentrics, hapless rebels. And in both films, they make their way 
to bohemian bug colonies where cares are few, human garbage plentiful 
and help can be obtained to fight off enemies, internal or external. 
They then try to accomplish the impossible: both to save the colony's 
way of life and to remain free individuals, to celebrate community 
while undoing the rigidities of ant life. But how else could humans 
imagine a congenial ant colony? Wilson and Holldobler look at ant 
colonies and write that ``It would appear that socialism really works 
under some circumstances. Karl Marx just had the wrong species.'' 
Maybe these films try to envision socialism with a human face. The 
charm of these movies is that they never let this idea become leaden 
or too serious. ``A Bug's Life'' is certainly lighthearted, turning 
the natural world into a kind of playground in which the laws are 
harsh but the possibilities of invention unlimited. The real hope 
is the inventiveness of the hero ant Flik, his creation of a mechanism, 
a technology, that might help save the colony, stave off disaster, 
harness the ants' teamwork in new directions and improve nature without 
displacing it. And isn't this an image of our hope for technology? 
That it might help alter the established order, remake society, offer 
images of things yet unimagined? It may be no accident that both ant 
films are also tributes to computer animation, with its new-found 
powers to create texture, character, individuality, nuance and other 
un-antlike characteristics. Computer animation was once the sign of 
artificiality; now it is humanized, naturalized, and we are meant 
to see it at work bringing a human touch to the inhuman realm of the 
ant. Nature is transformed by artifice into seeming more natural. 
And maybe, in directing ``A Bug's Life,'' John Lasseter also had in 
mind how similar the ant colony of his hero's vision is to the filmmaking 
universe, where individual genius and communal enterprise must coexist, 
and where technology is also reshaping the landscape. Maybe the message 
is: Forget maggots. Celebrate movies. The hero is called Flik. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>