<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981122.0166 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
After spending all week playing down what was obviously a huge game 
against Green Bay, a group of Minnesota Vikings players dropped all 
pretenses and showed up Sunday morning dressed in battle fatigues. 
They weren't going to war, just playing the Packers, or was it the 
same thing? The image was appropriate, because Vikings wide receiver 
Randy Moss is The Bomb. Not a bomb. The Bomb. And he caught a bunch 
of them Sunday. Over the shoulder. Across the middle. Single coverage, 
double coverage, zone coverage. Jam him at the line of scrimmage, 
he runs by you. Lay off, he runs by you. The Packers tried the latter 
late in the fourth quarter, while one of their linebackers blitzed; 
Moss was singled up and ran very deep, very fast. His 49-yard touchdown 
catch sealed the game for the Vikings and maybe rookie of the year 
for Moss. Minnesota beat the Packers, 28-14, in front of a record 
64,471 at the Metrodome. The 10-1 Vikings lead the 7-4 Packers by 
three games with five left. Unless Minnesota has a collapse of mammoth 
proportions, it will capture the division. But the real story is how 
Moss is affecting the National Football League. Moss is doing on offense 
what Lawrence Taylor did in his early years on defense. Moss scares 
teams so much that they make dramatic shifts in their game plans to 
compensate for his athleticism. Even then, there is nothing anyone 
can do when quarterback Randall Cunningham throws the football up 
for grabs and Moss goes and gets it. Cunningham completed 20 of 30 
passes for 264 yards Sunday and Moss had 153 of those yards and a 
touchdown, leaving Green Bay's defensive coordinator, Fritz Shurmur, 
shaking his head in wonder. In two games against the Packers, a team 
with a solid defense, Moss has 13 catches for 343 yards _ a 26-yard-a-catch 
average _ and three touchdowns. He is probably the biggest reason 
Minnesota swept the Packers in the regular season for the first time 
since 1993. ``I love playing football,'' Moss said. ``Moments like 
this feel good. If you are not scoring touchdowns, just as long as 
you are making grabs, catching key first downs.'' Vikings Coach Dennis 
Green said: ``There are some games where we allow people to double 
Randy and we don't work to get him open and we will get the ball to 
some other players. There are other games where we set out to make 
sure he gets singled up and this is the game. In big games you have 
to do that.'' Minnesota did have help from its defense. To try to 
confuse Minnesota, the Packers used 13 offensive formations in their 
first 15 plays. But quarterback Brett Favre, who had a badly injured 
finger on his non-throwing hand and a slight concussion, struggled 
early. A fumbled snap, which led to a field goal, and a 58-yard interception 
return for a touchdown by Jimmy Hitchcock put the Packers in a 10-0 
hole. ``You can't start out the game 10-0 right away against a good 
team,'' Packers Coach Mike Holmgren said. The Packers were eventually 
able to move the ball because Favre calmed down and played brilliantly. 
He completed 31 of 39 passes for 303 yards, and nine receivers had 
catches. Still, Minnesota jumped to a 13-0 lead, then 20-7, and it 
remained that way until the fourth quarter. Then Favre mounted one 
of those classic Packers drives. Despite four false-start penalties 
because offensive linemen could not hear the snap count over the screaming 
fans, Favre led the Packers on a 10-play, 71-yard drive that culminated 
in a two-yard touchdown pass to tight end Tyrone Davis. Green Bay 
was in striking distance, trailing, 20-14. ``At that point I thought 
we had a chance,'' Favre said. Then came Moss. On a third-down play, 
Cunningham threw the ball into triple coverage and Moss outmuscled 
and outjumped each defender. Then Moss outran cornerback Rod Smith 
and glided by safety Darren Sharper, who scrambled over to help. Too 
late. Moss caught the 49-yard bomb, then did the Metrodome leap into 
the stands. Moss is getting so good he felt comfortable enough afterward 
to reveal a trick that the veteran wide receiver Cris Carter taught 
him. On some deep balls, while running at full speed, Moss will glance 
at the huge scoreboard to see when Cunningham is throwing the ball. 
Only when it is in the air does Moss turn to look for it. Warning: 
Don't try that near your television set at home. ``This guy is doing 
things no rookie receiver has done in a long time,'' Green said. ``Throw 
the ball up, he gets it. It's pretty simple.'' 
</TEXT>
</DOC>