<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981122.0196 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
As the final ballots are being counted in the tight race for state 
attorney general, Democratic leaders are charging that the campaign 
of Dennis Vacco, the Republican incumbent, has mounted a concerted 
effort to invalidate paper ballots in black and Hispanic areas, particularly 
in New York City. On Friday, Vacco was trailing his Democratic opponent, 
Eliot Spitzer, by 19,646 votes, with fewer than 15,000 votes to be 
counted. The final tally is expected early this week. Because the 
contest is so close, Vacco and Spitzer have been scrutinizing the 
200,000 absentee and other paper ballots with unusual vigor. The two 
sides have challenged nearly 13,000 paper ballots, essentially setting 
them aside and rendering them uncounted, unless a judge decides otherwise. 
But Vacco's efforts in traditionally Democratic minority neighborhoods 
have angered many Democratic officials. In some districts, more than 
two-thirds of the paper ballots have been challenged. For example, 
in the 74th Assembly District, which includes largely Hispanic and 
black sections of the South Bronx, a total of 600 paper ballots were 
cast, but only 171 have been counted. Vacco's campaign objected to 
429, citing problems like a fingerprint on a ballot or a ballot that 
was slightly bent. Of the paper ballots that were counted, 146 were 
cast for Spitzer, and 25 were for Vacco. Similar challenges occurred 
in several Brooklyn districts. ``It is a pattern that brings up the 
ghost of disenfranchisement,'' said Keith Wright, an Assemblyman from 
Harlem who is chairman of the Black, Puerto Rican and Hispanic Legislative 
Caucus. ``People have died for the right of people of color to vote,'' 
he added. And Assemblyman Roberto Ramirez, chairman of the Bronx Democratic 
Party organization, said, ``There is no question that there is a focus 
and concentrated effort to challenge ballots in the minority community,'' 
adding that the Vacco campaign had crossed the line ``that separates 
having an accurate and fair counting of ballots and an abuse of the 
law in order to delay the outcome.'' State Republican officials dismissed 
such accusations as partisan, saying Vacco's campaign had been no 
more aggressive in the city than the Spitzer campaign had been in 
objecting to the paper ballot in traditionally Republican areas. ``They 
are challenging ballots themselves,'' said Terry O'Brien, a spokesman 
for the state Republican Party. He added, ``If you check the traditionally 
strong Republican areas in the state, you will see the same thing,'' 
offering Saratoga County and the suburbs of Buffalo, in Erie County, 
as examples. But in Saratoga County, where Vacco beat Spitzer in the 
machine count by a ratio of nearly 2-to-1, only 10 ballots were challenged 
out of a total of 2,500, according to Board of Elections officials 
there. And in all of Erie County, Vacco's home terrain, only 134 of 
10,334 absentee ballots were challenged. By contrast, in the 56th 
Assembly District, which is dominated by black voters and includes 
the Bedford-Stuyvesant section of Brooklyn, the Vacco campaign challenged 
434 of the 591 paper ballots. And in the 58th Assembly District, which 
includes the East New York section of Brooklyn, the Vacco campaign 
challenged 445 out of 669 paper ballots. Thomas Spargo, a lawyer for 
Vacco's campaign, said he did not consider the number of challenges 
to be any higher than those lodged by the Spitzer campaign. ``We feel 
they are of the same relative quality,'' Spargo said. ``We anticipated 
where Dennis Vacco would be doing well, there would be a large number 
of ballots set aside by the Spitzer campaign. And as a matter of overall 
strategy, I wanted to make sure that we made an equal number of objections.'' 
Vacco's lawyers have also gone to court, charging that the number 
of votes reported on election night did not correspond to the totals 
released by the Board of Elections a week later. As a result, Justice 
Thomas Keegan of State Supreme Court in Manhattan ruled that the campaigns 
could inspect the 7,000 voting machines in New York City again and 
report their findings to the court on Monday. Months before the Nov. 
3 election, the focus was on the U.S. Senate contest between Alfonse 
D'Amato, the Republican incumbent, and Charles Schumer, the Democratic 
challenger. Expecting that the election could well be decided by paper 
ballots, party officials reached an agreement that any paper ballot 
that either side contested would be set aside. The court would later 
determine whether they would be considered valid. While Schumer won 
the election decisively, the contest for attorney general proved to 
be the close one, with Spitzer securing an election night lead of 
just 18,000 votes of more than 4 million cast. Each side assembled 
teams of lawyers and campaign representatives to scrutinize the paper 
ballots. When party representatives examine the paper ballots, they 
do not see how the person voted, but they do know the makeup of the 
district and how it voted in the machine ballots. State election laws 
state that paper ballots may not have any stray markings. But campaign 
officials have challenged ballots for items like having a check mark 
slightly outside the box and having a signature that dips slightly 
below the line. In one case, a campaign representative objected to 
paper ballots because the voters, when asked their county of residence, 
wrote Brooklyn rather than Kings. In another case, an absentee ballot 
was challenged because the voter, when asked why she was unable go 
to the polls, wrote that she would be in the ``Holy Land.'' The campaign 
representative objected because she stated no specific country. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>