<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981122.0080 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
While their counterparts abroad have often led movements for social 
change, university students in Israel have had a well-earned reputation 
for indifference when it comes to political protest. But after a month-old 
strike for lower tuition that has been fought tenaciously in the streets, 
on television and in government offices, Israel's 200,000 college 
and university students are emerging as a powerful voice for rearranging 
national priorities. Drawing support from union leaders, the unemployed 
and poor towns and neighborhoods, the students are demanding a shift 
from the country's traditional preoccupation with security to greater 
attention to social needs. ``We want a conceptual revolution,'' Nir 
Amir, an engineering student participating in a round-the-clock vigil 
and hunger strike outside Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu's residence 
in Jerusalem, said Sunday. ``We want to put education and society 
first. Security is important, but if we don't have a society that 
is built soundly, we'll disintegrate and security won't do any good.'' 
What began on the eve of the new academic year as a campaign to halve 
college tuition has mushroomed into a broader struggle to redefine 
Israel's most pressing needs. Arguing that education is Israel's greatest 
resource and therefore the nation's highest priority, the students 
are demanding more generous government scholarships and loans to make 
university education accessible to all qualified candidates. Universities 
in Israel are privately run with government support, with tuition 
ranging from about $2,500 to $5,000 a year. The student protests have 
delayed the start of the academic year. Taking to the streets in recent 
weeks, thousands of students across the country have held demonstrations 
and blocked roads, leading to violent confrontations with police officers 
in which dozens have been arrested and injured. A day after a mass 
demonstration last week at Jerusalem's city hall, Prime Minister Benjamin 
Netanyahu joined the talks with the students, promising a ``revolutionary 
change'' in higher education. The form of that change has not been 
determined, but the discussions are focusing on scholarships that 
would cover 50 percent of college tuition in return for community 
service, such as helping disadvantaged youth, or work in hospitals 
and jails. The students' campaign has drawn support from Education 
Minister Yitzhak Levy and Parliament members from across the political 
spectrum, who have made pilgrimages to the strikers' vigil, along 
with many ordinary Israelis. In a show of solidarity, the Histadrut, 
the national umbrella group of labor unions, has threatened a one-day 
general strike this week if no agreement is reached with the students. 
Declaring that they want nothing less than ``a revolution'' in education 
and national budget allocations, the students have plastered the streets 
with banners and handed out leaflets to motorists. Their vigil outside 
the prime minister's office has grown into a makeshift tent-camp, 
complete with sleeping bags, contributions of food and medical supplies, 
and visiting lecturers from the idled campuses. On a billboard, big 
red letters proclaim: ``The Student Revolution: 1998.'' Avi Arien, 
one of the strikers, said his education had suffered from the need 
to work long hours to pay his way through college. Many students, 
whose college education follows compulsory military service, hold 
one or even two jobs to pay for their studies. ``There's no time to 
prepare for the lectures,'' Arien said. ``The revolution we want is 
an understanding that studying is actually a full-time job, and that 
the country's only resource is its human capital.'' Avi Mutsafi, another 
student, said: ``Israel doesn't depend on exporting oranges anymore. 
If it won't invest in human capital, we won't have economic security 
and people will prefer to leave for Silicon Valley or New Zealand.'' 
Strike leaders have accused the government of allocating state funds 
to support strictly Orthodox yeshiva students at the expense of general 
education, as a political payoff to Orthodox parties in the governing 
coalition. ``Israeli values have retreated in the face of the values 
of groups who haven't contributed anything to the society,'' Erez 
Eshel, a student leader, told the newspaper Haaretz. ``Corrupt politicians 
have taken away our idealism.'' Nir Alfasa, a student at the vigil 
Sunday, said that as Israel's conflict with the Palestinians moved 
toward a resolution, the country should turn to putting its own house 
in order. ``We've been too immersed in the security syndrome,'' Alfasa 
said. ``A permanent peace agreement is bound to come, and when that 
happens, no government will have an excuse to avoid the issues. After 
50 years it's time for this society to grow up and start solving the 
real problems: unemployment, religion and state, a constitution. We 
have to get this country organized.'' 
</TEXT>
</DOC>