<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981122.0203 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Before the Kennedys, before the Roosevelts, before the Vanderbilts, 
there were the Livingstons. From the late 17th century to the early 
19th century, they were one of America's most aristocratic families, 
lording over the Hudson River Valley and owning an area larger than 
the state of Rhode Island. Firm believers in noblesse oblige, the 
family helped mold the republic: One Livingston administered the oath 
of office to George Washington, another signed the Declaration of 
Independence, still another became a Supreme Court justice. As the 
country matured, the Livingstons consolidated their status, fiercely 
protecting their legacy and often marrying one another to retain their 
land. But by the early 20th century, the Livingstons had retreated 
from public life, preferring instead to enjoy the view. Now, though, 
after coasting for two centuries on the achievements of men in big 
wigs with titles like ``The Signer'' and ``The Judge,'' the family 
has returned to prominence, thanks to Rep. Robert Linlithgow Livingston, 
a 10th-generation descendant of Robert Livingston, first lord of the 
manor. Livingston, 55, the Louisiana Republican who is poised to become 
the next speaker of the House of Representatives, may be a man of 
the South. But his distinctly Yankee and upper-crust bloodline has 
prompted Livingstons and non-Livingstons in upstate New York to claim 
him as an honorary son. ``I think this is great news, and we're all 
very proud of him,'' said Henry H. Livingston, a distant cousin who 
lives at Oak Hill, a 200-acre riverfront estate built in the 1790s. 
``We're not bragging, but this family is very interested in its history.'' 
Like so many blue-blooded families in the 20th century, though, the 
Livingstons have sometimes been bewildered by modernity, their fortunes 
watered down by income taxes, their sensibilities entrenched in a 
genteel time warp. So until the congressman's ascension to national 
prominence, few people talked about the Livingstons outside of the 
tour guides at the area museums and historic sites. Livingston has 
had little connection with the Hudson River Valley; he has been here 
only once, his sister said, for a big family reunion at the Clermont 
State Historic Site in 1986. But should he return, he would find an 
area steeped in Livingstonia, still shaped by the family's influence. 
There is, of course, the town of Livingston in Columbia County. There 
is the village of Linlithgo, which, save for a dropped ``w'' at the 
end, is the same as the congressman's middle name. Linlithgo is the 
family's ancestral home in Scotland. Clermont, the town, is named 
after Clermont, the family mansion. The village of Blue Store is named 
after a tavern that was painted blue, and owned by a W.T. Livingston. 
There is also Linlithgo Mills (a village), Livingston Manor (a town 
in Sullivan County) and assorted local institutions, such as Livingston 
Memorial Church (which is in Linlithgo, naturally). According to the 
family's hefty genealogical register, which is decorated with the 
family's coat of arms, there have been 63 Robert Livingstons. This 
includes five Robert Linlithgow Livingstons, of whom the congressman 
would technically be the fourth, and his 32-year-old son, the fifth. 
One family, unable to muster anything original, simply named one son 
Livingston Livingston. ``There is no more of an old-money, blue-blood 
family in the United States than the Livingstons,'' said Robert Engel, 
the curator of collections for the Clermont State Historic Site, a 
former Livingston homestead. The family's fortunes began in 1686, 
when Robert Livingston, a 32-year-old merchant from Scotland, bought 
160,000 acres and called it Livingston Manor. By the early 1800s, 
the family had built about 40 mansions on the Hudson's east bank and 
had accumulated, through business deals and marriages to families 
like the Van Rensselaers and the Beekmans, 1 million acres, including 
most of the Catskills. The Livingston men entered public life. The 
most famous was Robert R. Livingston, great-grandson of the first 
lord, who was the first chancellor of the state of New York. He helped 
draft the Declaration of Independence, negotiate the Louisiana Purchase 
and provide financial muscle for Robert Fulton's steamboat, the Clermont. 
Edward Livingston, brother of ``The Chancellor,'' was no slouch, either. 
He was the mayor of New York City and the U.S. attorney from the New 
York district _ simultaneously. Then, after he learned that some aides 
had embezzled municipal funds, he resigned and moved to New Orleans, 
where he became a U.S. senator and Andrew Jackson's secretary of state. 
No one else in the family with the last name Livingston has made national 
news since the early 1800s, Engel said. But there have been many notable 
people with Livingston blood _ so many, in fact, that the apropos 
question may well be who is not a Livingston? Eleanor Roosevelt and 
Hamilton Fish were Livingstons. George Bush and his scions are Livingstons. 
So, too, is former Gov. Thomas Kean of New Jersey, whose own home 
is in the township of _ what else? _ Livingston, N.J. ``The Livingstons 
were like the Kennedys: They were in politics, there were a million 
of them, and you can't help but liken them to a dynasty,'' said Lucy 
Kuriger, the site director of Montgomery Place, a historic estate 
in Annandale-on-Hudson that was last owned by Dennis Delafield, a 
first cousin of the Louisiana congressman's. But unlike, say, the 
Kennedys or the Bushes, the Livingstons have never been associated 
with one political party or ideology. Instead, they were more known 
for their baronial life style in an area that does not look much different 
now than it did generations ago, with its rolling hills, apple farms 
and sweeping river views. These days, the Livingston aura continues 
at Oak Hill, the home of Henry H. Livingston, a retired financial 
analyst, and at Rokeby Preserve, a 500-acre estate owned by Winthrop 
Aldrich, a deputy commissioner of historic preservation for New York 
state. The news of Livingston's rise to speaker of the House has engendered 
calls for a commemorative plaque. Donald Kline, Livingston's town 
supervisor, has suggested putting up a marker in town noting the connection 
between the Livingstons of the past and the Livingston of the present. 
Indeed, Livingston is aware _ if perhaps a bit wary _ of his family's 
history, having inherited boxes of family mementos and an oil portrait 
of their grandfather, said his sister, Carolyn Teaford, in a telephone 
interview from her home in New Orleans. Their grandfather (Robert 
L. Livingston) was a banker in New York City who died of pneumonia 
in 1925. His widow, who also came from a wealthy family, then took 
her five children to France. Their father (also Robert L. Livingston) 
returned to the United States during World War II, attending Colorado 
College in Colorado Springs, Mrs. Teaford said. He met their mother 
there, and the future congressman was born in 1943. After the war, 
they spent a few years in Tuxedo Park, N.Y., before the father got 
a job in New Orleans as a salesman for National Distillers. It was 
a bad omen; he was an alcoholic, Mrs. Teaford said. In 1950, their 
parents divorced, and their father eventually fled to Spain to avoid 
paying alimony. But their mother persevered, found steady work and 
raised the two children. They had little contact with the Livingston 
side of the family. But when they did meet, they talked incessantly 
about the past. ``They loved to talk their family history; they were 
big on things like, `Now your great-great-grandfather did such and 
such,' '' Mrs. Teaford recalled. ``Certainly we're proud of that, 
and it's wonderful to have a heritage. But my brother and I believe 
it's who you are, and what you do, and not who your ancestors are, 
that make you a person.'' 
</TEXT>
</DOC>