<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981122.0056 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
A gang fight between Muslims and Christian migrants erupted into fierce 
rioting Sunday in this already tense city. Officials reported that 
six people were killed and nearly a dozen churches were burned or 
damaged. The rioting was not related to the political demonstrations 
and military gunfire that have kept the city on edge for more than 
a week. But it was a sharp reminder of the potential for violence 
that lies just beneath the surface of Indonesia as it suffers through 
a period of political turmoil and deep economic pain. For nearly two 
years _ beginning well before the political and economic crisis that 
forced former President Suharto from office in May _ the country has 
suffered an epidemic of local riots touched off by grievances and 
conflicts of all sorts. The clash Sunday involved Catholic migrants 
from the eastern island of Amboina and did not at first focus on the 
ethnic Chinese who have been the target of much of the recent violence 
here. But the arson and looting spread quickly into Chinese neighborhoods, 
where residents armed and barricaded themselves in a now-familiar 
drill. Officials said Sunday's violence appeared to have erupted following 
a dispute at a gambling hall and a stone-throwing attack by Ambonese 
Catholics on a mosque. It was the worst outbreak of violence to hit 
Jakarta's Chinese neighborhoods since the huge riots in mid-May that 
helped push Suharto from office. Most of the damage from those riots 
remains, with shops still standing in burned-out rows and several 
department stores blackened and empty. The Associated Press quoted 
officials as saying that at least 11 churches had been vandalized 
and four burned on Sunday. A gambling hall was set on fire, and a 
Catholic girls school was set alight and ransacked. Scores of shops 
were burned or looted, and cars and motorcycles were also set on fire. 
Armored personnel carriers rolled through streets of smashed storefronts, 
and troops fired tear gas and volleys of gunfire in an attempt to 
subdue the crowds. By evening the riots had subsided and lines of 
soldiers, redeployed from areas of the city where students had been 
marching last week, stood guard against the mobs. The day had started 
quietly as the city, filled with sunshine, seemed to settle down from 
more than a week of disturbances related to a parliamentary session 
that set the groundwork for a general election next year. Following 
the deaths of 16 demonstrators in clashes between students and soldiers, 
the city has been filled over the past week with student demonstrations, 
winding through the streets on foot or on buses. Sunday's violence 
quickly became deadly as gangs fought each other with knives and sticks, 
throwing rocks and smashing windows. Mobs waved the green flag of 
a Muslim political party as they surged down alleys in a Chinese quarter, 
where they targeted gambling halls and karaoke bars as well as Christian 
churches, witnesses said. At one church, they said, looters played 
musical instruments from the church before smashing or stealing them. 
Reporting on its continuing inquiry into its shootings of demonstrators 
last week, the military said Sunday that live bullets had been found 
in the bodies of some of the victims. But it said they were of a kind 
that is not used by the military. A military spokesman, Syamsu Maarf, 
also said 163 soldiers had been disciplined for the shootings and 
beatings, including 12 officers who had failed to control their troops. 
The Armed Forces chief, Gen. Wiranto, who like many Indonesians uses 
only one name, also repeated Sunday the government's assertion that 
the violence last week was instigated by political figures intent 
on bringing down President B.J. Habibie. ``These radical groups mobilized 
the students and joined with them,'' the general said. ``They also 
mobilized civilian mobs.'' 
</TEXT>
</DOC>