<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981122.0200 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
While London, Paris and Tokyo are often praised for the quality of 
their public transportation systems, a new report suggests that the 
New York region fares surprisingly well in the efficiency of its trains, 
buses and subways when compared with these cities. The report, based 
on a joint three-year study by groups in the four urban areas, concludes 
that these mass transit systems share many common attributes and problems, 
including highly centralized rail networks, growing business centers 
at their urban cores, huge populations of commuters and severe automobile 
congestion. In some respects, mass transit in the New York region 
compares poorly, particularly in the paucity of service to much of 
its suburban ring, which forces suburban residents to rely on cars, 
according to the report. But for New Yorkers who hold to a commonly 
held view that the largest cities of Europe, particularly Paris and 
London, have model mass transit systems, the findings of the four-city 
study may come as a shock. ``One thing it shows is that New York has 
made a good recovery in the last 30 years in the efficiency of its 
rail and subway systems,'' said Bill Shore, a senior associate with 
the Institute of Public Transportation, a New York City research group 
that carried out the New York component of the study. For instance, 
the New York region's commuter trains, including Metro-North, the 
Long Island Rail Road and New Jersey Transit, were found to be more 
punctual than those in the other metropolitan areas. All three New 
York regional commuter train systems were found to be punctual more 
than 90 percent of the time, while the regional rail network around 
London, long lauded as a model of efficiency, registered only 88 percent 
on the punctuality scale. New York City subways, however, were less 
punctual that their foreign counterparts, with 80 percent of the city's 
subways arriving close to their scheduled arrival time. By that measure, 
Tokyo's metro system came out on top, with 97 percent of its trains 
on time. In other comparative findings, the report said that more 
than 500,000 people ride motorcycles into Tokyo each day, about 5 
percent of its commuting population. But only about 10,000 motorcyclists 
brave the New York region's highways each day, so negligible a number 
that the report called it zero percent of the total. The report, released 
last week, was the largest study comparing what are perhaps the world's 
most advanced large cities in terms of mass transit, its authors say. 
The other groups participating in the study were the London Research 
Centre, the Institut d'Amenagement et d'Urbanisme de la Region d'Ile-de-France 
of Paris and the Tokyo Institute for Municipal Research, all of which 
received government or philanthropic grants in their own countries. 
Copies of the report, published by Her Majesty's Stationery Office 
in London, are available for $110 through Bernan Associates, 4611 
F Assembly Drive, Lanham, Md. 20706-4391. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>