<DOC>
<DOCNO> ABC19981104.1830.1277 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> CAPTION </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Another "closer look" at service in America tonight. We began with 
the premise that service is not what it used to be, and we haven't 
found much argument about that. We have found that many companies 
are reassessing the relationship between service and profit. ABC's 
Judy Muller tonight on some who have seen the difference. How's this 
for service? If you own a Lexus in need of repair, the dealer will 
bring a loaner car to your door. There's the key for your car. Okay? 
Take your car to the shop and, before returning it, throw in a Free 
car wash. But then, you'd expect that kind of treatment if you owned 
a luxury car. What about more mundane purchases? Like groceries? In 
the supermarket industry, expectations of customer service have been 
very low. In fact, almost nonexistent. Safeway has embarked on a plan 
to exceed those low expectations. Mrs. beadie, have a wonderful day. 
Employees are told to make eye contact with customers and to offer 
personal assistance. Always helpful. If I ask for something, they 
take me there, they don't say just, "oh, it's over on aisle four." 
Safeway's earnings are up. And marketing experts say that's no accident. 
Good service leads to higher customer satisfaction. And higher customer 
satisfaction leads to people coming back and more future sales. Recent 
research at Vanderbilt shows that for every dollar invested in customer 
service in banking and hotel industries, the return is $1.44. in retail, 
every dollar invested brings in $2.33. in other words, better service 
equals better profits. But better service is relative, based on customer 
expectations. Thank you kvetch. You're welcome. At southwest airlines, 
for example, the expectation is for no frills. That's what we're here 
for, is just to fly. Not to be pampered. That means no seating assignment 
and no food. But this nonservice is delivered on time, and in a most 
entertaining way. On this flight, for example, the voice of Ross perot 
gives the safety briefing. Place it over your nose and mouth, secure 
with the elastic strap, and unlike the president of the United States, 
you may then inhale. But surpassing low expectations is not the only 
path to profit. Superior service is the calling card of Nordstrom 
department stores. Their merchandise is pricey, but they have a generous 
return policy and each customer is treated like a vip. Nordstrom declined 
our request for an interview, saying it has a policy against blowing 
its own horn. That may be more caution than modesty. There is a danger 
in hyping expectations. People's expectations have been built up. 
And as soon as you cut back, the difference between what they get 
and what they expect becomes Negative and they'll start looking for 
something else. But few companies are likely to cut back on service 
once they see their profits go up. The trick, apparently, is in giving 
customers more than they bargained for. And remember, united we stand 
but southwest, we fly. Thank you very much. Judy Muller, ABC News, 
Los Angeles. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>