<DOC>
<DOCNO> ABC19981104.1830.0061 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> CAPTION </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Good evening. There are some serious political hangovers today. Some 
from celebrating last night's election results. They are mostly democrats. 
Others, from banging heads against the wall or each other and they 
are almost all republicans. Both republicans and democrats can say 
that they held pretty even in the governor's races, but republicans 
lost the plum, which is California. There was no change in the Senate, 
which was not good for republicans, who thought they would gain at 
least one seat and maybe more. And the big story is in the House of 
Representatives. For the first time in more than 60 years, the party 
which controls the White House has won not lost, house seats in a 
midterm election. The reverberations from that are being felt everywhere 
today. First here's ABC's John Cochran. White House aides say that 
privately, the president was ecstatic over the results. Publicly, 
he would say only that voters chose practical issues over partisanship. 
If you look at all the results, they're clear and unambiguous. The 
American people want their business's, their concerns, their children, 
their families, their future addressed here. Newt Gingrich had predicted 
republicans would win up to 40 seats. Look, I'm the speaker. So I'll 
take responsibility. We should have aggressively pushed cutting taxes 
and saving social security much harder than we did this year. Republicans 
gave grudging credit to democrats for getting out a Huge black vote 
in key races and to labor unions for burning up shoe leather all over 
the country canvasing for democrats. This year, the question is, should 
we reward Bill Clinton? Republicans admit their last-minute ad campaign 
reminding voters of the Lewinsky scandal was not the brightest idea 
they ever had. And I think we just didn't understand that people would 
just frankly get fed up with the existence of the topic. Some republicans 
paid dearly for keeping Twinkle, twinkle Kenneth Starr, now we see 
how brave you are. Congressman Michael Pappas, out of tune, out of 
touch. Last night, Pappas lost. Today, republicans realized many of 
their successful candidates are pragmatic governors concerned with 
getting results. Congressional republicans say they've learned their 
lesson, that the first thing the new Congress will focus on is something 
that people care about tax cuts. John Cochran, ABC News, Washington. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>