<DOC>
<DOCNO> APW19981104.1164 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
A car sped onto Red Square on Wednesday and exploded just outside 
the main gate to the Kremlin, injuring three guards and the driver, 
authorities said. The cause of the blast was not immediately known. 
Initial reports said one person was killed inside the car, but a spokesman 
for the presidential press service said no one had died. The driver, 
identified as a journalist for a nationalist, anti-Semitic magazine, 
was detained and was being questioned by the Federal Security Service, 
the main successor to the KGB, Russian news agencies reported. Prosecutors 
launched a criminal case into the incident. The car exploded shortly 
after 7 p.m. (1600 GMT), a few meters (yards) outside the Spassky 
Gate, the main entrance to the Kremlin. The walled enclosure has been 
Russia's governmental and spiritual center for centuries. Clouds of 
smoke could be seen drifting over St. Basil's Cathedral, a few meters 
(yards) away. Officials inside the Kremlin said they could feel the 
concussion from the blast. The Kremlin spokesman, speaking on condition 
of anonymity, said the car had driven very fast toward Red Square, 
past the famous GUM department store. It knocked down fences, drove 
across the square and approached the gate at the foot of Spassky Tower, 
a large red clock tower that is one of Russia's most distinctive symbols. 
The driver jumped out just before the car, a cheap, Russian-built 
Moskvich, exploded, the official said. The blast was reported to have 
had the force of 6 kilograms (13 pounds) of dynamite. Two Kremlin 
guards, one presidential guard and the driver were injured. The presidential 
guard was in critical condition, the Interfax news agency reported. 
The gate was also slightly damaged. Russian television showed an unidentified 
bloodied body lying near the charred car on the square's stone slope. 
The driver was identified as Ivan Orlov, a 65-year-old journalist 
for the magazine ``Russian Pravda'' from the Moscow suburb of Podolsk, 
the Interfax news agency reported. The magazine carries anti-Semitic 
and nationalist articles, Interfax said. He was taken to the hospital 
to treat minor scratches, where he was being questioned by police, 
who said he would undergo a psychiatric examination, Interfax said. 
It also quoted police as saying the driver had a gas pistol in his 
car. Reporting on the incident was sketchy, and the entire area surrounding 
the blast was sealed off to the press and public. The Federal Security 
Service said it was investigating and had not ruled out terrorism 
as a motive, Interfax said. President Boris Yeltsin has his office 
at the Kremlin, but has been in the southern resort city of Sochi 
recovering from what has been described as exhaustion. Kremlin officials 
said the doors to the gate have been closed for years, and expressed 
assurance that the car could not have broken through them. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>