<DOC>
<DOCNO> APW19981104.0272 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Three Serbs were wounded after a car was raked with gunfire by separatist 
ethnic Albanians, police said Wednesday. The violence highlighted 
the continuing potential for bloodshed in Kosovo despite last month's 
peace agreement. Serb police at a checkpoint near Sipitula, about 
15 kilometers (nine miles) west of Pristina, said Albanian guerrillas 
opened fire on two vehicles from the nearby Belacevac coal mine Tuesday 
evening. They said an ensuing gunfight between police and the attackers 
lasted an hour. Three miners in the car were injured and taken to 
Pristina hospital, according to police. The cars, still sitting at 
the checkpoint Wednesday morning, had several bullet holes or marks 
in the windshields and chassis. Villagers said Serb police began shooting 
at the village at about the same time police said the gunfight began. 
The villagers said they fled and spent the night in nearby fields 
or homes of friends and relatives. A few who returned Wednesday morning 
said police routinely attack the village and force them to flee. ``They 
aren't withdrawing their forces'' as called for in the Oct. 12 agreement, 
complained one man, Fatmme Mjeku. Alluding to the police threat to 
Albanian refugees before the attack, Kosovo's top ethnic Albanian 
leader said more needs to be done to ensure the safety of refugees 
going back home. Ibrahim Rugova spoke Tuesday after venturing into 
the countryside for the first time in nine years. ``We saw huge destruction, 
but we met many people who have begun returning,'' he said. ``It's 
a beginning of the process to return. But for a more massive return, 
more safety is needed.'' Rugova saw charred and roofless homes during 
a tour of central Kosovo. He accompanied U.S. envoy Christopher Hill, 
who is trying to persuade the ethnic Albanians to give up their dream 
of Kosovo's independence from Serbia and settle for some form of self-rule. 
As the head of the ethnic Albanians' outlawed government in Kosovo, 
Rugova has remained almost exclusively in the capital Pristina since 
Serbia stripped the province's autonomy in 1989 and set up a huge 
police presence. But with no major fighting in Kosovo for weeks and 
many Serb forces withdrawn under the Oct. 12 peace agreement, he visited 
villages that were on the front line of fighting between Serb forces 
and ethnic Albanian guerrillas last month. Sporadic violence by both 
sides continues, along with intimidation by Serb police intended to 
prevent ethnic Albanians from returning home in some areas. ``We have 
to give them a deeper sense of security as there is still fear for 
some people to get back home,'' Rugova said. Hill, who is trying to 
set up negotiations between Albanians and Serbs on a political agreement 
to set up a three-year interim period of self-rule, said a settlement 
is needed to generate more confidence and stability. Most ethnic Albanians 
want independence from Serbia, the dominant republic in Yugoslavia, 
while Serbs insist that Kosovo remain part of Serbian territory. While 
Yugoslavia maintains it has complied with Western demands to reduce 
its forces in Kosovo to levels before the crackdown began last February, 
the Kosovo Liberation Army said Tuesday that more special police and 
soldiers must go. The guerrillas also warned that they are not prepared 
to compromise their goal of outright independence. On Wednesday, they 
announced they are holding two politicians from Rugova's party who 
went missing Oct. 30 in Malisevo, southwest of Pristina. The two, 
Jakup Kastrati and Cene Desku, were conducting an anti-KLA campaign 
and ``coaxed people to turn in their arms,'' said a KLA statement 
printed in the daily Koha Ditore. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>