<DOC>
<DOCNO> APW19981104.0266 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Three state-run banks took over a troubled finance company Wednesday 
as the government pledged help to businesses facing difficulties in 
the economic slowdown. The banks will manage Central Bills Finance 
Co. for six months in an attempt to resolve serious cash-flow problems, 
Vice Finance Minister Sean Chen said. ``The main problem now is to 
restore investor confidence and stabilize the money market,'' Chen 
told a news conference. Investor confidence seemed in short supply 
Wednesday, as the share price of four companies damaged by a busted 
stock purchase plunged 7 percent, dropping by the maximum amount allowed 
under Taiwanese securities law for the second day in a row. All of 
the troubles helped push Taiwan blue chip shares down by another 2 
percent, following similar losses in Tuesday's dealings. The crisis 
erupted at Central Bills after the company failed to pay back an estimated 
4 billion Taiwan dollars (U.S. dlrs 123 million) worth of loans that 
had come due. Hit by Asia's financial crisis, Taiwan's economy has 
slowed and domestic consumption has slumped, leaving many companies 
struggling to pay off debts that they ran up when times were better. 
Several customers of Central Bills have recently run into financial 
troubles that eventually caught up with Central Bills, a finance group 
that guarantees bonds issued by its clients when they raise money 
to operate their own businesses. Fearing that Central Bills could 
be dragged down by the economic mess, creditors began clamoring last 
week for repayment of their debts, while customers demanded that the 
company make good on its business contracts. Among Central Bills' 
customers is the conglomerate New Magnitude, which together with the 
Panvest business group had failed Tuesday to come up with cash to 
settle stock deals worth a combined 760 million Taiwan dollars (U.S. 
dlrs 23 million) _ spreading negative sentiment through the market. 
Traders say three New Magnitude subsidiaries and one Panvest subsidiary 
were trying to prop up other members of their respective conglomerates 
through share purchases, but they eventually were unable to keep buying. 
Shares in all four subsidiaries fell as far as the law allowed both 
Tuesday and Wednesday. Property shares, which have been weak lately, 
plunged further amid concerns about the property interests of New 
Magnitude and Panvest. Finance Minister Paul Chiu predicted the financial 
turmoil would be short-lived because the government was developing 
a bailout plan. Early Wednesday, Premier Vincent Siew pledged government 
help to financial institutions that are sound but facing short-term 
problems with cash flow. Siew ordered government agencies to help 
troubled business groups improve their financial structures. Officials 
said the government will initially set up a fund of 1.2 billion Taiwan 
dollars (U.S. dlrs 30 million) to provide loans to small businesses. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>