<DOC>
<DOCNO> CNN19981104.0130.1502 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> CAPTION </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Communities across the country have weighed in with their opinions 
on america's leadership. And that's true in Hollywood as well. The 
only difference -- the stars' opinions make it on to television. Ron 
tank reports. Even if you do vote, it doesn't make one wits of difference. 
And that -- Of course it makes a difference! Oh, it does not! Roseanne 
may have her doubts, but the rest of Hollywood seems eager to participate 
in Tuesday's elections. I think the main thing is to vote. That's 
the most important thing. I've already voted. I've got my little "I 
voted" thing. I did absentee. The entertainment community seems to 
be earning its representation as a bastion of liberalism. I'm Dem 
all the way. I'm gonna vote the party line. I'm pretty apolitical 
for the most part. All right. Pretty excited. Proud of it. Many stars 
hope the election will dampen enthusiasm for investigating the president. 
I would like to see us move on to something more important. I'm tired 
of it. "Titanic" co-star Frances Fisher put her autograph on a petition 
urging Congress to chastise the president and be done with it. Whatever 
we do, pillory him or slap him on the wrist, or just, you know, don't 
ever let him set foot in Washington again. Who knows, but the idea 
is, let's just wrap this up and move on. Some are appalled by President 
Clinton's conduct with Monica lewinsky. I was shocked about what the 
president did. I really was. I think it was trashy. Others consider 
it a private matter. I think a person's personal life is their own 
business, whoever they are. I really think that that is really between 
him and his wife. And I think Joe would lie if he cheated on me. but 
-- Never. Oh, yes. no? First of all, everybody has -- You would lie. 
I would forgive him, but first, I'd throw him under a truck. While 
the Clinton scandal dominates the election, for Hollywood, there are 
other issues, like California ballot measures. The one that I'm really 
pushing for mainly is prop 4, which is against cruelty to animals 
with those steel-jaw traps. Rob reiner concedes California's proposition 
10, which would fund child development programs by raising the tax 
on cigarettes. And what we're trying to do is give every child a healthy 
start in life. Whatever the issue, most stars feel the key is to cast 
a ballot. People that say, "oh, I don't like to vote because my voice 
never really matters," and, you know, it's so much other stuff, this 
year is the election that really matters. If you've used that excuse 
in the past, it can't be used this year. Even roseanne can be convinced. 
Okay, I'll vote. Good. Ron tank, "CNN Entertainment News," Hollywood. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>