<DOC>
<DOCNO> MNB19981104.2100.1247 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> CAPTION </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
One of the biggest surprises of election night, the man who is the 
next governor of Minnesota, the former pro wrestler, Navy seal who 
goes by the name of Jesse "the body" Ventura is now governor-elect 
there after a Campaign that cost him about $250,000. We should also 
tell you there was genuine shock in parts of Minnesota this morning 
and the rest of the nation. But as you'll hear, the Ventura voters 
in the land of Humphrey have their reasons for voting for him. With 
more on this, here is Jim Avila. Jesse the body's Ventura's fight 
was not fixed from the beginning, no script and he still won. We shockled 
the world. The former professional wrestler, master of a pseudo port 
he describes as "Ballet with violence" is now the governor-elect of 
Minnesota with more than 4 million people, the country's 20th largest 
state. Elected on the independent reform party ticket, Ventura surprised 
his veteran opponents, cluing Hubert Humphrey's son skip with a Blunt 
campaign that capitalized on his fame and status as an outsider. I 
have pride I do a good job at everything I do. He did serves a mayor 
of a small Minneapolis suburb but his real job is wrestling, rock 
singing, coaching high school foot wall and hosting a Sports talk 
show. But now Jesse the body fashions himself Jesse the mind. Who 
helped him pull off the stunning win no one expected, young people 
18 to 44, many of whom had never voted before. He won among liberals 
with a social agenda that is pro-choice and pro-gay rights and scored 
half the large independent vote in Minnesota with a Message that appealed 
to voters fed up with politics. Why is my credibility good? Because 
I tell the truth. Jason riffenburg fits the profile, under 30, independent, 
high school graduate, and angry. We're tired of the way politics is 
being played. The Clinton thing, you know, that brought a lot of feanings 
to the politics, so many people weren't paying attention Tart started 
paying attention. Ventura won with plain talk and charisma, surprising 
pundits. Maybe common sense in government was as much a theme as anything. 
But Ventura is quick to point out that he comes with some solid qualifications, 
including an impressive military record. He was a Navy seal and combratted 
from the underwater demolition school, navy jump school, survival 
school and saw active duty in Vietnam and Korea, some of his missions 
classified. This is not something to be afraid of. This is a challenge. 
Tonight Ventura is back on the football field, still coaching, and 
reminding anyone who will listen that some of the best American leaders 
were not professional politicians. One of them played a football hero 
called "the gipper." Jim Avila. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>