<DOC>
<DOCNO> MNB19981104.2100.1837 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> CAPTION </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
More than 125 newspapers around the country have gone on record after 
all saying Bill Clinton should resign. Over 125 of them. We are joined 
this evening by editorial page editors of two of these papers. Jane 
Eisner of the "Philadelphia Enquirer" and beater bronson. "Cincinnati 
Enquirer." Jane, does this change anything? Does the election change 
anything? I think we treated this election as most Americans treated 
this election, which is that it was something about local news and 
local issues. It was about social security, education, tkses, environment. 
That is how we made our endorsements and how the voters reacted. I 
want to read what you originally wrote here. "He should resign because 
here is a quote. Now, it's cruel to read this back and say, well, 
this didn't happen, who do we see about that? What is the remaining 
reason for the paper through the voice of its editorial page to stick 
to its guns here and say, you know what, your power is over? Well, 
we stand by that editorial. But that's not all we've ever written 
lately about the political scene in america. With all due respect, 
you're pointi out to that one editorial, but we've written far more 
this year about the plight of needy children, about the challenges 
facing public education in urban centers. We concentrated a lot of 
our efforts in this election season on the one hotly contested congressional 
race in our readership area, the 13th congressional district in Montgomery 
county. We're pleased the democrat there unseated the republican incumbent. 
And we would like to say our strong editorial substance was a factor 
in that race. There are two reasons we wrote that editorial in September. 
There were some of us who thought the president cannot govern anymore. 
And, clearly, the events since then, including the real stupidity 
of the republicans has made that not so true. There are also many 
of us who thought he should not govern again. I think there are still 
a lot of Americans who believe that. But we've been following their 
lead and moving on to the issues we think are now utmost in our readers' 
minds. Now for the cincinatti inquirier, before we talk with Peter 
who's within here before, a brief sampling here. The fragile marriage 
between America and this charming cheater can never be the same. We 
need to dump him like last week's trash. He needs our prayers and 
deserves our forgiveness. He needs professional help but cannot remain 
in the White House. If he lacks the basic decency to resign, he should 
be impeached. Peter bronson, has anything changed in your mind after 
the results last night? In two words, Brian, no way. Nothing has changed. 
What the president did remains. We don't dismiss criminal charges 
because somebody has one a popularity contest. What we do is follow 
up on the charges and investigate them and get to the bottom of them. 
That's what we still recommend. I think there's a constitutional obligation 
on the part of Congress to proceed with impeachment hearings just 
as you would with a preliminary hearing to find out if you have an 
indictable mass of evidence that is indictable and proceed. If there 
needs to be a trial in the Senate, let's do it. I think there's a 
risk the president may feel vindicated and feel wreckless after this 
election that somehow the public doesn't care what he's done. I think 
the public cares and if we don't we should. More than that, Peter, 
there are some democrats on the record saying this is a mandate for 
exactly what we stand for, exactly what we've been putting out. Do 
you need any clearer a message? The American people have spoken it's 
OK with them. Well, I think Jane hit on part of it when she referred 
to the stupidity of the republican party. How do you take what's been 
a historic average of up to 20 seats in this kind of election and 
turn it into a five-seat loss. Some people have referred to tch as 
the Seinfeld election. If that's the case it must be run by comes 
mow Cramer and postal worker cramer. They've been inept. There's been 
no issues on the table by the republicans. We saw people winning in 
our districts. Thank you very much. We want to thank you both for 
coming on. It's been an interesting discussion. The two newspapers 
will continue writing on this subject. I appreciate your time tonight. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>