<DOC>
<DOCNO> MNB19981104.2100.2142 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> CAPTION </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Also, from last night, a majority of voters polled yesterday said 
they believe the economy was in good shape. More than that, they were 
concerned about the future, however, according to an NBC news exit 
poll. Voters were asked whether they thought the country would hit 
a recession within two years. 45% said there would likely be some 
economic trouble in the near future. John ryding is senior economist 
at bear Stearns where he's responsible for analyzing and forecasting 
the U.S. economy and financial markets and with us from New York. 
It gets even more confusing. Eight in 10 said the economy was fabulous 
where they were concerned. Six in 10 expect some sort of recession, 
however. All these conflicting feelings, would last night have been 
different if we had a few more months of bad economic indicators? 
I think last night would have been quite different if we'd had another 
month or so in the stock market like we had in August and September. 
We have a nation now very much invested in the stock market as well 
as invested in their own careers. And I think that the incumbents 
were fortunate that the federal reserve has cut interest rates twice 
ahead of this election, and that's brought the stock market bounding 
back strongly. Do you think it is all but the sole reason we had so 
many incumbents return to office? I think that's the major reason. 
I think if people are essentially comfortable in their own job, then 
they become more likely to vote for the status quo. I don't think 
that can explain why we didn't get more of the usual midterm shift 
towards the party in opposition as far as the White House is concerned. 
The wide republicans lost seats. I don't think that's a function of 
the economy. I think that is more -- that is more of fathers about 
the future and fears the republicans weren't tackling the issues. 
They were focusing on impeachment. I think the voters wanted to send 
a message, focus on the future. You know the conspiracy theerris in 
the U.S. believe there are things both parties can come to cook the 
books during the runup to an election to make sure everything looks 
good and the days to watch are right now for bad economic news. Do 
you think there's a chance for that? I don't think so. I think to 
begin with if the government was able to manipulate the figures so 
effectively, the outcome of the 2 election would have been different 
than it was. This is, after all, a continuation of the recovery that 
began under George bush and Alan Greenspan in 1991. I don't think 
that's the case. I think the economy is in fairly good shape. We shchal 
ens abroad we have to meet. With the feds help, I expect another rate 
cut in two week's time we will get beyond these problems. John is 
the Sr, economist at bear Stearns. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>