<DOC>
<DOCNO> MNB19981104.2100.2330 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> CAPTION </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
From Wall Street to Washington, politics with last night's unexpected 
democratic victories in prominent races, including the California 
statehouse, U.S. Senate seat in New York, a lot of people are wondering 
what the republican party will do next. Joining us tonight, a man 
who has advised powerful players in Washington, ken duberstein has 
served as President Reagan's chief of staff as well as president's 
Ford under secretary of labor. He also advised senator Colin Powell 
and is director of a consulting firm in D.C. where he joins us. A 
lot of people were cutting to the chase today that the focus shiferts 
to the year 2000 and George W. bush versus Al Gore. Do you concur? 
I think you have an awful lot of runup time to the year 2000. But 
the message from last night with the governors led by the bush brothers, 
by George and Jeb was performance and principalle and pragmatic leadership, 
building coalitions, getting the job done and focusing on what the 
people need, the big tent. I think if that's the wave of the republican 
future, then in fact, it is the run up to the year 2000. What should 
the Christian right be doing today by way of a mid course correction? 
I think the Christian right needs to broaden its message. The message 
can't just be on the ideological litmus test issues, the hot button 
issues, but rather focusing on governing and what the republicans 
need to do, including the Christian right is figure out what's going 
to make a difference in the everyday lives of average Americans, not 
just focus on abortion or school prayer or gun control, but talk values, 
but also talk about education, talk about social security reesm, modernizing 
our government, broaden the message. That's the only way they're going 
to succeed. How should we feel about the ability of the people of 
Minnesota to elect a Former wrestler? I think the question you have 
to ask is whether this is going to encourage mike Tyson to run for 
Congress or nature boy Rick flair to run for a Judgeship in Minnesota. 
I happen to be out in Minnesota yesterday morning at a meeting. And 
to see the energy and enthusiastic and the uplift of young Americans, 
young minnesotans saying no more politics as usual, let's stop fighting 
and bickering and figure out ways to govern, not republican or democrat, 
but let's work together. I think that sends a very important message 
to Washington. Both sides of the whoil and both ends of opinion pen 
pen avenue to reach out and figure out ways to govern together. And 
whether it's the president looking for a legacy or Newt Gingrich looking 
not only to hold the speakership but go to the year 2000 and keep 
a Republican Congress, he has to do it by governing, by reaching out 
in the middle. Last night was a centered election and not left to 
right. It was empowering the center. Let's talk about Newt Gingrich 
holding on to that job. The scandal didn't sell, Ken, as a national 
strategy. The president proved to have as thick a coating of teflon 
as your former boss, Ronald Reagan. And what is the chance that there 
will be a run on Gingrich's post, and would they be committing political 
suicide if the next speaker and the leader of that run came from the 
far right? Well, I think, number one, the people in the house will 
not sugar coat a Message to the speaker. I think they're going to 
say, where's the agenda? Where are the four or five it's that we want 
to run on in the year 2000? What can we do between now and 2000 to 
make this better for every American? Whether it's cutting taxes or 
modernizing government or looking at health care reform or social 
security reform or building better schools with local control. Focus 
on the four or five issues. What happened was, at least as far as 
I'm concerned, is that after they passed this agreement to balance 
the budget in 1997, they basically hit a Snooze alarm. And what they 
wound up doing was being confronted with scandal and focusing on scandal 
rather than laying out an issue agenda for the American people. That's 
what was missing in this campaign. Ken duberstein, thank you very 
much. You're always welcomed on the broadcast. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>