<DOC>
<DOCNO> MNB19981104.2100.0783 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> CAPTION </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
With us tonight to walk us through last night's numbers and what the 
voters were saying, both halves of what is arguably the best polling 
due O in the business and has been for some time. Peter Hart heart 
is a democratic pollster based in Washington. Bob teeter is republican 
pollster based in Michigan with us in Detroit. These gentlemen have 
been the pollsters for NBC news and wall treat journal for the past 
ten years. Mr. teeter, as they exited the booths last night and they 
were approached by our plight exit pollsters, what was the Dom national 
mood? I don't know there was a Dom anytime mood. I think the democrats 
from a political standpoint one. They one almost all of the close 
races. They clearly did two or three points better tharn the polls 
indicated. But in terms of an overwhelming sentiment, four against 
the president on any particular issue, a theme. There didn't seem 
to be one. I think in the last month our poll about a week ago showed 
there was some indication of maybe some anti-republican sentiment 
kept in some political sentiment against the republicans just over 
the last month or so. But I don't think there was a real dominant 
theme in this campaign. Peter Hart heart we have some numbers we can 
put on the screen. People seem to want something to happen to this 
president. And we have it broken down. Impeach, 34%. Censure, 47%. 
Have him leave office, 41%. And you know, voting for Congress, why 
did you vote for who you did? Support the president, 18%. Pope the 
president, 20%. Neither which speaks against the referendum argument, 
62%. A bizarre election. And Minnesota at least proved that Americans 
still have a funny way of going their own way. Let's start with the 
most important number. 62% said neither. And that's what we found. 
We found it in the NBC news/"Wall Street Journal" poll. And what it 
means is the voters are ready to push on. I think you heard congressman 
Hutchinson say it correctly, and that is get the business done and 
get it done quickly and get it done well. But the voters' message 
was do our business and that means education, that means social security. 
Those are the things the democrats ran on. That was part of the theme. 
The other theme that I would pick up is that it was a great year for 
incumbents. Almost every incumbent one. I think only 10 out of 455 
lost. And all good news because the economy is going well. The direction 
of the country is positive. And Bob teeter, speaking of the economy, 
if it goes south, traditionally voters become angry and start casting 
about and so long to some incumbents? That's true. Obviously the economy 
was as strong and as good a shape it's been in for many years. As 
Peter said, that benefited incumbents. That's something we did see 
all the way along in our polls. When we asked people how -- how satisfied 
they were with the incumbents, it was very high. The fact someone 
wasn't an incumbent made it more likely to vote. Very interesting 
dynamic among democrats. You could watch it happen overnight. The 
same democrats who had been saying this is no way a referendum on 
our president in this election were last night starting to say it's 
clearly a Mandate for all our president stands for, if not personal 
support for him. How does that happen? You win a few seats and things 
look a lot rosier. But it was much more something about Newt Gingrich 
and the republicans. In 1994, they gambled and won by nationalizing 
the election. You put on all the voices and all the predictions, and 
when you stop and look at that versus the final seats, the republicans 
gambled on nationalizing the election in 1998 and it bit them in the 
Fanny to be honest. And Bob teeter, when was the first indication 
you had personally and as a Professional that this was what was the 
trend last night? Well, as you begin to see, the races in New York 
obviously was one, North Carolina was one. Those early races were 
important where republicans were losing. But just as important, even 
the places where they were winning they weren't getting the margins. 
The one exception is the vernors. I think the only indication we saw 
I mentioned a minute ago, before the election was in a poll we did 
last week, the Negative readings of the republican party had been 
flat for about two years. And just between September and October, 
they went from 29 to 40%, while the democratic readings stayed flat. 
We talked about it a little last week and didn't pay enough attention 
to it. Peter Hart, why should Gingrich pay for something that he may 
not be responsible for, if people voted local for their guy or woman? 
It wasn't a local election and Newt Gingrich knows that. What it came 
down to is it was a national election. He nationalalized it. They 
it two play books and took the southern play book, exclusion and I 
am impeachment didn't play. The northern play book which was the republican 
governors, that's the one that would have done well for them. Pollsters 
Hart and teeter. It's always a pleasure. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>