<DOC>
<DOCNO> MNB19981104.2100.2764 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> CAPTION </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Paula Jones, as you may know, has been back in the news lately in 
search of a big settlement with her case against the president. Abe 
hirschfeld has been dang Lyn $1 million in the case. Apparently her 
current lawyers have had enough. In tomorrow's "New York Times," Neil 
Lewis writes exclusively about the impending departure of the Jones 
legal team. Neil Lewis with us in Washington. Neil, abe hirschfeld, 
kind of a gad fly New Yorker and former publisher of the New York 
post. He said I'll give you a million bucks and then what happened? 
He said I'll give you $1 million. My only interest is to solve this. 
I'm a rich man and proud of the country. I want to end this. In the 
interim he withdrew his offer and was back in, withdrew again and 
was back in. On Saturday, which is one of the events I think really 
impelled the current team of jeans' lawyers to consider withdrawing, 
he had this ceremonyy in washington with Paula Jones at a hotel where 
he handed her a mock check for $1 million, gave her a Kiss on the 
cheek and had an agreement with these lawyers that he would send by 
wire the million dollars to an account in dallas where the lawyers 
are based and it will remain in escrow. He has not done so. Of course, 
the problem with any case where you're seeking a big financial settlement 
is that it looks like the principal of is less important to you. This 
has become a spectacle. Tell us about the lawyers and why they're 
departing and what got to them this time? As you said earlier, it 
would be the second set of lawyers to leave. They've grown increasingly 
impatient with Jones in the settlement business. There are two reasons. 
When they got in the case in September of 1997 when the previous lawyers 
left, they skewed an agreement from a California woman who befriended 
miss jones that she wouldn't never any longer. Her role drove the 
previous lawyers nuts. There was an agreement she wouldn't be part 
of this. Lo and behold we come to a point where these lawyers and 
lawyers of the White House come close to a settlement and miss McMillan 
Carpenter is back in it counseling against it. And she is courting 
this million dollars from abe hirschfeld who you say is a colorful 
figure, a strange figure, who has offered this million dollars. And 
in the eyes of these lawyers, Paula Jones' current lawyers, they were 
negotiating with the White House between $700,000 and a million dollars. 
Miss Jones seemed to have her eyes grow large at the possibility of 
getting that monfri from the White House and adding it to Mr. hirschfeld's 
money for as much as $2 million. In the end, the hirschfeld's offer 
has qutesed things. Where is pk Paula Jones in all of this as of tonight, 
still gunning for the best offer? I'm sorry, she's still gunning for 
it, certainly. But she's about to -- unless there's a settlement soon, 
she's about to lose these lawyers. She'll have to find a new set of 
lawyers if an appeals court in St. Paul reinstates her case. Her original 
case of sexual misconduct against President Clinton has been thrown 
out by the trial judge in Little Rock. She through her lawyers has 
argued it should be reinstated largely because the president misrepresented 
his relationship with Monica Lewinsky to her lawyers. So if the court 
rules she can go to trial, she'll have to get a new set of lawyers 
to do so. If the court rules she can't go to trial, she'll still have 
to get a new set of lawyers. I believe most experts in sex yull heirsment 
and misconduct cases believe even if Paula Jones won the right to 
a new trial and even if then she won in the trial, it's unlikely she 
would get anywhere near the amount of money the White House is offering 
her now. She alleges she was harassed in a Little Rock hotel room 
in 1991 where she met with then-governor Clinton for 10 minute. Most 
people think even if she won what is the jury going to give her. They're 
not going to give her $700,000. This is the political moment for her 
to settle. Just as we didn'ten this case could get stranger, the byline 
tomorrow, Neil lewis. Thank you for coming on tonight. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>