<DOC>
<DOCNO> MNB19981104.2100.0504 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> CAPTION </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
We're joined by telephone this evening by congressman Asa Hutchinson 
of the state of Arkansas. He's on the Judiciary committee. And, congressman, 
we wanted to ask you about a bit of news we have tonight. Sources 
are telling MSNBC is that Henry Hyde is going to come out with a Completely 
accelerated schedule, having this matter out of committee by thanksgiving, 
rapidly appearing down the process. Can you confirm or deny and your 
action to this? We did have a conference today with chairman Hyde, 
and he's going to make an announcement tomorrow. That should be his 
option to make the announcement on the schedule. But certainly from 
the election results, it was clear that the intent to wrap all of 
this up by the end of the year is what the voters want, so the commitment 
of the Judiciary committee is reconfirmed and reinvig rated that we're 
going to keep our commitment and wrap this up and bring this to conclusion 
as soon as we can in a fair manner. That's one way of looking at it. 
It depends really on party affiliation. Some people, mostly democrats 
have been saying let's listen to what the american people think in 
this election. That should decide this proceeding. But Mr. Hyde made 
a point of saying nothing changed about the constitution in this election. 
But as you know, the reports are going to begin tomorrow. It appears 
this has been accelerated because of the vote. Well, I think what 
has not changed is our obligation to do our duty. If we had picked 
up 15 seats on the republican side in the election, I don't -- I woop 
not be here saying that's a mandate for impeachment. I don't think 
you can construe a whole lot into a national election this last week. 
But clearly from the polls and the town meetings that I hold, the 
American public wants this concluded. That's been a consistent pattern 
for the last month. And so that was our intent all along. But, certainly, 
we want to continue down that pattern, and part of that would be to 
hold some hearings that can bring this to a conclusion fairly quickly. 
I should tell you, NBC news is reporting tonight the republicans are 
planning to call one witness, Ken Starr. Can you shed some light on 
that for us? Well, I think the exact witness list would be announced 
by chairman Hyde. But I think Ken Starr should be a witness. With 
all of the charges back and forth, he ought to have an opportunity 
to make a statement. He's the chief investigator of this. And he should 
respond to appropriate questions. So I think it's good he will testify. 
I think that will be a well listened to committee hearing if that 
is the case. I'm sure he will. The other witnesses I think remain 
to be seen. I'm sure chairman Hyde will have a statement to make about 
the other potential witnesses or who may or may not testify. And on 
the eve of that announcement, congressman Hutchinson has been nice 
enough to join us by telephone tonight as NBC news is reporting something 
of a preview of what's going to be going on tomorrow. Congressman, 
thank you. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>