<DOC>
<DOCNO> NBC19981104.1830.0166 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> CAPTION </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Although he still faces a republican majority in Congress, president 
clinton does have some running room tonight when it comes to the future 
of his presidency. As he once again escapes who appeared to be a political 
death trap. We have three reports tonight on what happened in the 
last 24 hours. Anne Thompson on who cast the most critical votes, 
Gwen Ifill on the governor races and we'll begin with Claire Shipman. 
The question, whatever happened to the Monica Lewinsky factor. Tom, 
the voters decided the Lewinsky factor wasn't spornt. But while the 
president's mood was one of euphoric disbelief and vindication, the 
public strategy today was to keep that all in check. The White House 
message today was clear -- the issues were the winners in this election, 
not the president. The American people want their business, their 
concerns, their children, their families, their future addressed. 
So that's what the message of the election was. But behind the scenes, 
the White House hopes that the message republicans get is that the 
impeachment inquiry should be shortened, or even dropped. Henry Hyde 
is expected to release a hearing schedule tomorrow, which will outline 
proceedings to be completed by year's end. If a deal to avoid hearings 
can be reached, republicans are still struggling for what they call 
a "suitable presidential punishment." Like censure, banning the president 
from the grounds of Congress, or taking away his retirement pension. 
Of those three, White House sources say only censure is acceptable. 
These election results won't necessarily mean a quick end to the Lewinsky 
matter. For example, many democrats are now worried that Bill Clinton 
may feel that he is avoid any sort of reprimand. And sources tell 
us that Newt Gingrich's job as speaker may now be in jeopardy. Advisers 
here worry that to keep his job, he may have to push hard on impeachment. 
tom? Thank you very much. Claire Shipman at the White House tonight. 
In politics there's always a lot of talk about winning an election 
one voter at a time. But thelessson from yesterday is that the democrats, 
especially, have brought together a strong voting block. And they 
will be working hard to improve its strength. Anne Thompson joins 
us now. Anne? Tom, energizing its traditional constituencies of women, 
african-Americans and Hispanics, democrats put together a coalition 
that helped its candidates to victory from coast to coast. The biggest 
prize in yesterday's contest -- California. Democrat's hold on to 
Barbara boxer's Senate seat and put Gray Davis in the governor's office, 
each with almost 60% of the women's vote, over 80% of the black vote 
and more than 70% of the Hispanic vote -- that state's largest minority. 
In New York, those same three groups dig a disastrous pothole for 
incumbent republican senator alphonse D'Amato, wildly favoring his 
democratic challenger, Charles Schumer -- 82% of Hispanics, 86% of 
blacks, 59% of women. In North Carolina, a big turnout of blacks helps 
trial attorney John edwards defeat GOP senator Lauch Faircloth. And 
in Georgia, a 13% increase in the black vote pushes democrat Roy Barnes 
into the governor's office. But in Illinois, the minority vote was 
not enough. Carol Moseley-Braun won 93% of the black vote, but still 
lost to republican peter Fitzgerald. In part, Tom, because Moseley-Braun 
lost support among women, getting only 50% of that vote yesterday 
compared to 58% she captured when she won in 1992. Thank you very 
much. Anne Thompson tonight in Chicago. Now to a new class of political 
stars, the nation's governors. Gwen Ifill with that story for us. 
Gwen? Tom, voters sent 13 new governors to the nation's statehouses 
last night, choosing hands-on chief executives, who billed themselves 
as problem solvers. California's Gray Davis convinced voters he could 
be tough on crime, improve schools and be more practical than political. 
A moderate path to the future. That is who I am, that is how I ran, 
and that is how I will govern. Exactly what voters demanded in a year 
when Washington's bickering grew deafening. Governors-elect in Florida, 
South Carolina and Alabama -- all elected emphasizing education, health 
care, and modest tax cuts, and local issues ranging from video poker 
to the environment. In other words, moving out all those four or five 
issues, but in a kind of a fiscal conservative but compassionate mode. 
Alabama democrat Don siegelman forged strong ties with the state's 
business community. Iowa's Tom vilsack talked HMO reform, while efforts 
to tie state campaigns to Washington backfired. South Carolina republican 
David beasley paid for this ad. He was defeated -- a lesson not lost 
on most of the nation's governors who are trying to keep their political 
efforts intact, Tom? Thank you very much. Gwen Ifill at the capitol. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>