<DOC>
<DOCNO> NBC19981104.1830.1016 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> CAPTION </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
NBC news "in depth" tonight, the strongest statement in this election. 
They call him Jesse "the body" Ventura. Well, they used to. They also 
call him governor elect of Minnesota. He was born 47 years ago in 
Minneapolis and he is 6'4" tall. He's taken over the Minnesota statehouse. 
NBC's Jim Avila tonight "in depth." This time, Jesse "the body" Ventura's 
fight was not fixed from the beginning -- no script, and he still 
won. We shocked the world! The former professional wrestler, master 
of a pseudo sport he describes as "ballet with violence," is now the 
governor-elect of minnesota, more than 4 million people, the country's 
20th largest state. This is America where dreams can come true. Elected 
on the independent reform party ticket, Ventura surprised his veteran 
opponents, including Hubert Humphrey's son skip, with a Blunt campaign 
that capitalized on his fame and his status as an outsider. I have 
personal pride that I do a good job at everything I do. He did serve 
as mayor of a small Minneapolis suburb, but his real jobs -- wrestling, 
rock singing, acting, coaching high school football and sports talk 
show host. But now, Jesse "the body" fashions himself Jesse the mind 
populist thinker. Who does not accept money? Who helped him pull off 
the stunning win no one expected? Young people, 18-44, many of whom 
had never voted before. He won among liberals with a social agenda 
that is pro-choice and pro-gay rights, and scored half the large independent 
vote in Minnesota with a Message that appealed to voters fed up with 
politics. Why is my credibility good? Because I tell the truth. Jason 
riffenburg fits the profile -- under 30, independent, high school 
graduate, and angry. You know, we're tired of the way politics are 
being played. That Clinton thing brought a lot of attention to politics. 
So maybe people that weren't paying attention started paying attention 
now. Venn tour ra won with talk and charisma, energizing voters. This 
was a theme if anything was. But Ventura is quick to point out that 
he comes with some solid qualifications, including an impressive military 
record. Real name, James George janos, a Navy S.E.A.L. he graduated 
from the grueling basic underwater demolition school, Navy jump school, 
survival school and escape school. And saw active duty in both Vietnam 
and Korea, some of his missions classified. This is not something 
to be afraid of. This is a challenge, something to tackle. Tonight 
he is back on the football field, still coaching and reminding anyone 
who will listen some of the best American leaders were not professional 
politicians. One of them played with football hero called the giper. 
Jif Avila, NBC news, St. Paul. Final note, that's not the last we'll 
here of Jesse "the body" Ventura. He is going to keep a promise to 
go down from a hospital to the capitol dome. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>