<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981104.0552 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
The lawyers representing Paula Jones in her sexual misconduct lawsuit 
against President Clinton have grown annoyed with her settlement demands 
and have told her they will soon withdraw from the case, a friend 
of Ms. Jones and lawyers involved in the discussions said Wednesday. 
The impending departure of her lawyers, who are based in Dallas and 
Charlottesville, Va., may weaken her position as she seeks a settlement 
to drop the lawsuit, which led to Clinton's confrontation with Congress 
over impeachment. At the same time, although Abe Hirschfeld, a New 
York real estate magnate who announced on Saturday that he would put 
$1 million in an escrow account to help settle the lawsuit, he has 
failed to do so. Hirschfeld, the Jones lawyers said, failed to wire 
the money as he had explicitly promised to do in a written agreement. 
Ms. Jones did not respond to efforts to reach her but friends said 
she and her husband, Steve, were surprised, even shocked, when the 
lawyers told her on Tuesday night that they would be withdrawing. 
It would be the second time that a team of lawyers has left Ms. Jones 
after losing patience with her. Her current lawyers, like the previous 
lawyers, have laid out enormous sums of money _ the previous lawyers 
claimed $800,000 was owed them and the Dallas firm has said its fees 
totaled more than $1.5 million. It is in the interests of the lawyers 
to have a prompt settlement. Lawyers involved in Tuesday night's discussions 
said Ms. Jones' lawyers were troubled that she was, in their view, 
increasingly unrealistic if not unreasonable about the amount of money 
she should expect to receive in any settlement. Ms. Jones has said 
she would withdraw the lawsuit for $2 million _ $1 million from the 
president in addition to $1 million from Hirschfeld. Clinton's lawyers 
have offered $700,000 to her and have made it clear they are extremely 
reluctant to get involved in any settlement that would include a contribution 
from Hirschfeld, who is under indictment for tax fraud in Manhattan. 
The event that seemed to have exhausted the patience of Ms. Jones' 
lawyers was the meeting on Saturday in which Hirschfeld handed her 
what appeared to be a check for $1 million in a Washington hotel before 
television cameras. The event was not attended by lawyers from the 
Dallas firm, Rader, Fisher, Campbell &AMP; Pyke, and John Whitehead, 
president of the Rutherford Institute in Charlottesville, who have 
been representing her in court. Nonetheless, they signed an agreement 
with Hirschfeld providing that he would wire the money to an escrow 
account and they would assent to his condition that the money could 
not be withdrawn until a settlement was reached with the White House. 
Hirschfeld, who has said he wants to speed a settlement to help the 
country, has been notably inconsistent in explaining what he would 
do. He has withdrawn his offer twice only to reinstate it, gaining 
a fresh burst of publicity each time. Ms. Jones' lawyers complained 
Wednesday that despite the ``media fanfare'' on Saturday, Hirschfeld 
did not live up to his agreement. Harvard Hollenberg, Hirschfeld's 
lawyer, said in an interview Wednesday that Hirschfeld had not wired 
the money as planned because he became fearful that the Dallas lawyers 
for Ms. Jones would seek to withdraw the money. Hollenberg said that 
instead of sending the money to an escrow account, Hirschfeld had 
opened a line of credit for $1 million to be used if there was a settlement. 
Ms. Jones' lawyers do not expect to withdraw from the case immediately. 
If there were any breakthrough in negotiations with Clinton in the 
next few weeks, the lawyers said, they could still represent her. 
A federal judge has dismissed Ms. Jones' lawsuit but the matter is 
under appeal. Ms. Jones has contended that in 1991 when Clinton was 
governor of Arkansas and she was a state clerical worker she was summoned 
to a hotel suite in Little Rock where he dropped his trousers and 
made a crude sexual proposition. In practical terms, Ms. Jones would 
have to find a new set of lawyers to conduct the trial if an appeals 
court reinstates her case. If it ruled against her, she would also 
need new lawyers should she appeal that ruling. The impatience of 
Ms. Jones' lawyers parallels a similar dispute in September 1997 when 
Ms. Jones balked at a possible settlement with Clinton. Her lawyers 
then, Joseph Cammarata and Gilbert K. Davis, asked the court to allow 
them to withdraw from the case because Ms. Jones was unreceptive to 
an offer of $700,000 from the White House. Ms. Jones said then that 
she did not care about the money but that Clinton would not be offering 
an apology. She has since dropped the demand for an apology, her lawyers 
said, because Clinton's acknowledgment of a sexual affair with Monica 
Lewinsky have made that unnecessary. Public opinion polls show that 
since Clinton's admission, a majority of people now largely believe 
Ms. Jones' account. Each time that Ms. Jones has seemingly ignored 
the advice of her lawyers she accepted the counsel of Susan Carpenter 
McMillan, a California woman who befriended Ms. Jones and became her 
spokeswoman. Ms. Carpenter McMillan was the first to embrace Hirschfeld 
as a possible savior of the situation, even as Ms. Jones' lawyers 
in Dallas and the White House were skeptical that he could play a 
role. She declined to comment on the most recent developments. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>