<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981104.0527 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Politicians in both parties said the unexpected Democratic successes 
on Tuesday stemmed from a fundamental misreading of the electorate 
by Republicans: In the face of nine months of polls showing that voters 
were not particularly exercised by the White House scandal, Republicans 
were utterly convinced that it would ultimately play to their advantage. 
That was not their only blunder. Many Republican party officials said 
they assumed they would have an edge given the tide of history showing 
that the president's party almost always loses seats in a midterm 
election. These Republicans figured, therefore, that they did not 
need to use their congressional majorities to push legislation that 
would shape the debate in this political year. Acknowledging the miscalculation, 
Speaker Newt Gingrich said: ``We probably should have almost maniacally 
focused on cutting taxes, reforming government, working on saving 
Social Security'' and ``accepted the fact that that was a better fight 
for us than drifting into September and October where there really 
were _ as people kept saying _ there were no national themes.'' Sen. 
Trent Lott of Mississippi, the Republican leader, said: ``One of the 
lessons for Republicans out of this is that we need to listen more 
carefully to the people _ and we need to have a clear understanding 
and concise message that we do apply across the nation.'' Democrats, 
who were swifter than in past elections in seizing an opening, took 
the offensive on a host of issues including education, Social Security 
and health care. Surveys of voters leaving the polls on Tuesday showed 
that those matters played to the Democrats' advantage. The emphasis 
on those concerns gave the party's core voters, particularly minorities 
and union members, an incentive to turn out in larger numbers than 
expected on Tuesday. Democrats, meanwhile, took advantage of the party's 
issue edge by developing an intense turnout drive that resembled the 
old-fashioned voter efforts practiced by Democrats years ago. And 
with a low turnout overall, those targeted efforts had special impact. 
By contrast, while Republicans had for months expected the scandal 
to embolden the voters that form their base of support, in the closing 
weeks the Monica Lewinsky matter had so dissipated that it was not 
an important motivator for Republicans to vote. Curtis Gans, director 
of the Committee for the Study of the American Electorate, said Democrats 
clearly had an edge in turnout. ``I don't think Republicans gave people 
a reason to vote,'' he said. Strategists in both parties said that 
rather than generate defections from the Republicans _ or drive independents 
to the Democratic column _ the decision by Republicans to put their 
hopes in the impeachment controversy simply gave the Democrats room 
to ignite their supporters by focusing on issues. Some Republicans 
said they sensed trouble late last week, after the press got wind 
of the sudden, multi-million-dollar plan by the National Republican 
Congressional Committee to broadcast television commercials that reminded 
voters of the scandal. Party officials had not intended word of the 
plan to leak out so soon, and they were not prepared for the sustained 
national publicity about the advertisements, which were shown in 30 
Congressional districts. ``The ads added fuel to the ability of the 
Democrats to create a fire about impeachment,'' said Tony Marsh, a 
Republican consultant who created one of the three scandal commercials. 
``They ended up reinforcing everything that we were trying not to 
reinforce.'' The advertisements serve in some ways as a metaphor for 
the Republicans' failed strategy in the election: They showed that 
after dozens, even after hundreds of polls showing that the scandal 
had not registered with voters, Republicans in the crucial final days 
clung to the idea that it was their ticket to victory in races around 
the country. But Marsh said Republicans felt they had no choice but 
to turn to the scandal near the end of the campaign because voters 
had not identified their party with other issues. ``We couldn't connect 
on the other issues,'' he said. While strategists argued over whether 
the advertisements hurt Republicans, they certainly did not seem to 
help. Republican officials said they ran the commercials in 10 districts 
where they did not think Republicans had a chance of winning _ and 
Republicans lost all 10 seats. They also ran them in four races that 
were considered toss-ups, and that the Republicans lost those races. 
The remaining districts where the ads appeared were 16 that party 
officials had expected to win anyway, and where the spots were intended 
to spur turnout. The party's candidates won 12 of those 16 seats. 
There was other anecdotal evidence that a backlash against impeachment 
may have benefited Democrats. In Washington state, for example, former 
Rep. Jay Inslee, a Democrat, was the first candidate in a competitive 
race to run commercials linking his opponent to the impeachment inquiry. 
The Republican incumbent, Rep. Rick White, lost the election. Some 
Republicans said strategists in their party simply could never fathom 
that, despite a job approval rating that never ebbed all year, Clinton 
would not be a drag on Democrats. ``The continued success of Clinton 
is something that totally confounds Republicans,'' said Stuart Stevens, 
a Republican media consultant, ``just as the Democratic intelligentsia 
never understood Ronald Reagan. They just saw him as this actor guy, 
kind of a dummy.'' Strategists on both sides said the Democrats triumphed 
not as much from a backlash against the impeachment inquiry _ although 
that certainly was a factor _ but because Democrats had an issue agenda 
upon which to draw support and Republicans did not. Several leading 
Republicans said the party should have used its majority in Congress 
to pick fights with Clinton on the budget and other matters. Even 
in the face of presidential vetoes, they said, they would have had 
substantial issues to take to the voters. But even though they thought 
the scandal would be a millstone for Clinton, many Republicans said 
they were nervous to challenge him over issues given that the party 
was still smarting over the president's success in turning the government 
shutdown against Republicans in the 1996 elections. ``They were willing 
to get out of town at any cost,'' said Craig Smith, the White House 
political director. ``They left all the budget decisions to the very 
end. And they had no leverage left.'' An explanation for that is there 
was no consensus in the party about precisely how to frame the budget 
battle. Party officials said it was simpler to try to coalesce around 
the scandal. For months, Republican officials said, there was an ongoing, 
and roiling debate inside the party over the Clinton affair, with 
some officials warning that it could ultimately dampen their prospects. 
But in the end, the consensus was that addressing the scandal was 
unavoidable _ and that it was the most obvious issue around which 
the Republicans could rally. Rep. Dick Gephardt, the House minority 
leader, said in an interview that even he had miscalculated the depth 
of the voters' desire to hear no more about the scandal. ``I thought 
when all their money came out in the last two weeks that we were gone,'' 
he said. ``I just thought the money was going to kill us.'' He said 
he had also been apprehensive about the last-minute scandal commercials, 
even though others in the party had gleefully seized on them as working 
to the Democrats' advantage. ``I assumed they had spent a zillion 
dollars on research and focus groups so the knew they ads would work 
before they put them up,'' Gephardt said. Many Republicans also said 
that while they enjoyed a huge financial advantage, they were too 
lax in blanketing their money on races where they had no chance in 
the unrealistic hope of setting off a national wave of support for 
Republicans. But Democrats, forced to preserve their resources, targeted 
their money more carefully. For months many Democratic candidates 
complained that they could not break through to voters because the 
press was so focused on the scandal _ to the benefit of Republicans. 
But in the face of defeat, losing Republican candidates offered the 
same complaint Wednesday. Marvin Robertson, a spokesman for Joe McCormick, 
a Republican who was defeated in Albany, Ga. _ and who party officials 
had tried to help by running one of the Clinton scandal spots _ said 
their campaign was drowned out by the scandal. ``It took us out of 
the race,'' he said. ``You couldn't talk issues. It motivated the 
Democratic Party leadership at the state and national level to get 
those people to the polls.'' At the White House, Smith attributed 
the Democratic wins less to the Democrats' strategy itself and more 
to ``our ability to capitalize on their miscalculations.'' But Republicans 
said they were also jolted by the Democrats' success in prodding people 
to the polls, and particularly by the drive by the White House to 
focus on black turnout. For example, party officials said they had 
calculated the exact number of votes they needed to oust Rep. Melvin 
Watt, D-N.C., and to counter support from black voters in the district. 
The Republicans said they met their goal but, because of an unanticipated 
outpouring of support among blacks, the Republican, John S. Keadle, 
still lost by 20,168 votes. Rep. John Linder of Georgia, chairman 
of the National Republican Congressional Committee, said his organization's 
multi-million-dollar advertising drive ``saved a lot of seats that 
we otherwise would have lost.'' Yet, he added, ``if I were to do it 
over again, I probably would have moved some money off TV and moved 
it into more turnout efforts.'' Linder added: ``The president and 
first lady and their entire team, Jesse Jackson leading the team, 
turned out a huge African-American vote, a block vote that turned 
out in large numbers. Some of that was just fear tactics.'' Over all, 
turnout on Tuesday was estimated at 38 percent of the voting age population. 
While religious conservatives and other groups mounted aggressive 
voter drives, Democrats appeared to benefit significantly from a decision 
by labor unions to channel their resources into get-out-the-vote drives 
rather than advertising campaigns, as they did two years ago. ``They 
went under the radar again,'' Lott said. ``They probably spent more 
money _ and I think it was more effective.'' The AFL-CIO distributed 
statistics from surveys of voters leaving the polls which the federation 
said showed that voters in union households comprised 22 percent of 
all voters on Tuesday, and 14 percent in the 1994 election. ``Union 
members said they wanted to elect people who would focus on solving 
the country's problems, instead of wasting time trying to impeach 
Bill Clinton,'' said Geoff Garin, a Democratic pollster and consultant 
to the AFL-CIO. ``Seventy-five percent said that that was a very important 
goal of theirs when they went to the polls and decided how to vote.'' 
Because of the small turnout overall, many races were decided by only 
a tiny pool of voters. If 9,537 people had voted differently in six 
Congressional districts, Democrats would have won back the House on 
Tuesday, according to Mark Gersh, chairman of the National Committee 
for an Effective Congress, which provides demographic data for Democratic 
candidates. Yet for all the gloating among Democrats, a similar shift 
in the other direction may have preserved the Republicans' fragile 
margin in the House. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>