<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981104.0613 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Sen. Alfonse D'Amato has long reigned as the undisputed king of New 
York's Republican Party. He chose the party chairman, swayed votes 
for local committees and county leaders, raised money and labored 
to build a party machine in every corner of the state that was effective 
and loyal to him. With D'Amato's loss in the Senate race to Rep. Charles 
Schumer on Tuesday, his role as party chief falls to Gov. George Pataki, 
who breezed to a second term. At the same time, some Democrats are 
looking to Schumer, suddenly the state party's biggest star, to do 
for their party what D'Amato did for the Republicans. But history 
indicates that D'Amato was the exception, an aggressive, established 
politician who filled an unusual power vacuum in his party. The Democrats 
have not had a powerful state party boss in decades, and the Republicans 
did not have one in the 1980s or most of the 1970s. People in both 
parties cautioned Wednesday against expecting anyone to reprise D'Amato's 
role. Schumer said Wednesday that he would work to strengthen the 
state's Democratic Party, but he and other Democrats said that Schumer 
would never have the sovereignty over his party that D'Amato has exercised. 
``My top priority is to be a legislator,'' Schumer said. ``But another 
goal of mine is to help rebuild the Democratic Party in the state. 
I don't want to run it.'' As for the Republican Party, he said, ``Senator 
D'Amato, I guess, wanted to run it.'' Even if he did want to control 
the party, the Democrats are simply a more fractious bunch than the 
Republicans; Schumer has the distractions of a new job to tend to, 
and the state's most powerful Democrat for the last four years, Assembly 
Speaker Sheldon Silver, will not simply cede power to the new senator. 
Pataki may gain influence in state Republican politics through D'Amato's 
defeat, but it is also a setback to the governor's ambitions for national 
office. The senator, the governor's one-time patron, is a prodigious 
fund-raiser, with a national network of contacts and contributors 
that he could have put at Pataki's disposal. ``On the national level, 
Pataki is weakened by the absence of an ally who, however rough-cut 
a diamond he might be, was nonetheless a powerful force nationally 
inside the Republican Party,'' said Raymond Harding, chairman of the 
New York Liberal Party. Another politician who could gain by D'Amato's 
loss is Mayor Rudolph Giuliani, who has looked for opportunities to 
broaden his influence in the Republican Party but was often thwarted 
by the senator. Such questions are of more than just intramural interest. 
Well-run state and local party organizations recruit candidates, win 
contested primaries, operate phone banks, register people to vote 
and canvass neighborhoods. They develop cadres of active members _ 
in part by winning offices that provide patronage jobs that ensure 
loyalty _ who become the foot soldiers for campaigns. The state and 
local parties not only help put their candidates over the top in general 
elections, but they also play a role in deciding who those candidates 
will be. In the case of the Republicans, the shift in leadership from 
D'Amato to Pataki could mean a less conservative bent to the party 
organizations and, therefore, to the party's candidates. In particular, 
analysts predict that there could be a move away from candidates who 
oppose abortion, as the senator does. ``I think that the party necessarily 
becomes a reflection of the new head, Pataki, which means it becomes 
more moderate,'' said Jay Severin, a Republican political consultant. 
``Pataki now becomes the guy essentially who's picking the county 
leaders, who's going to muscle those local organizations when he needs 
to.'' But a close adviser to Pataki predicted that he would not steer 
the party or referee disputes as readily as D'Amato has, leaving the 
running of the party mostly to the state chairman, William Powers, 
whom the senator installed eight years ago. D'Amato did not try to 
take the reins of the state party until after the 1990 election, when 
he had been in the Senate for 10 years. In that election, the Republican 
candidate for governor narrowly avoided finishing third. D'Amato picked 
Powers, and together they began raising money for the party. Powers 
recruited candidates and designated offices that the Republicans wanted 
to win, while D'Amato refereed disputes. And in 1994, the senator 
threw his support behind Pataki for governor, lending the candidate 
his fund-raising apparatus and leaning on other Republicans not to 
support rivals for the nomination. Gerald Benjamin, dean of the College 
of Liberal Arts and Sciences at the State University at New Paltz, 
said D'Amato's defeat would accelerate a transition that was already 
under way. ``The governor was already becoming the real head of the 
state party,'' he said. ``It's a natural role for a governor. He has 
the patronage jobs to hand out.'' Though Giuliani has recently mended 
fences, he has long been on the fringes of the Republican Party. He 
feuded with D'Amato in the 1980s and early 1990s, and then endorsed 
Pataki's Democratic opponent, Gov. Mario Cuomo, in the 1994 election. 
Giuliani's forays into local party struggles have been largely unsuccessful, 
so there are few people in local organizations with strong loyalties 
to him. His most notable setbacks were in 1995, when he backed contenders 
for county leader in Queens and Brooklyn who lost to people supported 
by D'Amato. ``With D'Amato gone, there's room for Giuliani to maneuver 
in those local organizations, which would give him more of a base 
if he runs for statewide office,'' said a Republican state legislator, 
speaking on the condition of anonymity. ``What's interesting is, does 
that put him at odds with the governor more and more?'' The Democrats 
have long been less organized and more riven by internal disputes 
than the Republicans, and they have raised far less money. Since Cuomo's 
defeat, Silver has largely directed the party, but the limits of the 
speaker's power were exposed this year, when he tried, to no avail, 
to block the nomination of Peter Vallone, the New York City Council 
speaker, to run against Pataki. ``I think a lot of people are looking 
at Schumer as the rebirth of our state party,'' said Steven Pigeon, 
the Erie County Democratic chairman. ``He is a person who understands 
the need for organizational strength, and he's the best Democratic 
fund-raiser in the country.'' Several top Democrats said that they 
did not foresee any serious struggles between Schumer and Silver but 
that some tension was unavoidable. They predicted that the new senator 
would take the lead in choosing the next state party chairman and 
in raising money for the party but would not try to take on smaller 
duties like choosing upstate county chairmen or tapping candidates 
for local offices. People close to Silver said that he would retain 
considerable influence in the party. His Assembly Democrats kept an 
overwhelming majority in Tuesday's elections after predictions that 
they would suffer serious setbacks. And three of the party's most 
influential county chairmen _ those in Brooklyn, Manhattan and the 
Bronx _ are Assembly members who are close to the speaker. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>