<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981104.0113 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
The votes Americans cast in Tuesday's midterm elections will inevitably 
have an impact on the impeachment proceedings against President Clinton 
and hence on the remaining months of his presidency. But according 
to a survey of voters leaving the polls, that was not what most had 
on their minds. ``This election will have an effect on Clinton's future,'' 
said Ferrel Guillory of the University of North Carolina, one of the 
swing states in the balloting. ``But that doesn't mean Clinton's past 
had much effect on this election. Everything I've seen and heard suggests 
the opposite.'' But because the Democrats fared better than expected, 
bucking historical precedent, some of the steam is likely to go out 
of the impeachment process. And one major reason, the polls suggested, 
was broad public disapproval of the way Republican leaders in Congress 
have handled the Clinton investigation. In the Ohio River Valley, 
Democrats won close House races in three states. They turned out two 
incumbent Republican senators, Alfonse D'Amato of New York and Lauch 
Faircloth of North Carolina, both of whom waged harsh, negative television 
campaigns that were devised by Arthur Finkelstein, a prominent New 
York media consultant. Sen. Ernest Hollings Jr. of South Carolina, 
one of the last Democratic survivors of the one-party South, won re-election 
in the face of a stiff challenge, and Democrats defeated Republican 
governors in Alabama and South Carolina. Another Democrat, Sen. Russell 
Feingold of Wisconsin, one of the chief backers of campaign finance 
reform, survived a multimillion-dollar onslaught of television attacks 
financed by its opponents. But Republicans took a Democratic seat 
in Illinois, and other Senate races appeared headed for photo finishes, 
reflecting a close partisan division that also showed up in the polls. 
Across the country, nearly six voters in 10 said their votes had been 
cast neither in support of nor in opposition to Clinton, but for other 
reasons. About two in 10 told interviewers for a consortium of five 
television networks and The Associated Press that they were expressing 
backing for the president, and about the same number said they were 
expressing disapproval of him. Still, preliminary tallies suggested 
that the Democrats may have succeeded in stimulating a sizable black 
voter turnout with last-minute efforts including a visit by Clinton 
to a black church in Baltimore on Sunday and a television spot that 
concluded: ``Next Tuesday, vote Democratic. And tell Congress we're 
ready to move on.'' If the vote did not turn upon the president, it 
may have been substantially affected by resentment of the tactics 
of Kenneth Starr, the independent counsel, and the Republicans on 
the House Judiciary Committee. The weaker-than-expected Republican 
showing will mean not only fewer anti-Clinton votes in the House and 
Senate, but also less zealous pursuit of the president. Among those 
elected were all 435 of the representatives who will be called upon 
next year, if the process unfolds as expected, to vote ``yea'' or 
``nay'' on articles of impeachment. Also chosen, in an election in 
which fewer than four of 10 eligible voters participated, were a third 
of those who will sit as jurors if the House sends the case to the 
Senate for trial. Clearly, neither Republican efforts to demonize 
the president for his relationship with Monica Lewinsky through a 
late flurry of ads in pivotal districts, nor Democratic efforts to 
picture congressional Republicans as mindless partisans determined 
to savage Clinton, succeeded in making the election a referendum on 
the president. It was not, in fact, a referendum at all. Unlike the 
Republican sweep of four years ago, this was a typical midterm election 
in the sense that people tended to respond to the candidates themselves 
and to issues that seemed important locally rather than to national 
imperatives. ``This was a Seinfeld election,'' said Curtis Gans, who 
heads a group that monitors voter turnout. ``He said his show wasn't 
about anything and neither was this election.'' When people were pressed 
to say what issue mattered most in their voting decisions, almost 
a quarter mentioned either the Lewinsky matter or ``moral and ethical 
issues,'' which might be taken to mean the same thing. But more than 
three-quarters mentioned other issues like education or Social Security 
and jobs or taxes, with education at the head of the list. Schools 
were featured in television commercials, handbills and stump speeches 
in a number of the hardest-fought contests this fall. In a number 
of ways, the exit poll confirmed the findings of dozens of surveys 
the last six months. Voters expressed approval of Clinton's performance 
as president _ two-thirds gave him a favorable rating _ disapproval 
of his personal conduct and disappointment at the Republican Congress' 
performance. Most said they would just as soon see the impeachment 
matter dropped, although voters were divided, the exit poll found, 
on whether Congress should censure the president. They also expressed 
robust confidence in the national economy. ``Overall, the country 
is happy with its lot,'' a Republican strategist said last weekend. 
``No winds of discontent, no tidal waves of change.'' There were other 
factors favoring the status quo. Only 34 members of the House and 
only five senators, far fewer than average, are retiring this year, 
and most seats change party hands when they are open. Incumbents also 
had a strong advantage in raising money this year. No president's 
party in this century has made a net gain in the House midway through 
a second presidential term, though the Democrats still stood a chance 
of doing that late Tuesday night. Clinton's travails led to predictions 
a month or so ago of at least modest gains by Republicans, but that 
view softened as Election Day neared. In addition to the apparent 
backlash against the Republicans, another factor in the improved Democratic 
showing may have been a string of successes for Clinton. While Vice 
President Al Gore _ increasingly introduced to audiences as ``the 
next president of the United States'' _ barnstormed through more than 
a dozen states, Clinton, by most impartial accounts, bested the Republican 
leadership in the budget deal; played midwife to a Middle East land-for-peace 
agreement; worked within the G-7 group of industrialized nations to 
stabilize the global economy, and grabbed a few rays of the limelight 
when Sen. John Glenn, D-Ohio, returned to space. One result must have 
comforted Gore, whose political style is sometimes so wooden that 
he once compared himself to an oak plank. Lt. Gov. Gray Davis of California, 
the Democratic victor in the gubernatorial race, is even less colorful 
than Gore, but that did not hurt him much in a race against a strongly 
ideological rival, Attorney General Dan Lungren, a Republican. Gore 
may face a right-wing Republican in the 2000 race. Or he may face 
Gov. George W. Bush of Texas, a studiously pragmatic politician re-elected 
by a sizable majority. Bush and his younger brother Jeb, projected 
as the victor in the Florida governor's race by exit polls, would 
be strongly placed in the struggle for the Republican presidential 
nomination as governors of two of the four biggest states. It looked, 
in fact, like a good election for moderates, with possible victories 
for Davis, the two Bushes, Republican Gov. George Voinovich of Ohio 
in a Senate race and several other centrist congressional candidates 
compared with the avalanche of right-wing triumphs only four years 
ago. This was particularly noticeable in gubernatorial races. As more 
power has moved from Washington to statehouses, voters have seemed 
eager to keep the blatant partisanship that has characterized Washington 
out of governments closer to home. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>