<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981104.0621 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Rep. Charles Schumer cobbled together a surprisingly easy victory 
in the Senate race by piling up a huge plurality in New York City, 
keeping it competitive upstate and battling to a near draw in the 
suburbs, the very heart of Sen. Alfonse D'Amato's political base. 
Although D'Amato held his home base of Long Island, he did so by a 
diminished margin compared with past campaigns. Schumer's success 
in those areas was based in part on gains he made among Jewish, Hispanic 
and women voters that were impressive even for a Democrat, according 
to exit polls. D'Amato's support among Jewish voters slumped significantly 
this year while women, influenced in part by Schumer's position in 
support of abortion rights, broke heavily for the Democratic congressman. 
Schumer captured 59 percent of the women's vote. Political analysts 
said that Schumer was helped with women voters by Hillary Rodham Clinton's 
campaign visits and, indirectly, by the recent shooting of a Buffalo 
obstetrician that gave new urgency to the abortion debate. Schumer's 
advertisements had drawn attention to his own position in support 
of abortion rights, while painting D'Amato as an anti-abortion advocate. 
``There are times in politics when something outside a campaign has 
a direct effect,'' said Joseph Crangle, a former Erie County Democratic 
chairman. ``I think the turnout here among females was a little larger 
because of the shooting and it broke more favorably for Schumer.'' 
Because of his strong showing in Erie County, Schumer avoided getting 
trounced upstate, as many other Democrats before him have. Schumer 
received 56 percent of the vote in Erie, even as Gov. George Pataki 
won the county easily. D'Amato's last Democratic challenger, Robert 
Abrams, the former attorney general, also won Erie County in 1992, 
but narrowly. Hank Morris, Schumer's political consultant, said he 
did not think there was any one region or voter bloc that had been 
critical. ``We did better in the suburbs,'' he said. ``We did better 
upstate. We did better in the city. It was a statewide victory. You 
don't win by 10 points without it being a victory everywhere.'' But, 
clearly, there would have been less confetti at Schumer campaign parties 
if the congressman had not steamrolled D'Amato in New York City, where 
Schumer captured 75 percent of the vote. It was a margin equal to 
President Clinton's own impressive tally in 1996 and far surpassed 
the 61 percent garnered by Abrams. Turnout in the city was only average, 
39 percent, but it was a bit lighter than usual upstate, according 
to analysts, who said Pataki's expected landslide might have made 
some upstate Republicans stay home. ``New York City was a higher proportion 
of the state vote _ 31 percent,'' said Lee Miringoff, director of 
the Marist College poll. ``Some years it is as low as 28 percent.'' 
Perhaps Schumer's most impressive performance was in Westchester County, 
a mercurial place where voters often ignore their own party affiliations. 
Abrams lost the county by six points in 1992. Schumer took it by eight 
points Tuesday, again despite a strong showing by Pataki, who won 
the county handily. Schumer's aides said they thought his positions 
on abortion and gun control were attractive to the many moderate Westchester 
residents. ``The county is also more diverse and more Democratic than 
it used to be,'' said Howard Wolfson, the campaign's communications 
director. Over the last eight years, Westchester has seen double-digit 
increases in its black, Hispanic and Asian populations while the number 
of registered Democrats has soared. Democrats now have a 40,000-voter 
edge in registrations. State Sen. Nicholas Spano, the Westchester 
Republican chairman, said that the Democrats' registration edge had 
hurt but that so did the sense that D'Amato's incumbency had become 
a liability. ``The biggest problem was the fact that Al D'Amato was 
there for 18 years and people were just looking for a change,'' he 
said. Joseph Mondello, the Nassau County Republican chairman, cited 
the same reason for the senator's disappointing showing on Long Island, 
where he won, but not by the margins he was accustomed to. In Nassau 
County, where D'Amato pulled 58 percent of the vote in 1992, his total 
dropped to 53 percent. In Suffolk, where pulled 59 percent last time, 
he got only 52 percent. Schumer won only a slightly higher percentage 
of the black vote, 86 percent, than Abrams had in 1992. But he captured 
a higher percentage of the Hispanic vote, 82 percent, compared with 
69 percent by Abrams six years ago. Assemblyman Roberto Ramirez, the 
Bronx Democratic leader who helped organize efforts to spur a Hispanic 
vote, said there were higher turnouts in several neighborhoods with 
large numbers of Hispanic residents, like the Lower East Side, East 
Harlem and Hunts Point. ``It was Schumer's legislative record on a 
number of issues, especially gun control,'' Ramirez said. ``Crime 
affects these neighborhoods as much as any neighborhood.'' D'Amato 
also must have been disappointed with his performance with Jewish 
voters, a constituency with whom he has always done well, even when 
running against Jewish candidates. A strong supporter of Israel who 
was quick to condemn the 1991 rioting in Crown Heights, D'Amato was 
involved in a well-publicized push this year to force Swiss banks 
to return money to the families of victims of the Holocaust. But the 
senator received only 23 percent of the vote, an 18-point drop from 
1992. Miringoff said polling data indicated that D'Amato's support 
collapsed several weeks ago when he used a vulgar Yiddish term to 
refer to Schumer. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>