<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981104.0390 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
It's alive! Victor Frankenstein isn't the only creator, it turns out, 
who can make a breathing organism out of dead body parts. That corpse 
of a musical known as ``The Scarlet Pimpernel,'' which opened a year 
ago at the Minskoff Theater, is suddenly showing startling signs of 
animation. Restructured, rewritten, restaged and significantly recast 
under the supervision of its new executive producer, Tim Hawkins, 
and its new director and choreographer, Robert Longbottom (of ``Sideshow''), 
what was once a frozen lump of a production is on its feet and moving. 
And not with the lumbering tread of Frankenstein's monster but with 
a light and springy step. Heck, it has even learned to dance a little. 
``The Scarlet Pimpernel'' still isn't, by any stretch of the imagination, 
a ``My Fair Lady'' or even a ``Phantom of the Opera.'' But on its 
own terms _ as a family-oriented musical that's part boy's adventure 
story, part Harlequin romance _ it works. It now has such essential 
assets as a focused story line, dramatic momentum and cleanly defined 
characters, none of which were evident in its first incarnation. This 
kind of metamorphosis is commonplace during out-of-town tryouts for 
Broadway shows. But for it to occur well into a New York run is astonishing 
and what makes this revitalized ``Pimpernel'' news. It also gives 
anyone who suffered through the first version a fascinating opportunity 
to see how the same set of ingredients can be used to such radically 
different effect. Until recently, ``The Scarlet Pimpernel,'' which 
has a score by Frank Wildhorn (of ``Jekyll and Hyde'') and a book 
and lyrics by Nan Knighton, had the distinction of being the most 
irritatingly understaged musical on Broadway. (That was before the 
arrival of ``Footloose.'') Directed by Peter Hunt, with choreography 
by Adam Pelty, this singing adaptation of Baroness Orczy's 1905 novel 
suggested a waxworks run by a caretaker who had forgotten to turn 
down his radio when the public arrived. Though the plot was as eventful 
as any Superman comic book, with a disguised band of English aristocrats 
saving worthy souls from the guillotine during the French Revolution, 
it was translated to the stage as a series of awkward tableaux. Whatever 
``swashbuckling'' means, this ``Pimpernel'' didn't have it. A Broadway 
newcomer named Douglas Sills showed a definite spark in the title 
role. But his more seasoned co-stars, Christine Andreas, as the Pimpernel's 
French wife, and Terrence Mann, as his archenemy, seemed respectively 
annoyed and bored with the proceedings. The romantic chemistry was 
nil, and by the spring, the company was playing to half-empty houses. 
That was when David W. Checketts, the president and chief executive 
officer of Madison Square Garden, stepped in with a plan that seemed 
about as foolhardy as bearding Robespierre in the Reign of Terror. 
Radio City Entertainment, which like Madison Square Garden is a division 
of the Cablevision Systems Corp., acquired ``Pimpernel'' with the 
financier Ted Forstmann, one of its original producers. While Sills 
remained, Mann and Ms. Andreas left the show when their contracts 
expired, to be replaced by Rex Smith and Rachel York. The succeeding 
wholesale revision of ``Pimpernel'' is all the more remarkable when 
you realize the full company had only a week of rehearsals while the 
Minskoff went dark. From the new production's first minutes, it declares 
its differences from its predecessor. The most significant of these 
is its confident sense of identity: It obviously knows what it wants 
to do and how to achieve it. The musical no longer begins with a gloomy 
``Les Miserables''-style assemblage of prisoners awaiting the guillotine 
but on the stage of the Comedie Francaise. The opening image is a 
confectionary fantasy. A woman in a towering pink wig (Ms. York) emerges 
from the darkness to sing of storybook dreams and ask of her audience, 
``Come, let's believe.'' (The song, ``Storybook,'' is a reworking 
of a number that was bizarrely featured in the second act in the original 
and has been ingeniously retailored in the same spot in a reprise.) 
The lights come up to reveal a team of ornately costumed dancers, 
music hall variations on Fragonard. The effect is picturesque but 
slightly silly, closer to Folies-Bergere than Comedie Francaise, and 
that's the point. Don't take us too seriously, the show seems to suggest: 
This is only a story; it's meant to be fun. The number also neatly 
establishes the show's romantic triangle. Watching the actress, Marguerite, 
are Chauvelin (Smith), her former lover and a vengeful official of 
the new French regime, and Percy (Sills), the English nobleman who 
is her fiance. The scene is a score card of sorts. Now you know who 
the players are. Relationships and conflicts are established in quick, 
broad strokes. What follows is of a piece with that scene. The level 
of enchantment aspired to here is not lofty. It's not far from that 
of the formula Technicolor movies of the 1950s in which stars like 
Stewart Granger and Rhonda Fleming smoldered on the high seas. Accept 
that context and you can now have a perfectly good time at ``Pimpernel.'' 
Longbottom's restaging and Ms. Knighton's extensive rewriting consistently 
bring lightness and clarity to what once seemed merely turgid. Seen 
as part of a ``let's pretend'' sensibility, Andrew Jackness' sets 
and Jane Greenwood's costumes feel far less like elements in a Rococo 
window at Bloomingdale's. Natasha Katz's revamped lighting is invaluable 
in focusing attention as well as creating atmosphere. Even Wildhorn's 
syrupy pop ballads, while still evoking images of has-been movie stars 
in sequins on a Las Vegas stage, have acquired a new ease. What's 
more, these songs are now efficiently used to define character and 
advance plot. It helps, of course, that Sills, Smith and Ms. York 
make an appealing set of lovers. Although she succumbs to the Streisandesque 
vocalizing that always befalls women in Wildhorn shows, Ms. York beguilingly 
mixes dewiness and feistiness in ways Barbara Cartland might admire. 
Smith is terrific, offering the sinister authority and vulpine mien 
that make archetypal villains fun to watch. There's even a mild erotic 
charge to the duet of seduction and resistance sung by him and Ms. 
York. Percy has been more fully reconceived as a virile matinee-idol 
type whose assumed foppishness masks the valiant hero beneath, and 
Sills winningly slides between personas that alternately bring to 
mind Danny Kaye and Errol Flynn. The choreography is more a matter 
of kinetic posing than proper dancing, but it's not without charm, 
especially in the number in which Percy and his fellow aristocrats 
practice the art of accessorizing. And there's a climactic sword fight 
(staged by Rick Sordelet) that makes witty use of the show's three 
principals. It's not genuinely exciting, but it's enjoyable. Like 
much of ``Pimpernel,'' the scene is an affectionate nod to the heroic 
conventions of another time. This is a show, after all, that includes 
lines like, ``Citizens, the tumbrels are here,'' and lets the hero 
say to the villain, about the kidnapped heroine, ``Old boy, she's 
coming home with me.'' Such moments, wisely delivered with straight 
faces, sum up the appeal of ``Pimpernel,'' which isn't much more than 
a pleasant diversion. The show's stormy history, however, reminds 
us that in the theater these days, even pleasant diversion doesn't 
come easy. PRODUCTION NOTES: `THE SCARLET PIMPERNEL' Book and lyrics 
by Nan Knighton; music by Frank Wildhorn; based on the novel by Baroness 
Orczy; directed and choreographed by Robert Longbottom; sets by Andrew 
Jackness; costumes by Jane Greenwood; lighting by Natasha Katz; sound 
by Karl Richardson; hair by Paul Huntley; production supervisor, Steven 
Beckler; special effects, Jim Steinmeyer; orchestrations, Kim Scharnberg; 
musical supervision, Jason Howland; musical director and vocal arrangements, 
Ron Melrose; music coordinator, John Miller; assistant choreographers, 
Tom Kosis and Darlene Wilson; dance arrangements by David Chase; originally 
choreographed by Adam Pelty; general manager, 101 Productions Ltd.; 
production manager, Peter Fulbright; executive producer, Tim Hawkins; 
fight director, Rick Sordelet. Presented by Radio City Entertainment 
and Ted Forstmann, with Pierre Cossette, Bill Haber, Hallmark Entertainment 
and Kathleen Raitt. At the Minskoff Theater, 200 W. 45th St. With: 
Rachel York (Marguerite), Rex Smith (Chauvelin), Douglas Sills (Percy), 
Elizabeth Ward (Marie), James Bohanek (Armand), James Judy (Dewhurst) 
and David Cromwell (Prince of Wales). 
</TEXT>
</DOC>