<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981104.0627 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Fashion is about seduction, although it may sound crass to come out 
and say it. Dressing to be sexually seductive is obvious, but that 
is not the issue. The point is that fashion exists to seduce customers 
into buying something. Clothing is another matter entirely. Clothing 
is what children need as they grow, what women and men need for work 
and leisure. Fashion is the icing, the nonessentials, the garments 
that are coveted because they are irresistible. And that's what a 
designer, as opposed to a manufacturer, exists to provide. An artist 
like van Gogh painted to satisfy an inner drive, but fashion does 
not inhabit such an exalted plane. The glamour and hype are there 
to accomplish a practical end. When designers forget that and simply 
churn out basics, or make the opposite mistake of getting caught up 
in some far-fetched, unrealistic dream, women will not succumb to 
their blandishments. The designers who remember what their mandate 
really is are the ones who last. Ralph Lauren knows this in his bones. 
He has always excelled at tempting women to share his vision. Fashion 
people talk about aspirational clothes _ a wardrobe that embodies 
a way of life that a customer craves _ and Lauren all but invented 
the concept. When he started designing for women in the early 1970s, 
during the hippie era, he evoked an elegant time of style-setters 
like the duchess of Windsor, Fred Astaire and Katharine Hepburn. Women 
responded, and he now heads a fashion empire. But time moves on, and 
so does Lauren. In his collection for spring 1999, shown Wednesday 
morning, he infused his particular brand of luxury into such casual 
styles of the moment as cargo pants and anoraks. How do you get a 
woman to buy high-priced cargo pants when she can find them at a surplus 
store for $20? Make them in silk faille in luscious colors like sky 
blue and pink. That's what Lauren did, turning ``function into fashion,'' 
as he said in his program notes. He also showed cropped sweaters with 
hip-huggers, and he paired oversize pullovers and cardigans in silk 
and linen with long loose dresses and wide soft pants. He topped a 
long floral silk dress with a bronze shantung flight jacket and made 
a jumpsuit in pink faille. There were variations on parachute pants 
in olive-green silk, on the flight jacket in sage-green suede, and 
on the utilitarian poncho in silk poplin and knitted cashmere. But 
Lauren didn't forget his more classic customer, offering her shapely 
little tailored jackets, bias-cut skirts and narrow cuffed pants _ 
all in neutral beiges _ as well as flowing off-white organza dresses 
for evening. Michael Kors has always been a sportswear kind of guy, 
and this time he went for active sports like sailing and camping, 
basing his collection on anoraks and windbreakers, shown with hand-knit 
sweaters, short-sleeved shirts, shorts, slim skirts and trousers. 
He used bold colors like orange, yellow, green and cinnabar, as well 
as neutral khakis and beiges. His anoraks came in cotton sailcloth 
or silk taffeta, and were shown not just conventionally over shorts 
or trousers but also over pailletted skirts. Kors, who once tended 
to put his customers into flamboyant gold leather, now uses shine 
and sparkle more discreetly. He paired a sequined skirt with a heather 
gray cashmere undershirt or a black cotton shirt, and made a totally 
sequined shift in a dark tortoise-shell pattern. His collection was 
on the same wavelength as Lauren's, but not as broad in scope. He 
played the same few notes over and over. Kors does tend to have very 
focused collections, which is not a bad thing, but the one he showed 
last month in Paris for Celine had more variation and more pizazz 
than this one. Designers who do more than one collection a season 
often devote more energy to one, which is a pity but perhaps inevitable. 
John Bartlett also designs two women's collections, one for Byblos 
in Italy and one under his own label, as well as menswear. The signature 
line he showed here on Tuesday night was _ surprise! _ based on military-surplus 
styles like cargo pants and fatigues, made of silk poplin, canvas 
and tulle. Starting with basic styles, he added personal touches like 
wired hemlines so that the garments could be twisted into different 
shapes, and he put tabs on pants legs or skirt hems so that they could 
be shortened on a whim. Straps under shirts and jackets could be adjusted 
to hold them open. All of this sounds clever, but it frequently ends 
up merely gimmicky, as when a single tab is used to shorten one spot 
on a skirt. When tabs all around a skirt are used to shorten it, the 
effect is thick and ungainly. Adding those tabs under shirts and tacking 
a pouf of netting inside the hem of a coat seemed like unfortunate 
borrowings from some of Helmut Lang's innovations. Bartlett would 
do better to do away with the extraneous details and not to be afraid 
to show his clothing as is. It looked fine that way. Lauren, Kors 
and Bartlett all mined the same military-surplus lode this season, 
with Lauren striking gold, Kors silver and Bartlett brass. Other designers 
have mapped out their own courses for appealing to a woman's love 
of fashion. Oscar de la Renta offers femininity and beauty. For spring 
he used never-fail colors like pink, sea foam, banana, ivory and sky 
blue for pared-down daytime styles. There were chemises, double-faced 
wool coats and jackets with welt seaming and abbreviated sailor collars, 
and A-line skirts with scalloped hems. (Scallops, which started with 
Comme des Garcons in Paris, have crossed the Atlantic to land in such 
disparate collections as those of Marc Jacobs, Zang Toi and de la 
Renta. Is it a fashion conspiracy?) As the collection segued into 
evening, de la Renta added decorative elements like openwork broderie 
anglaise and floral beading. He showed slender beaded columns; off-the-shoulder 
embroidered gauze blouses, and full-skirted ball gowns in pastel striped 
taffeta, ivory silk shantung and navy tulle with crystal beading. 
The woman who wears his clothes may not need another evening dress, 
but she is sure to be tempted to add one more to her already full 
closet. Yeohlee's clothes are deceptive at first viewing. They look 
like the essence of simplicity but are far from simplistic. They are 
filled with hidden triangles, crescents and rectangles, punctuated 
by dots, bars and vertical lines. You have to look closely to find 
these shapes, because they are formed by the construction of the seams, 
not by an overlay of a different fabric or color. A yoke around a 
curved neckline forms a flattering crescent. A triangle formed by 
seams on the front of a shift holds invisible pockets. Cutting fabric 
against the grain or reversing it may yield a crenelated effect. Or 
rectangular flags are attached to a skirt to flutter and add an element 
of controlled fullness. These flag dresses were quite beautiful. Like 
a dancer whose effortless leaps give no hint of the years of practice 
that went into achieving them, Yeohlee makes her painstakingly wrought 
clothes look effortless. Their appeal to a women is intellectual as 
well as emotional. Not so with Daryl Kerrigan, a k a Daryl K, who 
designs for hip young women who live in T-shirts, hip-huggers and 
leather. She offered more versions of these styles for spring in frayed-edge 
fabrics, unbleached denim and zebra patterns. Ms. Kerrigan has a reputation 
for being on top of the downtown trends, so the fact that she showed 
a graffiti-patterned T-shirt and had break dancers perform at her 
show sent signals, to the tuned-in members of her audience, of a return 
to '80s hip-hop. Patrick Robinson's spring collection was a disappointment. 
It was filled with nice but quite ordinary-looking sportswear that 
lacked a distinctive signature. There were cropped sweaters and quilted-gauze 
skirts, gingham shirts and distressed leather jacket. But nothing 
that shouted, ``Buy me!'' 
</TEXT>
</DOC>