<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981104.0610 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
The outcome of the hard-fought New York state attorney general's race 
will not be known until, at the earliest, after absentee ballots are 
counted next week, but both sides maintained Wednesday that they were 
edging closer to victory. Out of about 4 million votes cast, the Democratic 
candidate, Eliot Spitzer, was about 18,000 votes ahead of the Republican 
incumbent, Dennis Vacco, with ballots from all but about one percent 
of election districts counted. At a news conference Wednesday, Spitzer 
fell short of predicting victory, but he said he was cheered by his 
lead over Vacco. ``I'm optimistic about the way the race looks,'' 
he told reporters. ``The numbers are very encouraging.'' Vacco did 
not meet with reporters Wednesday. But in a statement, his campaign 
spokesman, Michael Zabel, said, ``We remain confident that, when all 
the ballots have been counted, Dennis Vacco will emerge victorious, 
just as he did four years ago.'' With the election in the balance, 
each campaign offered its own interpretation of what the absentee 
ballots were likely to show. State election officials had mailed out 
more than 184,000 absentee ballots, and as of Wednesday, 132,347 of 
them had been returned. Advisers to Vacco took heart from the fact 
that fewer than 25,000 of these ballots were from New York City, which 
provided Spitzer with more than 30 percent of his votes so far. They 
also said that Vacco had the edge in the election districts where 
ballots had not yet been tallied because of technical problems, personnel 
shortages or mistakes. Kieran Mahoney, a consultant to the Vacco campaign, 
said the Republican Party had organized a huge effort to mobilize 
absentee voters that had involved mailing out 2.6 million applications. 
``Historically, the people who vote by absentee ballot tend to be 
more Republican than the state as a whole,'' he said. ``They tend 
to be older, and there is a large military component.'' Advisers to 
Spitzer, however, said that the absentee ballots tended to mirror 
the breakdown in the Election Day voting. They said that Vacco would 
have to win the absentee vote by a landslide in order to erase Spitzer's 
lead. Each candidate got about 48 percent of the vote at the polls. 
At his news conference, Spitzer raised the possibility that supporters 
of his opponent might try to tamper with the results. He cited the 
mechanical problems in an assembly district in southeastern Queens, 
made up largely of minority residents, where voters were unable to 
cast votes by machine for either him or Charles Schumer, the Democratic 
candidate for the U.S. Senate. ``We were terribly troubled by what 
we saw yesterday,'' Spitzer said. ``There was an effort to disenfranchise 
New York State voters. It appears that there was an effort to disenfranchise 
certain ethnicities.'' City election officials are investigating, 
but have said that they suspect negligence rather than tampering was 
to blame for the machine problems. Joining Spitzer at his news conference, 
Judith Hope, the chairwoman of the New York State Democratic Committee, 
said that the party would take steps to insure that all the votes 
cast were counted. Advisers to the Spitzer campaign said that every 
voting machine in the state would be checked _ a time-consuming process 
known as recanvassing that may begin as soon as Friday. Officials 
will also count the paper ballots that were issued to voters when 
mechanical breakdowns occurred. If these ballots already had been 
tallied, the results will be checked. ``Recanvassing the entire state 
and canvassing paper ballots could be a process that takes up to two 
weeks,'' said state Sen. Martin Connor, the leader of the Democratic 
minority, who is helping Spitzer. Counting the absentee votes is also 
expected to be a laborious undertaking because representatives of 
each party will be on hand to make sure that each ballot is valid. 
As long as they are postmarked Nov. 2, the absentee ballots may still 
be counted as late as Tuesday in most parts of the state. (In New 
York City, where there was a delay in mailing out the ballots because 
of a dispute over a proposed referendum on Yankee Stadium, they may 
be counted as late as Nov. 20.) To prevent tampering, the ballots 
are being guarded by the police and county sheriffs until they are 
counted. The counting will begin on Monday in most of the state, but 
in New York City, it will begin on Thursday. Wednesday, Spitzer was 
asked why he thought he had done better than the polls had predicted. 
On Election Night, some aides had cited as turning points Spitzer's 
focus on his support of abortion rights in the wake of the recent 
slaying of an obstetrician near Buffalo and the outcry over Vacco's 
use of the word ``bodega'' in a general reference to criminals. Spitzer, 
however, offered a simpler explanation. ``I think what happened was 
the public began to pay more attention to a down-ballot race that 
frankly had not drawn much media attention or much emotional energy,'' 
he said. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>