<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981104.0118 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Democrats roared back in the midterm elections Tuesday, winning impressive 
victories in crucial Senate and gubernatorial races around the country 
despite months of dire predictions by both Republicans and Democrats 
that President Clinton's scandal would drag down his party's candidates. 
While Republicans maintained control of the Senate and the House of 
Representatives, the Democrats' strong showing, in an off-year election 
when the party in the White House typically loses seats, made it far 
less likely that the Congress would move ahead aggressively with its 
impeachment inquiry of Clinton. Republicans did not come close to 
the goals publicly stated by party leaders to win a magic 60 Senate 
seats, the number needed to cut off filibusters by Democrats blocking 
Republican legislation, or to substantially widen the party's narrow 
11-seat edge in the House. As House races were still being tallied 
Tuesday night, with four incumbent Republicans losing, Rep. Martin 
Frost of Texas, chairman of the Democratic Congressional Campaign 
Committee, predicted that his party would defy expectations and even 
pick up ``a couple of seats _ at least.'' No president's party in 
this century has made a net gain in House seats midway through a second 
presidential term. Speaker Newt Gingrich and other Republicans had 
hoped to transform the campaign into a public outcry for Clinton's 
impeachment. But as the returns came, many party leaders appeared 
to be backing off from the impeachment inquiry. Gingrich sought Tuesday 
night to change the subject from impeachment, insisting, ``Republicans 
have never been particularly fixated on the issue of impeachment.'' 
And he play down the disappointing performance of many Republicans 
by focusing on the long view. ``This will be the first time in 70 
years that the Republicans have kept control of the House for a third 
term,'' he said repeatedly. Gov. Roy Romer of Colorado, general chairman 
of the Democratic National Committee, said the voters' message about 
impeachment could not be clearer: ``Wrap this up. Get it off the table.'' 
In the most coveted single prize of the day, Gray Davis, the lieutenant 
governor of California, defeated Dan Lungren, the Republican attorney 
general, to become the first Democrat elected governor of the state 
in 16 years. But since Davis had outpaced Lungren in the polls for 
months, Democrats were celebrating surprising triumphs in races that 
had been viewed as excruciatingly close. Many Democrats were relieved 
that Sen. Barbara Boxer of California had fought off a spirited challenge 
from state Treasurer Matt Fong, a Republican. Perhaps the biggest 
upset of the day was the ouster of Sen. Alfonse D'Amato, R-N.Y., by 
Rep. Charles Schumer. In another major upset, John Edwards, a Democratic 
trial lawyer, defeated Sen. Lauch Faircloth of North Carolina. And 
Sen. Russell Feingold, D-Wis., a leading advocate of campaign finance 
reform who significantly limited his spending, still defeated Rep. 
Mark Neumann. The election was also marked by a resurgence of Democrats 
in the Deep South, spurred in part by better-than-expected turnout 
among black voters. In South Carolina, Jim Hodges, a former Democratic 
state representative, ousted Gov. David Beasley, a rising star in 
his party who was chairman of the Republican Governors Association. 
That state's Democratic senator, Ernest Hollings, turned back a vigorous 
challenge from Rep. Bob Inglis, a Republican. In Alabama, Lt. Gov. 
Don Siegelman, a Democrat, toppled Gov. Fob James, a Republican. And 
in a race to replace Gov. Zell Miller of Georgia, a Democrat, Roy 
Barnes, a Democratic state legislator, defeated Guy Millner, a Republican 
businessman. In Maryland, Gov. Parris Glendening, a Democrat, fought 
off a tough challenge in a rematch with Ellen Sauerbrey. The Maryland 
contest was so competitive that Clinton, in his last political trip 
of the campaign, traveled to Baltimore on Sunday to implore Democrats 
to vote. Still, the Republicans did pile up some important wins Tuesday. 
In Illinois, Peter Fitzgerald, a wealthy state senator, ousted Sen. 
Carol Moseley-Braun, a Democrat who was captapulted to Washington 
in the year of the woman. Republicans also maintained their domination 
of governorships around the country. Jeb Bush, the younger son of 
former President George Bush, won the Florida governorship in his 
second try for the office, building something of a political dynasty. 
His brother, Gov. George W. Bush of Texas, was re-elected by a wide 
margin, solidifying his position as the early favorite among many 
in his party for the Republican presidential nomination in 2000. It 
was the first time in 24 years that a governor of either party had 
been re-elected to a consecutive term in Texas. Other incumbent Republicans 
who were re-elected governors of major states _ some of whom also 
have presidential ambitions _ were George Pataki of New York, Tom 
Ridge of Pennsylvania, Tommy Thompson of Wisconsin and John Engler 
of Michigan. Voters were hard-pressed to describe an overarching issue 
on which they based their vote. In interviews as they left their polling 
stations, voters cited many issues that moved them to vote. It was 
a marked contrast to four years ago, when voters rebelled against 
incumbents and handed control of the House to Republicans for the 
first time in 40 years. Two years ago, Clinton was re-elected, and 
some voters said they were disturbed by what they viewed as the extremism 
of Gingrich and the new Republican majority. Many races were so close 
that they were not decided into well past midnight. While Clinton's 
relationship with Monica Lewinsky was a subtext for the entire election 
season, voters leaving the polls said they were not particularly driven 
by the scandal one way or another. Sen. Trent Lott of Mississippi, 
the Republican leader, insisted Tuesday night that impeachment had 
never ignited as an issue. ``If it was,'' he said, ``we should be 
winning a lot more seats right now.'' Lott added: ``There wasn't really 
a national theme. It depended on issues at the local level, personalities, 
and what kind of campaign they ran.'' In other returns, former Gov. 
Evan Bayh, a Democrat, recaptured a Senate seat from Indiana that 
had been held by Republicans since his father, Birch Bayh, was defeated 
for re-election in 1980. But Republicans also grabbed a Democratic 
seat in Ohio. Gov. George Voinovich was elected to succeed Sen. John 
Glenn, who was orbiting Earth this week aboard the shuttle Discovery. 
Democratic senators who were re-elected included Barbara Mikulski 
of Maryland; Bob Graham of Florida; Patrick Leahy of Vermont; Christopher 
Dodd of Connecticut; John Breaux of Louisiana, and Byron Dorgan of 
South Dakota. Republicans who were re-elected included the party's 
whip, Don Nickles of Oklahoma; Judd Gregg of New Hampshire; Sam Brownback 
of Kansas; Arlen Specter of Pennsylvania; Ben Nighthorse Campbell 
of Colorado; Christopher Bond of Missouri, and John McCain of Arizona. 
Sen. Richard Shelby of Alabama was re-elected in his first race since 
he switched to the Republican party in 1994. Other governors who were 
elected to new terms included these Democrats: Jeanne Shaheen of New 
Hampshire and Howard Dean of Vermont. Among Republican governors, 
Frank Keating romped to victory in Oklahoma, as did John Rowland in 
Connecticut, Bill Graves in Kansas, Lincoln Almond of Rhode Island 
and Don Sundquist in Tennessee. Mike Huckabee won his first full term 
in Arkansas. He had taken office when his predecessor resigned after 
a Whitewater conviction. In Maine, Angus King, an Independent, also 
won re-election. Officials had been concerned about spotty turnout 
in both parties. In the end, fewer than four in 10 of adults of voting 
age population went to the polls. In some heavily black precincts, 
which tend to be overwhelmingly Democratic, turnout among voters was 
reported as impressive. In Rep. Elijah Cummings' largely urban Baltimore 
district, turnout among black voters was heavier than in past races. 
``Everywhere I went today, folks were lined up,'' said Cummings, a 
two-term Democrat. In one inner-city precinct, 187 people had voted 
by noon, nearly four times the turnout at midday at the same precinct 
in 1994, Cummings said. Cummings attributed the surge to Clinton's 
appeal in the district on Sunday. ``This was the first time African-Americans 
had the opportunity to do something in support of the president,'' 
Cummings said. ``People are fired up.'' Voters were largely approving 
of Clinton, confident about the economy, resentful of the impending 
impeachment hearings and disappointed in Congress' performance, according 
to a survey of voters leaving polling places around the country. Voters 
said the issues that mattered to them most were education, taxes, 
Social Security, jobs and ethical and moral standards. While the Lewinsky 
affair loomed over the entire campaign season, 6 in 10 voters surveyed 
said they did not think the president should be impeached, did not 
approve of the way Congress has handled the matter, and did not even 
want the House to hold impeachment hearings. Voters were divided on 
whether, as a lesser punishment, Congress should censure Clinton. 
Throughout the investigation into the president's relationship with 
Ms. Lewinsky, Clinton has been buoyed by a high job approval rating, 
and voters Tuesday said they liked the way he was running the country. 
More than half said they approved of the job he was doing, even though 
most had a negative view of his personal conduct. Despite a last-minute 
television blitz by the Republican Party to remind Americans of Clinton's 
conduct during the inquiry, 6 in 10 voters surveyed said they disapproved 
of the way Republicans in Congress had handled the matter. The interviews 
with voters also help explain why Clinton and other prominent Democrats 
invoked Gingrich in their drives to move people to the polls. More 
than half the voters said they did not have a favorable view of Gingrich; 
those people voted largely for the Democratic House candidates in 
their districts. In a sharp contrast to the midterm elections four 
years ago, voters said overwhelmingly that the nation's economy was 
strong and that they fully expected it to stay that way. People also 
registered contentment with their own lives. Most voters said their 
family's finances had either improved in the last two years, or at 
least not deteriorated. While many analysts described the elections 
as a competition between the most extreme wings of both parties, half 
the voters Tuesday described themselves as moderates. The survey of 
voters also found a gender gap of about 7 percentage points, roughly 
what it was in the 1994 elections; men voted more heavily for Republicans 
while women favored Democrats. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>