<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981104.0593 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
In a key reorganization intended to make Pepsico more focused, the 
company's North American beverage operations on Wednesday announced 
a restructuring of the sales and marketing divisions. Philip Marineau, 
president and chief executive officer of Pepsi-Cola North America, 
outlined the changes Wednesday in a six-page memo to employees that 
repeatedly emphasized a desire to improve connections with consumers 
as well as with stores that sell Pepsi-Cola products. The changes 
are expected to be followed shortly by a major reorganization of Pepsi's 
bottling operations into a handful of large bottlers in which Pepsico 
will hold an equity stake. Pepsi announced the division of its concentrate 
and bottling businesses in September, creating the Pepsi Bottling 
Group and naming Craig Weatherup as the group's chairman and chief 
executive officer. ``This is to be more market- and consumer-driven 
than we have been,'' Marineau said in an interview Wednesday. ``It's 
to improve our consumer marketing skills and sell better than we have 
in the past.'' Since his arrival at the company in January, Marineau 
has been intent on transforming Pepsi from the United States' perennial 
No. 2 soft-drink player into a more dynamic, better organized company. 
He has been a champion of Pepsi One, a diet cola that contains an 
artificial sweetener known as Ace-K and that is the first new diet-cola 
product to hit the U.S. market in almost two decades. Pepsi plans 
to spend $100 million on advertising and promotions for Pepsi One; 
it began its onslaught during the World Series last month with a string 
of commercials starring the actor Cuba Gooding Jr. Marineau also jettisoned 
the ``Generation next'' ad campaign, shortly after the abrupt departure 
of Pepsi's global marketing chief, Brian Swette, who thought it up. 
Marineau has said he has no desire for a new tag line for Pepsi products, 
and recent television commercials have shown no particular pattern; 
they range from a little girl enraged because a coffee shop she is 
patronizing serves Coke and not Pepsi, to clay animation baseball 
players who get a burst of energy from drinking Lipton tea. The sales 
and marketing overhaul is ``a continuation of his putting his own 
stamp on the organization,'' said Jennifer Solomon, a beverage analyst 
with Salomon Smith Barney. Among the changes announced Wednesday was 
the appointment of Robert Jordan, a former consultant who joined Pepsi 
three months ago, to take charge of consumer research. The work done 
by that division, the memo said, is expected to translate into ``tangible 
programs, consumer-relevant new products and across-the-board innovation.'' 
In addition, Dawn Hudson, a former executive at the Frito-Lay snack 
unit who had moved to Pepsi earlier this year, was named senior vice 
president for strategy and marketing. Ms. Hudson's responsibilities 
will include new products as well as the coordination of brand-marketing 
and corporate strategy, which has been a weak point at Pepsi for the 
last several years. Pepsi has been exploring additional ways to market 
salty snacks and soft drinks together, something it began as a once-a-year 
promotion eight years ago. Ms. Hudson's appointment also eliminates 
the three-member marketing committee Pepsi announced in the spring 
after Swette, who was one of the three, resigned, Marineau said. Other 
changes include the creation of an ``innovation and technology'' department, 
which Marineau described as ``dedicated to maintaining an innovation 
pipeline that is filled with new products, packaging and equipment'' 
and will include an existing research and development unit based in 
Valhalla, N.Y. And there is a new vice president for ``channel strategy 
and occasion marketing,'' which will try to ``better understand how 
consumers relate to our products'' in convenience stores, supermarkets, 
vending machines and other places where people buy Pepsi. Marineau 
also announced the combining of the company's customer-development 
and bottler-development teams into a single unit, headed by Jim Nolan, 
a 20-year Pepsi veteran, and changes in the way sales are handled. 
``We are transforming our entire system's in-market operation,'' Marineau 
said in his memo, ``to create one powerful selling machine that is 
focused like a laser on the requirements of our customers.'' All this 
seems designed to make Pepsi function a lot more like its archrival, 
Coca-Cola Co., when it comes to streamlining and coordinating its 
corporate self. Much of it appears to have been driven by the rapid 
consolidation of supermarkets and other big retailers, which are a 
soft-drink company's biggest customers. There's more to come. One 
analyst expects an announcement within the next week or so of a reconfiguration 
of Pepsi's bottling operations into five Coke-style ``anchor bottlers'' 
around the country. Such a move, said the analyst, Bill Pecoriello 
of Sanford C. Bernstein, would set the stage for additional consolidation 
of other, smaller bottlers. The five bottlers would include Pepsi's 
company-owned operations, the recently split off Pepsi Bottling Group, 
he said. The others, Pecoriello added, would be Whitman Corp.'s Illinois-based 
Pepsi-Cola General Bottlers unit, which currently handles about 12 
percent of Pepsi's volume in the United States; Honickman Affiliates, 
based outside Philadelphia; Delta Beverage Group, based in Memphis, 
Tenn.; and Pepcom Industries, based in Raleigh, N.C. Combined, the 
five would handle 76 percent of Pepsi's volume, compared with the 
88 percent that Coke's top five bottlers handle. Those bottlers will 
be sold parts of Pepsi's bottling business to make them bigger, Pecoriello 
said, with the goal of having the Pepsi Bottling Group wind up with 
about 50 percent of Pepsi's volume, instead of the current 58 percent. 
Pepsico is expected to take the Pepsi Bottling Group public, and many 
on Wall Street say the initial public offering could take place sometime 
in the first half of next year. Marineau refused to discuss the bottler 
reorganization in detail, but it is widely known that the company 
is negotiating with several big bottlers. ``After all this, you could 
have a Pepsico that looks like a better investment,'' Pecoriello said. 
With low-margin bottling businesses gone from the books, and the higher-margin 
concentrate sales and the snack business remaining, Pepsi could see 
more consistent earnings growth and find itself a far nimbler competitor 
in the marketplace, he said. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>