<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981104.0067 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
George Pataki swept to a second term as governor of New York Tuesday, 
defeating his weak and splintered opposition by one of the largest 
margins in history, a victory so resounding that it is certain to 
raise his national profile. Pataki's triumph capped a remarkable transformation 
from a little-known state senator waging an uphill fight for governor 
in 1994, to a governor who has shifted the state markedly rightward 
on crime, welfare and taxes, and has made himself its most popular 
political figure. Four years ago, he narrowly defeated Gov. Mario 
Cuomo, with considerable help from Sen. Alfonse D'Amato. This year, 
it was the senator who, in an ultimately unsuccessful bid for a fourth 
term, turned to Pataki for help, and the governor spent more energy 
in the final weeks stumping for his onetime patron than for himself. 
With 60 percent of the voting precincts reporting, Pataki, a Republican 
who was also the candidate of the Conservative Party, had 55 percent 
of the vote, to 32 percent for his Democratic challenger, Peter Vallone, 
the New York City Council Speaker, who was also nominated by the newly 
founded Working Families Party. Thomas Golisano, the Independence 
Party candidate making his second run for the office, was a distant 
third, with 8 percent, and Lt. Gov. Betsy McCaughey Ross, the Liberal 
Party nominee, trailed with 2 percent. The 24-year-old split in New 
York's state Legislature appeared to hold fast, with Republicans easily 
retaining control of the state Senate, and Democrats keeping a strong 
hold on the Assembly. The polls indicated that the Liberal Party had 
survived the near-death experience of nominating Ms. McCaughey Ross, 
then watching her husband, financier Wilbur Ross, withdraw much of 
her financial backing. She appeared to have topped the 50,000 votes 
a party needs in a gubernatorial election to maintain an automatic 
place on New York ballots for the next four years. Despite Pataki's 
triumph, the Republican ticket's Election Night crowd was remarkably 
subdued, mindful of D'Amato's defeat. The governor appeared at 9:50 
p.m., less than an hour after the polls closed, to declare victory 
before a crowd of supporters at the New York Hilton Hotel on the Avenue 
of the Americas. ``We said we were going to change this state and 
put in place new policies that would free the spirit of the people 
of New York from an oppressive government,'' he said. ``Well, it's 
four years later, and let me tell you something, this is a better 
state than it was four years ago. We have kept our word in making 
this a safer state, making this a healthier state, making this a state 
with more environmental opportunities for our children and the children 
of the next generation.'' Vallone gave his concession speech at 9:30 
p.m., just half an hour after the polls closed, before a surprisingly 
upbeat group of supporters at the New York Marriott East Side hotel. 
``This is really not cause for sorrow or complaint,'' Vallone said, 
flanked by his family, Sen. Daniel Patrick Moynihan and former Mayor 
David Dinkins. ``We knew from the start that this was going to be 
an uphill race. The odds were long. The campaign dollars were always 
a little short. But there was a need to be filled, an obligation to 
be met.'' The campaign did not present much of a test for Pataki, 
who campaigned sparingly, ignored his opponents and refused to debate 
them. But the defeat of D'Amato leaves his former protege, the governor, 
as the undisputed leader of the state Republican Party and clearly 
the most powerful figure in state politics. In the last month, as 
polls showed him running away with this race, Pataki and his aides 
grew so elated that they began to talk openly about the prospect of 
his running for national office in 2000. Like the last Republican 
elected New York's governor, Nelson Rockefeller, Pataki might be favored 
by moderate Republicans, but is widely considered a dark horse, especially 
with the larger body of conservative GOP voters. In New York this 
year, as in much of the country, the election season lacked defining 
issues or ideological chasms. There was none of the economic unrest 
that animates some contests, and local fights were overshadowed by 
President Clinton's troubles, though they did not cut clearly one 
way or another with voters. In such an atmosphere, voters were content 
mostly to return incumbents to office, even if it meant ignoring party 
lines and splitting their tickets. The governor was headed for the 
third-largest winning margin in a gubernatorial race in state history, 
in both percentage terms and in raw votes, and the largest ever by 
a Republican. The biggest margins were set by Cuomo in 1986 and 1990; 
he won each time by 32 percent, and 1.4 million and 1.3 million votes, 
respectively. Pataki appeared to have won a higher percentage of the 
vote than any Republican candidate for Governor since Thomas E. Dewey 
was elected to a second term with 57 percent in 1946. The governor 
did not outpoll Vallone in the city, as some of his advisers had hoped, 
but the breadth of his victory was still remarkable. Pataki led Vallone 
2-to-1 in the downstate suburbs, and more than 3-to-1 upstate. And 
voter polls showed that one-fourth of the people who voted for Democratic 
candidate Charles Schumer for senator also voted for Pataki. The governor 
carried 58 of the state's 62 counties _ all but Brooklyn, Manhattan, 
the Bronx and Queens. Pataki has said little about what he would do 
in a second term, beyond continuing to cut taxes and toughen criminal 
penalties, but the magnitude of his victory could allow him to claim 
a mandate for whatever his second-term agenda may hold. If the economy 
slows, however, Pataki's plans could be overtaken by budget woes, 
precisely the opposite of the circumstances that he has enjoyed for 
the last four years, as the economic expansion and Wall Street boom 
allowed the governor to do what he promised and more, simultaneously 
cutting taxes and raising spending. Pataki's victory brings to statewide 
politics a new face, that of Mary Donohue, his running mate for lieutenant 
governor. Ms. Donohue, a former judge and prosecutor from the Albany 
area, takes on a purely ceremonial post, but would become governor 
if her boss were elected to national office. And the election may 
mark the end of the political career of Ms. McCaughey Ross, the Republican-turned-Democrat 
whose brief, odd sojourn in politics had alienated her from both major 
parties. In one of the race's many subplots, Golisano's showing was 
close to capturing for the four-year-old Independence Party the third 
position on the ballot for the next four years. Positions are assigned 
in order of gubernatorial vote, and Golisano was running close to 
the number of votes that Pataki garnered on the line of the Conservative 
Party, which has been listed third since the early 1970s. Pataki took 
office in 1995 determined to cut not only taxes but also state spending 
on health care, education, mass transit and other areas, a quest that 
won him a legion of enemies and made him widely unpopular. But in 
1996, he began his political resurrection by forging an alliance of 
some of his harshest critics, including labor unions and environmentalists, 
in support of his $1.75 billion environmental bond act. The campaign 
for the measure was, as much as anything else, a campaign for Pataki, 
one that raised his popularity and softened his image. Voters approved 
the act. By last year, Pataki was raising spending on popular programs, 
and he was widely seen as unassailable. The two men considered his 
strongest potential challengers, Schumer and state Comptroller Carl 
McCall, decided not to challenge him. That left Vallone, virtually 
unknown outside New York City, as the leading candidate for the Democratic 
nomination. Not since 1966 had the Democrats nominated someone of 
so little stature for governor. During the Democratic primary campaign, 
the mercurial Ms. McCaughey Ross drew much of the attention, and after 
she finished second to Vallone, she continued running on the Liberal 
Party line. Meanwhile, Golisano's ever-present advertisements drowned 
out Vallone's own meager media campaign. And he and Ms. McCaughey 
Ross both threatened to fragment whatever anti-Pataki vote there was. 
But ultimately, those were little more than distractions from Vallone's 
deeper problems: The governor was too popular, the voters were too 
complacent, Vallone was too uninspired a campaigner, and he had too 
little money to prevent a rout. In the most expensive gubernatorial 
race in New York state's history _ and one of the most costly in any 
state _ Pataki spent $20 million, Golisano may have matched that total, 
and Vallone spent just $6 million. Vallone has faced speculation all 
year that his true aim in this race was to position himself to run 
for mayor of New York City in 2001, but Tuesday, as he has all along, 
he declined to discuss that subject. ``We'll talk about that in the 
next millennium,'' he said. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>