<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981104.0537 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Deflation is scary. The last time prices nose-dived throughout the 
economy was during the Great Depression. Then government stood by 
helplessly as wages and prices plummeted and over a quarter of the 
labor force stood desperately in unemployment lines. No wonder, then, 
that investors cringe at the word ``deflation.'' Alan Greenspan, chairman 
of the Federal Reserve Board, recently warned that ``deflation from 
the Far East is heading our way.'' Many analysts now echo the deflation 
theme. Charles McMillion, chief economist of MBG Information Services, 
wrote last week in The New Republic that deflation ``could happen 
again soon.'' But predictions of deflation amount to little more than 
blather. The experts who dwell on deflation can point to no data that 
show prices are generally falling. Nor can they point to evidence 
that across-the-board price cutting is likely to break out in the 
future. Most important, deflation has not reached the all-important 
sinews of labor markets. Predictions of deflation miss the key difference 
between today and the 1930s: a Federal Reserve no longer asleep at 
the monetary switch. First, the data. This year, as in most other 
years, prices in some individual industries are falling. Energy prices 
have dropped almost 10 percent in the last year. Commodity prices 
have dropped by about 20 percent in the last year. The prices of raw 
materials, clothes and other imported goods have also declined, partly 
in response to the economic collapse of Southeast Asia. But other 
prices are more than making up for the slack. Producer prices, excluding 
energy and food, are rising about 1 percent a year. Consumer prices 
are rising by about 2 percent a year. These rates are small. But they 
are nowhere near negative. Look to the labor market, which drives 
the formation of prices. Over the last year, wages and salaries have 
been rising about 4 percent a year. Nothing in economic logic or history 
suggests that wages will suddenly reverse course. Indeed, even if 
recession strikes, wages will almost certainly continue to rise, as 
they have in every recent downturn. And if wages do not fall, prices 
will almost certainly not fall either. Labor costs typically account 
for two-thirds of the cost of producing goods and services. In general, 
wages and prices move up and down together. They can move in opposite 
directions, however, in times of rapid gains in productivity. If, 
say, workers are given the tools to churn out 5 percent more each 
hour, then the extra output would yield enough new revenue to allow 
the company to pay workers 5 percent more even without raising prices. 
The company could even cut prices a few percent and still have enough 
extra revenue to pass along to workers as higher wages. But productivity 
is now rising by less than 2 percent a year. That provides no room 
for prices to fall if wages continue to rise anywhere near their current 
4 percent clip. As Martin Feldstein of Harvard points out, ``Only 
in the extreme case of the economy falling into a deep depression 
like that of the 1930s would the level of prices actually begin a 
sustained decline.'' Nor are prices falling in any other industrialized 
economy except Japan. Throughout Europe, prices are rising very slowly. 
In developing countries, inflation rules nearly everywhere outside 
China. Even in the decimated economies of Indonesia, South Korea and 
Thailand, prices are rising rapidly. So why the frenzy over deflation? 
Robert Solow, Nobel laureate at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology, 
attributes some of the chatter about deflation to analytical confusion. 
In virtually every industrialized country, the official task of the 
central bank is to achieve price stability, or roughly zero inflation. 
At least since the reign of Paul Volcker in the 1980s, Fed chairmen 
have been measured by their ability to get inflation down. With prices 
rising by only 2 percent a year, Greenspan has come close to victory. 
But Solow observes, ``if average prices are not changing, then, to 
a rough approximation, half the prices must be falling, while the 
other half must be rising'' in order to keep the price index relatively 
level. To invoke the specter of specific price cuts for oil, apparel 
and computers as harbingers of deflation is, by this argument, to 
confuse economics with algebra. The United States has not experienced 
deflation since the 1930s. But though economic historians continue 
to debate the underlying cause of the Great Depression, they do not 
dispute the simple proposition that deflation was then, and will almost 
certainly be in the future, a monetary event. Translation: Prices 
can only continue to fall if people are given fewer and fewer dollars 
to spend on good and services. This is the flip side of the commonplace 
proposition that inflation can rage only if people are given more 
and more dollars to spend by the Fed. In the 1930s, the Fed committed 
the fatal mistake of sitting back while banks closed and the supply 
of money shriveled. It is inconceivable that the Fed would make the 
same mistake today. If, as Greenspan fears, deflation forces drift 
ashore from Asia, the Fed has an ironclad remedy. It needs only to 
step on the monetary pedal, as it has already begun to do cautiously 
by lowering interest rates. There are lots of economic forces to fear. 
Recession. Inequality. Productivity slowdown. In each case, living 
standards are at risk and government cannot perfectly anticipate what 
to do and when to act. But deflation isn't worth fretting about unless 
you believe that the United States will suffer a once-in-a-century 
catastrophe and the Fed will play dumb. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>