<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981104.0596 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Any new work by Twyla Tharp for American Ballet Theater is an event. 
She knows how to surprise and to reveal the unsuspected about virtuoso 
classical dancers. ``Known by Heart,'' given its premiere by the company 
on Tuesday night at City Center, is no exception. The 44-minute piece 
is, above all, a fabulous showcase for Ethan Stiefel, the former New 
York City Ballet principal who joined Ballet Theater two seasons ago. 
Ms. Tharp brings out the Marlon Brando in him; in short, all the new 
hanging-loose brawn he displays here is rooted in a bravura performance. 
``Known by Heart'' is nonetheless one of Ms. Tharp's true classical 
ballets and, at its beginning, gleamingly so. But in the last third 
of the piece, Ms. Tharp shoots herself in the toe shoe. Extraneous 
dancers are tossed into the contrapuntal fray, and the final section 
of this three-part ballet is just plain long, not merely repetitive 
like its minimalist score by Steve Reich. Mozart, however, accompanies 
the sunlit neo-classical first segment, danced by Angel Corella and 
Julie Kent. The metallic sound of a percussion tape by Donald Knaack, 
once a disciple of John Cage, hangs over the second part for Stiefel 
and Susan Jaffe. A male duet for Keith Roberts and Griff Braun, often 
dancing in unison, promises a relevant contrast to the first two sections. 
But by the time six more dancers get involved, the glazed-eye effect 
has taken over. Surprisingly, Ms. Tharp did not see fit to chop off 
some of the selections from Reich's ``Six Pianos,'' also heard on 
tape. Along the way, she loses the thread that initially led her through 
a distinctively polished choreographic maze. As a title, ``Known by 
Heart'' is up for grabs. Whatever its private meaning (the program 
dedication is to the memory of Bob Patino, an interior decorator and 
a friend of Ms. Tharp's), it is a truism that dancers learn choreography 
by heart. As usual, Ms. Tharp gives her cast plenty to learn on the 
formal plane. Each couple has its own signature, motifs that are recapitulated 
in each section and in a different context, within the final ensemble. 
Devoid of an overt message, the ballet is a pure-dance exploration 
of musical contrasts. Mozart's ``Danse Allemande'' opens the piece 
and unlike the other music, it is heard live and not on tape. Actually, 
it is heard in a circusy orchestration that evokes a fife and drum 
corps. Ermanno Florio's brisk conducting nonetheless allows the dance 
form in which Mozart wrote to come through while Ms. Tharp picks up 
on the orchestration's parade-ground effect in the choreography. When 
Ms. Kent and Corella, dressed in white by Santo Loquasto, enter they 
are granted the promise of a bright future thanks to Jennifer Tipton's 
lighting, which grows intricately nuanced and grayer throughout the 
piece. Ms. Kent, in a short tunic, recalls both an heiress on a tennis 
court and one of George Balanchine's ballerinas. Ms. Tharp offers 
a nod to Balanchine's ``Concerto Barocco'' when, as in that ballet, 
Corella slides Ms. Kent, two feet together, along the floor. But she 
is also slid across in a deep plie, her toe shoes skimming the ground. 
Ms. Kent is all luminosity and clarity, paying attention to detail 
and her knee held high in frequent attitude turns. There is the occasional 
flexed foot but Ms. Tharp does not mock the classical idiom. She honors 
its basic steps with a poetic simplicity. Similarly, she refrains 
from exploiting Corella's magnificent technique, giving him a purer 
image than expected. After his solo and Ms. Kent's brief solo, a hurdy-gurdy 
sound leads Ms. Tharp into a fleeting folk dance for the couple. The 
partnering, never easy, leaves Corella looking winded but still game. 
The connections between the different sections are subtle. At one 
point, Ms. Kent zigzags to the ground, a movement that is reversed 
later by Stiefel and given a harder edge by the other men. Part II 
takes its cue from ``Junk Music,'' in which Knaack uses found objects 
for percussion. The choreography offers a sophisticated updating of 
1930s machine dances, with Stiefel, in sleeveless shirt, and Ms. Jaffe, 
in a gray tunic and on toe, as robots programmed with ballet training. 
He leaps in, she slides across and in a recurring image, she hits 
him on the noggin. Everything sounds and looks metallic. Stiefel, 
asked to act dizzy, is all character study: He shadow boxes, he executes 
a double assemble turn, he shakes his way up from the ground to end 
in ballet's fifth position, in perfect academic form. Ms. Jaffe's 
solo has a similar collage structure. Stiefel lets loose in a muscular 
display after he has bumped chest to chest with his partner. There 
is a stunning moment when he remains suspended in the air, feet bent 
to one side, and drops straight to the floor. When the movement is 
poorly executed by other dancers, it is evident how brilliantly Ms. 
Tharp and Stiefel have collaborated. Braun and Roberts are impressive 
as a space-age Tweedledee and Tweedledum in the Reich segment, where 
their broad steps, circles and spins are taken up by two replacements, 
Marcelo Gomes and Sean Stewart. From then on it is downhill as the 
first couples enter and exit and the stage fills up with two other 
pairs (Oksana Konobeyeva, Maxim Belotserkovsky, Ekaterina Shelkanova 
and Giuseppe Picone), all looking as if they had rushed into the wrong 
ballet. A word for the wonderfully integrated performance on the same 
program of ``Fancy Free,'' led by the outstanding Gil Boggs, Ethan 
Brown, John Gardner, Christine Dunham and Amanda McKerrow. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>