<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981104.0500 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
The defeat of Sen. Alfonse D'Amato of New York means that Sen. Phil 
Gramm, R-Texas, who has a combative streak, is expected to become 
the next chairman of the Senate Banking Committee, a prospect that 
is sending shivers through many on Wall Street and in the financial 
services industry. The reason is that Gramm last October single-handedly 
halted a bill, sought by the financial services industry, to sweep 
away Depression-era restrictions just as the measure was about to 
receive Senate approval. For two decades the industry has sought this 
measure, only to see it slip away at the 11th hour because of Gramm's 
opposition. In addition, Gramm, who espouses a strong free-market 
philosophy and anti-regulatory view, has criticized the Securities 
and Exchange Commission's efforts to improve investor education. The 
banking committee oversees, in part, the nation's securities industry, 
and Gramm has clashed with Arthur Levitt, chairman of the SEC, on 
a variety of issues, including SEC funding. ``Gramm and Levitt have 
tilted at each other before,'' said a lobbyist, who asked not to be 
named. ``They are hardly peas from the same pod.'' Lobbyists said 
Wednesday that they had been fielding nervous phone calls from Wall 
Street executives, concerned over Gramm's views as well as his long 
history of clashes with bankers, regulators and other senators. Some 
financial services lobbyists here who maintain residences in New York 
said they were so concerned about the possibility that Gramm would 
head the most important congressional banking oversight committee 
that they flew to New York to vote for D'Amato. ``A D'Amato defeat 
does not bode well for the prompt enactment of financial restructuring 
legislation,'' said Kenneth Guenther, executive director of the Independent 
Bankers Association of America, which supported the bill. ``D'Amato 
worked things out and could reach across the aisle. That's not Phil 
Gramm's style. Gramm will be more partisan, more interested in drawing 
lines in the sand and in keeping the differences between Democrats 
and Republicans.'' Gramm halted passage of the financial overhaul 
measure after it had already passed the House, had enough votes to 
gain Senate approval and had gained unusual bipartisan and industrywide 
support from special interests that had been warring for decades. 
Through clever parliamentary maneuvering, Gramm stopped the bill, 
because he objected to parts of it that he felt would expand the Community 
Reinvestment Act, which requires bankers to provide loans to low- 
and moderate-income areas. On Wednesday, Gramm issued a statement 
supporting the financial modernization measure _ repeating what he 
had said all along. ``I strongly favor rewriting the Depression-era 
laws which govern much of the financial activity in America,'' Gramm 
said. ``I have long recognized the need to update them.'' But those 
who have dealt with Gramm over the years say his words and actions 
often do not match. The overhaul bill would eliminate restrictions 
that prevent banks, insurance companies and investment banks from 
engaging in one another's businesses. For nearly two decades, attempts 
to pass this measure have failed. This year the House passed the measure 
by a one-vote margin and the Senate was poised to approve it, until 
Gramm held up a stop sign. ``Clearly this means changes for HR 10,'' 
said Bert Ely, banking industry consultant in Alexandria, Va., referring 
to the overhaul measure by its bill number. ``The conventional wisdom 
is that Gramm's chairmanship will impede HR 10.'' In his lone stand 
against the bill, Gramm represented no industry group and said he 
was acting on principle. He has likened the reinvestment act requirements 
to ``slavery'' and ``extortion'' in speaking before the Senate Banking 
Committee. It is Gramm's penchant for strong ideological stances that 
is raising concern among financial lobbyists here. ``Who knows with 
Phil Gramm?'' said one lobbyist for a New York investment bank, who 
asked not to be identified. ``He's a very principled, ideological 
guy who has been very effective in stopping things in the banking 
committee. Who knows if he can be effectively affirmative? We are 
all beating our breasts. It's hard to imagine him compromising. With 
D'Amato, compromise was his middle initial.'' Another area of concern 
is over potential legislation to regulate hedge funds. While funding 
for the Commodities Future Trading Commission, which oversees regulation 
of over-the-counter derivatives, is handled by the Senate Agriculture 
Committee, the banking committee also has some CFTC jurisdiction. 
Gramm's wife, Wendy, is the former head of the CFTC and Gramm's basic 
orientation is to oppose regulation. Lobbyists generally feel that 
Gramm would be viewed positively by hedge funds _ lightly regulated 
limited partnerships for rich investors _ that want to fend off regulations. 
Some hedge funds have suffered large losses recently, drawing new 
attention to this kind of fund. With New York as the center of the 
nation's financial industry and with Sen.-elect Charles Schumer having 
served on the House Banking Committee, many expect that Schumer will 
get a seat on the minority side of the Senate Banking Committee. For 
years, Schumer has been a proponent of financial services modernization 
and, like D'Amato, has long enjoyed the financial support of Wall 
Street and New York banks in his campaigns. Gramm, too, has received 
hefty campaign contributions from the financial securities industry. 
Federal Election Commission records show he currently has $2.3 million 
in campaign donations from the financial services industry. Other 
lobbyists feel Gramm, as chairman, might want to put his own stamp 
on financial services reform. They think that if Gramm's concerns 
about the reinvestment act can be addressed, and if the House passes 
the bill again by an overwhelming majority, Gramm might want to make 
a mark as chairman and would support the bill. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>