<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981104.0561 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
After more than two years of debate, a group of human rights organizations 
and apparel manufacturers, including Nike, Reebok and Liz Claiborne, 
has reached an agreement intended to curtail sweatshops by setting 
up a code of conduct and a monitoring system for overseas factories 
used by American companies. The group that reached the agreement hopes 
it will reassure American consumers that the apparel they buy is not 
made in sweatshops, but the nation's leading apparel union rejected 
the agreement Wednesday as not going far enough. Members of the group 
said they would seek to carry out the agreement even though the apparel 
union rejected it. But several members said they feared that American 
consumers would feel little reassurance that apparel produced under 
the agreement's guidelines was not made in sweatshops. The Union of 
Needletrades, Industrial and Textile Employees criticized the accord 
for not requiring overseas factories to pay workers enough to meet 
their basic needs and for allowing American companies to use apparel 
factories in countries, including China, that repress unions. ``This 
agreement's not very good,'' said Mark Levinson, director of research 
at the needletrades union. ``How can you talk about eliminating sweatshops 
without making a commitment to pay a living wage? And the agreement 
allows companies to produce in countries that systematically deny 
worker rights, and it allows them to do that without requiring them 
to say anything to protect rights in those countries.'' Despite the 
union's rejection, members of the group insisted that the accord was 
a giant step forward in combating sweatshops. The four companies and 
five nonprofit groups that reached the agreement say they hope dozens 
more companies will sign on and comply with the agreement's requirements 
to insure that apparel is made under satisfactory working conditions. 
``The administration is convinced this agreement lays the foundation 
to eliminate sweatshop labor, here and abroad,'' said Secretary of 
Labor Alexis Herman. ``It is workable for business and creates a credible 
system that will let consumers know the garments they buy are not 
produced by exploited workers. We remain committed to working with 
all interested parties to insure its future success.'' The pact grows 
out of a presidential task force, the White House Apparel Industry 
Partnership, that was set up in 1996 after embarrassing revelations 
that apparel produced under the Kathie Lee Gifford name was being 
made in sweatshops in New York and Central America. After the task 
force's 18 members remained stalemated for months, nine of the group's 
more centrist members began negotiating among themselves and finished 
thrashing out an agreement on Monday. This group presented the agreement 
to the other members Monday night in the hope that they would accept 
it. ``It's incredibly important,'' said Roberta Karp, general counsel 
of Liz Claiborne and co-chairwoman of the task force. ``It's the foundation 
to move forward to make a real difference in working conditions around 
the world. It requires monitoring by independent monitors as well 
as public reporting for the first time ever. It's simply unparalleled.'' 
In interviews Wednesday, officials with the apparel union said they 
would no longer participate in the presidential task force if other 
members moved forward with the new agreement. ``We cannot continue 
to participate in this effort on the basis of this agreement,'' said 
Alan Howard, assistant to the president of the needletrades union. 
``This has been offered to us on a take it or leave it basis and we 
can't take it.'' Companies that participate hope that by complying 
with the code of conduct and monitoring system, they will be able 
to boast _ perhaps through advertisements or by tags on their apparel 
_ that their products are sweatshop-free. The nine task force members 
that reached the new agreement are Liz Claiborne, Nike, Reebok, Phillips 
Van Heusen, Business for Social Responsibility, the Lawyers Committee 
for Human Rights, the National Consumers League, the International 
Labor Rights Fund and the Robert F. Kennedy Memorial Center for Human 
Rights. Four other corporate task force members, L.L. Bean, Patagonia, 
Nicole Miller and Kathie Lee Gifford, have accepted the new agreement. 
``This agreement is only the beginning,'' President Clinton said. 
``We know that sweatshop labor will not vanish overnight. While this 
agreement is a historic step, we must measure our progress by how 
we change and improve the lives and livelihoods of apparel workers 
here in the United States and around the world. That is why I urge 
more companies to join this effort.'' Several corporate members said 
that if the task force accepts the stricter requirements sought by 
union leaders, that would make it harder to persuade more companies 
to join the effort. Under the agreement, factories used by American 
companies could not use forced labor and could not require employees 
to work more than 60 hours each week. In addition, the agreement prohibits 
factories from employing children younger than 15, although employment 
of 14-year-olds would be allowed when the country of manufacture allows 
employment at that age. The agreement also requires employers to pay 
the minimum wage required by local law or the prevailing industry 
wage, whichever is higher. Labor unions have repeatedly complained 
that in countries like Indonesia and Vietnam, both the minimum wage 
and prevailing wage are too low to support a family. Under the accord, 
a new entity, the Fair Labor Association, would be set up to oversee 
compliance. The new association would certify which monitors could 
examine factories, and it could expel companies that do not comply 
with the code. Many of the monitors would be accounting firms, but 
the accord urges all monitors to work with nongovernmental groups, 
like human rights groups, to get an accurate picture of conditions. 
The agreement calls for companies to monitor all their factories themselves, 
but in addition requires outside monitors to examine 30 percent of 
a company's factories in the three years after a company agrees to 
comply with the code of conduct. In subsequent years, about 10 percent 
of a company's factories would be inspected annually. Officials with 
the needletrades union said it was insufficient for only one-tenth 
of a company's factories to be monitored each year. ``The monitoring 
is badly flawed,'' Howard said. ``We don't think it's very independent 
monitoring and the companies pick their monitors and the factories 
to be monitored so there won't be surprise inspections.'' The union's 
biggest criticism is the accord's failure to require that companies 
pay a living wage. Human rights groups that backed the agreement said 
they persuaded the companies to agree to a Department of Labor study 
on the minimum and prevailing wages in relevant countries and how 
those wages compare with the amount needed to meet workers' basic 
needs. ``Those of us on the nongovernment organization side are continuing 
to fight for higher wages in this industry,'' said Michael Posner, 
executive director of the Lawyers Committee for Human Rights. ``This 
issue is central to our thinking going forward. Remember, this a first 
step and we have a lot of work to do to make this work.'' 
</TEXT>
</DOC>