<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981104.0605 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Listen to Wade Phillips long enough and he will lull you to sleep. 
He has an easy voice and an easy demeanor and he is so calm and so 
comfortable that it appears he is sleepwalking. Far from it, though. 
Don't sleep on Phillips. Or his team. The Buffalo Bills began the 
season 0-3 and looked like they were cooked. Well-done. But Phillips 
saw more. He saw a team that lost by 2 points at San Diego, by 6 at 
Miami and by 1 to St. Louis. Three losses, 9 points. ``I kept pressing 
the players on that, and that two of those loses were on the last 
play of the game,'' Phillips said. ``I've been through a lot of seasons 
where things started out bad and got better. The losses made us appreciate 
the winning so much more. Now we get excited about winning. We know 
what it takes to win and it's fun again.'' Fun because Buffalo has 
beaten San Francisco, Indianapolis, Jacksonville, Carolina and Miami 
in successive weeks. Three losses and then five victories. Now the 
players win, Phillips says, and they can't wait until the next one. 
The next one is at the Jets on Sunday. It is for first place in the 
American Football Conference East as both teams turn the corner on 
the season's halfway mark. Roasted but not cooked, after all. That 
is the Bills now and it is Phillips. Phillips, 51, jumped into coaching 
in 1969 as a college assistant. His first head-coaching job came after 
that, from 1970 through 1972, at a Texas high school. He was an interim 
head coach with the New Orleans Saints in 1985 and interim head coach 
again for Denver one game in 1990. Things would go wrong and Phillips 
would get a call. Phillips was a defensive coordinator in Denver and 
in Buffalo. He was Denver's head coach for two seasons and went 7-9 
in 1995 before being dismissed. He came to Buffalo for three seasons 
as the defensive coordinator and then Marv Levy retired after last 
season. The Bills were 6-10 last year. Things went wrong and Phillips 
got a call. There is distance now between the Phillips dismissal in 
Denver and the Phillips leadership now, the Doug Flutie-mania at quarterback 
and the current Bills excitement. ``There is a lot of distance between 
me and Denver,'' Phillips said. ``I appreciated the opportunity. I 
learned some things. But I think all Denver had to do was wait a couple 
of years. The foundation was being laid. It would have worked out.'' 
No, the Broncos would not wait. Phillips had to go. He was seen as 
lovable and wonderful but not as a leader. Not as the brightest guy, 
despite even though others have long viewed him as a defensive wiz. 
Denver thought it was becoming stagnant under Phillips. Buffalo is 
doing the opposite. It is being resurrected. Maybe Phillips is different 
in one way now. He is more determined, more clear, more decisive. 
He walked into his news conference here Wednesday morning and said: 
``I know what the question is and the answer is Doug Flutie.'' Head 
on. He said that Flutie was the Bills quarterback against the Jets 
and beyond. He said that there was a lot of ego involved with keeping 
Rob Johnson, the previous starter back from injury now, on the bench, 
but the Bills have to go with Flutie's hot hand. He said Johnson needed 
to know and ``we needed to know where we are.'' He said: ``I think 
you have to have a quarterback. A quarterback.'' The emphasis was 
truly on the ``A.'' And you have to have a true, tested leader when 
you are 0-3 and the ship is rocking, full of holes and taking on water. 
Phillips is a man the Bills players say they follow and respect. He 
is like Levy in that he keeps in touch, in tune with his players. 
He said a few of them came and talked to him about the Flutie/Johnson 
decision. And Phillips did not turn them away. After so many years 
with Levy, it is difficult to imagine that the Bills, especially the 
veteran Bills, could have flourished under a fiery coach who constantly 
ignites fires. With a new coach, a new quarterback, a new offense, 
a new defense, new assistant coaches, really, for Buffalo this season, 
after nearly starting all over, the Bills needed some patience. No 
wonder, with all of the changes, their start was 0-3. No wonder they 
took time to coalesce. The magical thing is it is happening now, with 
eight games down, with eight to play. Everyone was about to fall asleep 
on the Bills. But Wade Phillips has helped jolt this team and this 
town wide awake. Through rough times, he kept the Bills in one piece, 
then began riding the hot hand of Flutie. He complemented Flutie with 
sound defense and solid decisions. With leadership. That is what good 
coaches do. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>