<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981104.0533 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
After a decade of mainly losing to Republicans in state legislative 
races, Democrats managed a small comeback in Tuesday's voting. In 
doing so, they strengthened their party's hand a bit looking toward 
the crucial congressional redistricting process that will begin after 
the 2000 federal census. Riding the same tide that helped Democratic 
candidates in contests for Congress and governorships, the party's 
state legislative candidates came out of the election in control of 
both legislative chambers in 21 states, compared with 17 for the Republicans. 
Control was divided in 11 other states. The remaining state, Nebraska, 
has a one-house legislature that is nonpartisan. Democrats controlled 
20 state legislatures going into the election, just one more than 
the Republicans, who had steadily strengthened their state capitol 
grasp during the previous 10 years by snatching 11 legislatures from 
Democratic control. Going into the election, 10 states had split legislatures. 
In all, control of eight chambers switched on Tuesday to give Democrats 
their 21-to-17 edge. Democrats took over the Senate in New Hampshire, 
Washington and Wisconsin and the House in Indiana, North Carolina 
and Washington. Republicans took control of the House in Michigan 
and Minnesota. ``This really positions the party well for redistricting 
in 2000,'' Kevin Mack, the executive director of the Democratic Legislative 
Campaign Committee, said of Tuesday's gains. Redistricting is by no 
means the only important issue when it comes to control of state legislatures, 
given the increased governing responsibility Washington has been handing 
down to states. But because redistricting occurs only once every decade, 
a party that controls both legislative chambers in a state has an 
advantage in the process, especially when the redrawing involves high-stakes 
congressional district lines. And if the governor comes from the same 
party that controls the legislature _ as does Florida's Republican 
governor-elect, Jeb Bush, son of former President George Bush _ so 
much the better. A rough rule of thumb among political experts is 
that the party that controls redistricting can tilt as many as one 
of every five districts in its favor. In a state like California, 
which has 52 congressional districts, that would add up to at least 
10 seats, a hugely significant number given the narrow divide between 
Democrats and Republicans in the House of Representatives. Republicans 
went into Tuesday's election with high hopes that they would emerge 
in control, at last, of more state legislatures than the Democrats. 
They have not enjoyed that edge since 1954. Nevertheless, party officials 
were upbeat, insisting that the long-term trend was toward Republican 
dominance and that Tuesday was hardly a disaster. ``We continue to 
add to our numbers,'' said Tim Fitzpatrick of the Republican National 
Committee. ``That, coupled with our majority of governors, is going 
to put us in a position of strength for 2000 and the first decade 
of the next century.'' Besides the tide that seemed to be running 
for Democrats on Tuesday, in that they did better than was anticipated, 
other important factors helped decide many state legislative contests. 
In states like Arkansas, Michigan and Oregon, roughly half of the 
seats at stake were open because of new term limits laws. Both national 
parties, their sights set mainly on redistricting, thought they saw 
special opportunity there since open seats are generally easier to 
go after than occupied seats. So in the closing days of the election, 
they poured in money, perhaps as much as $1 million in all. Money 
is increasingly important in state legislative races, and not just 
when redistricting looms. Until a few years ago, these races were 
generally inexpensive, almost folksy affairs in many places. But as 
states have gained more and more governing responsibilities, state 
legislative jobs have become more and more important and the campaigns 
have become more and more competitive, more and more sophisticated 
and more and more expensive. In New York, Republicans spent a record 
$3 million on legislative races. In California, where expensive television 
advertising sometimes seems to be the only way to campaign, state 
legislative candidates were on the screen in many places along with 
candidates for Congress and governor. In Texas, Republicans mailed 
a million campaign flyers in an effort to capture 20 key legislative 
seats held by Democrats. Many of the legislators and governors elected 
on Tuesday will still be in office when redistricting begins after 
the 2000 census _ probably in 2002. But some will be up for re-election 
in 2000 and some will be unable to run because of term limits, so 
Tuesday's vote did not by any means end the fight for control of the 
nation's state legislatures. ``Taking the long view, what happened 
Tuesday was neither a great victory for Democrats nor a great loss 
for Republicans,'' said Constance Campanella, head of Stateside Associates, 
a Washington-based consulting firm that specializes in state government. 
``Most incumbents managed to hang on, as they usually do. I don't 
see any great change and certainly no great trend, not yet. Let's 
see what happens the next time.'' 
</TEXT>
</DOC>