<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981104.0116 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Charles Schumer, a congressman from Brooklyn with a tenacious political 
spirit and a huge campaign war chest, won election to the U.S. Senate 
Tuesday night, toppling Sen. Alfonse D'Amato and ending his reign 
as one of the most imposing figures New York Republicans have produced 
in 50 years. Schumer, a Democrat from Park Slope, adopted many of 
D'Amato's own political techniques, from relentless fund raising to 
a take-no-prisoners style of television advertising, to achieve a 
goal that has eluded Democrats since 1980, when D'Amato slipped into 
office in a race that was split three ways. In the process, Schumer, 
47, who has served nine terms in Congress, provided the national Democratic 
Party with one of its biggest victories of the night. With 96 percent 
of the state's precincts reporting, Schumer had 2,332,401 votes, or 
54 percent. D'Amato had 1,901,978 votes, or 44 percent. In other races, 
Gov. George Pataki, a Republican, won the kind of easy re-election 
that would have seemed unthinkable when Pataki, an unknown state Senator 
from Peekskill in northern Westchester County, defeated Mario Cuomo 
four years ago. He easily defeated Peter Vallone, a Democrat and the 
New York City Council speaker, with B. Thomas Golisano, a wealthy 
businessman from Rochester running as the Independence Party candidate, 
and Lt. Gov. Betsy McCaughey Ross, on the Liberal Party line, trailing 
far behind. Attorney General Dennis Vacco was in a tight contest with 
Eliot Spitzer, a Democrat and former state prosecutor in New York 
City. And in a fourth statewide race, Comptroller Carl McCall, a Democrat 
and the first black statewide elected official in New York history, 
was re-elected, defeating Bruce Blakeman, the majority leader of the 
Nassau County Legislature. But it was the outcome of the Senate race 
that in a single evening altered New York's political landscape, eclipsing 
one of the country's most ferocious political personalities and ending 
an era in Republican politics in the state. It was a rare moment of 
good news for New York Democrats in what has been a barren decade, 
and it immediately established Schumer as the state party's presumptive 
political leader. D'Amato called Schumer at his suite at the Waldorf-Astoria 
Hotel to concede at 10:45 p.m. Schumer, moving to the song ``Simply 
the Best,'' by Tina Turner, declared victory 25 minutes later. ``I 
want to thank you, New York,'' Schumer said. ``You have honored me 
with your trust. And I promise all New Yorkers that as hard as I fought 
to win this election, I'll fight even harder for everyone in this 
state, for the country that we love.'' Referring to the bitter campaign, 
Schumer said, ``Campaigns more often than not must focus on the thing 
that divides us. But government and public service must focus more 
on the causes that unite us.'' D'Amato conceded at 11:32 p.m. His 
speech was delayed, he said to a murmur of laughter, by one last problem: 
His overcrowded elevator got stuck between floors of the hotel. He 
congratulated Schumer and wished him well. ``We had the battle,'' 
he said in a six-minute speech. ``The battle is over. I am proud of 
having carried the torch. And now the leadership is going to go into 
the hands of someone else. ``I tell you from the bottom of my heart,'' 
he said. ``I love you, the people of New York, thank you very much.'' 
Then the band played the music from ``Rocky,'' his campaign theme, 
one more time. President Clinton called Schumer with congratulations 
about 9:30, a half hour after polls closed. Clinton's gesture reflected 
White House ebullience at the result; the president had campaigned 
twice in the state with Schumer, and Hillary Rodham Clinton visited 
the state four times to campaign against D'Amato, who ran the Senate 
investigation into the Clintons' Whitewater business dealings. Schumer 
ran one of the most efficient and relentless campaigns by a Democrat 
in New York in years, and certainly the most intense challenge D'Amato 
faced during his 18 years in statewide politics. Even D'Amato's friends 
came to view his campaign as a faltering and uncertain effort that 
often seemed unable to adjust to a pugilistic and nimble challenger 
and to a political climate that had changed since D'Amato first came 
upon the scene. The formula that had served D'Amato so well for so 
many years _ a combination of heavy spending and an emphasis on his 
attention to voters' local concerns _ apparently failed this time 
to erase doubts about his ideology and his integrity. His attempts 
to discredit Schumer first as a liberal and a New York City partisan, 
a strategy that brought D'Amato victory in 1986 and 1992, did not 
work this time. A mid-campaign course correction in which D'Amato 
began to attack Schumer for missing votes in Congress in order to 
run for Senate failed as well. Instead, interviews with voters leaving 
the polls throughout the state suggested that it was Schumer who had 
set the tone of this campaign, even as D'Amato outspent him nearly 
two to one, with relentless emphasis on a single campaign attack: 
``Too many lies for too long.'' Nearly two-thirds of voters surveyed 
said that they did not consider D'Amato honest or trustworthy. And 
about 60 percent said they thought D'Amato had, after 18 years, been 
in office too long. In one particularly striking finding in the exit 
poll, D'Amato received the support of only one in four Jewish voters 
_ about half as well as he did with the same group of voters in 1986 
and 1992. That figure strongly suggested that D'Amato had been hurt 
both by his decision to enlist Holocaust survivors to attack Schumer's 
record on Jewish issues, an effort that Schumer and other Jewish leaders 
denounced as inappropriate. He may also have been damaged by his later 
use of a Yiddish vulgarism to describe Schumer, who is Jewish. The 
fall-off in support explains why D'Amato spent so many hours at the 
end of the campaign in conservative Jewish communities, speaking to 
voters who presumably should have been solidly in his camp. Although 
Pataki did extremely well Tuesday, his success was tempered by D'Amato's 
loss. It was D'Amato who paved the way for Pataki's victory four years 
ago, and Pataki tried to repay the favor this week, appearing constantly 
with D'Amato. With the loss of D'Amato, Pataki is now the dominant 
Republican in New York, but there are clearly limits to his influence 
with voters, and that might complicate any effort by Pataki's promoters 
to present him as a figure of national potential in 2000. nn The twin 
events of Pataki's victory and D'Amato's loss presented a difficult 
moment Tuesday night for the small group of Republicans who ran both 
campaigns. Both men's supporters gathered at the same midtown hotel 
Tuesday night, and so the same stage was the site first of Pataki's 
victory speech and then of D'Amato's concession. D'Amato did not appear 
with Pataki when he came down to declare victory, but the Republican 
governor paid tribute to the senator, without making mention of what 
had befallen the man most responsible for Pataki's rapid rise in state 
politics. ``He will always be a great senator for the people of New 
York state,'' Pataki said to applause from an emotionally conflicted 
crowd at the Hilton Towers that had by then seen the television projections 
of his loss. The Republican crowd was at once exhilarated and mournful, 
torn between Pataki's victory and the loss of a man who had been a 
fixture in Republican politics. ``I feel like we lost something _ 
part of the fabric of New York _ to not be able to say, `Senator Al 
D'Amato,''' said Bernadette Castro, the state Commissioner of Parks, 
Recreation and Historic Preservation, who was her party's candidate 
for Senate against Daniel Patrick Moynihan in 1994. But even Castro 
suggested some concern about the way D'Amato had run this campaign. 
``I know what the senator's done, his substance, the breast cancer 
research,'' Castro said. ``As a senator he accomplished so much, and 
I wish he had talked more about all the things he's done.'' The race's 
$33 million price tag _ $20 million for D'Amato, $13 million for Schumer 
_ made it the most expensive campaign in New York history and the 
second most expensive Senate campaign ever. For all that, turnout 
seemed about the same as in 1994: 38 percent of the state's voting 
age population. Schumer's victory was larger than many Democrats and 
Republicans had expected, and appeared to reflect the extensive get-out-the-vote 
effort Democrats made. Schumer won three-quarters of the vote in New 
York City. In the suburbs, Schumer won almost half the votes and upstate, 
the part of New York where the Brooklyn Democrat was considered weakest, 
he won about 45 percent of the vote. Schumer's supporters burst into 
applause when he and his family emerged. Schumer did not take the 
stage until after he got a call from D'Amato, though, in an unusual 
move, he did not wait for D'Amato to concede before giving his 13-minute 
acceptance speech. Schumer spent most of the past year excoriating 
D'Amato as untrustworthy and a political extremist, and when he first 
mentioned D'Amato's name, the crowd responded with a low chorus of 
boos. Schumer raised his hands to quiet his supporters. ``Senator 
D'Amato and I have often held very different views,'' he said. ``But 
there is one area where I believe we can all agree on Senator D'Amato's 
tenure in public life. ``He has always been a hard worker. He has 
always fought hard for the causes he believes in. I respect his tenacity, 
and his family should be proud of his service.'' 
</TEXT>
</DOC>