<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981104.0507 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
With the government's effort to deport a group of supporters of the 
Palestinian cause now approaching its 12th year, the Supreme Court 
heard arguments Wednesday on whether the seven Palestinians and one 
Kenyan are entitled to go before a federal court with their claim 
that they were unconstitutionally selected for deportation because 
of their political views and lawful activities. In a 1996 law, Congress 
cut back sharply on judicial review of actions by immigration officials. 
Where deportation is concerned, the new law made explicit a limitation 
that the government had viewed as inherent in the old law: that judicial 
review was confined to appeal of a final order of deportation, and 
that during the years that often precede the final order, aliens were 
restricted to bringing much more truncated administrative appeals 
that could not address constitutional issues. There was considerable 
confusion in the courtroom on Wednesday over the extent to which the 
new law applied to this long-running dispute and over what difference 
a ruling would make for future cases, to which the new provisions 
would clearly apply. Several justices appeared to be looking for some 
safety valve, a way to interpret the law to make sure aliens would 
not be effectively forced to forfeit their constitutional arguments. 
The lower federal courts have begun examining the new law and have 
been restricting or striking down various provisions intended to cut 
off judicial review. ``If no review is available of these constitutional 
claims, it might influence our interpretation of the statute,'' Justice 
Sandra Day O'Connor told Malcolm Stewart, an assistant solicitor general. 
Stewart was defending the government's position that the lower federal 
courts should not have blocked the deportation proceedings, as they 
have repeatedly done in this case, to enable the Palestinians to collect 
more evidence to bolster their argument of selective enforcement. 
But other justices expressed impatience with allowing constitutional 
arguments to stand in the way of moving swiftly toward deportation. 
``It's clear that these amendments were intended to prevent exactly 
what's happening here,'' Justice Antonin Scalia said, referring to 
the new law and addressing David Cole, the Palestinians' lawyer. ``Everybody 
knows this is the name of the game: String it out, and the longer 
it's strung out, the less likely deportation will be.'' Cole, a Georgetown 
University law professor handling this case on behalf of the Center 
for Constitutional Rights, a New York City-based legal organization, 
replied that it was the government, and not his clients, that was 
prolonging the case through repeated appeals of the Palestinians' 
incremental legal victories. ``The irony is,'' Cole said, ``we're 
the ones seeking expeditious resolution at every stage.'' He said 
that the longer the case dragged on, the longer his clients remained 
``chilled'' in exercising their First Amendment rights to free speech 
and political association. The group, often referred to as the ``L.A. 
Eight,'' supports the Popular Front for the Liberation of Palestine, 
which the government regards as a terrorist organization. But no member 
of the group has been charged with any act of violence. Several were 
students when the case began, and were charged with offenses like 
not taking enough college credits to maintain their student visas 
or for holding jobs not authorized by their immigration status. In 
their selective enforcement claim, they are arguing that other aliens 
with similar visa problems but lacking similar political associations 
have not been faced with deportation proceedings. The 9th U.S. Circuit 
Court of Appeals, which sits in San Francisco, agreed with Cole in 
a ruling last year that the claim of selective enforcement should 
not have to wait until the end of the deportation process to be heard 
by a federal court, because the facts necessary to support the claim 
could not be adequately developed through the limited administrative 
appeals available in the immigration system. During the argument on 
Wednesday, Justice Anthony Kennedy asked Stewart, the government's 
lawyer, whether he agreed that the Palestinians ``can't make in the 
administrative proceeding the records necessary to make their case.'' 
``Yes, we concede that,'' Stewart replied. While some useful evidence 
might emerge during such a proceeding, ``we can't count on it,'' he 
said. The case is Reno vs. American-Arab Anti-Discrimination Committee, 
No. 97-1252. In a second case on Wednesday, the court heard arguments 
on whether a public school district in Iowa was obliged under federal 
law to provide continuous care in the classroom to a quadriplegic 
student who relied on a ventilator to breathe. Under the Individuals 
with Disabilities Education Act, schools must provide special education 
and ``related services'' to enable students with disabilities to benefit 
from an education. But schools are not required to provide ``medical 
services.'' The broad question in this case, Cedar Rapids Community 
School District vs. Garrett F., No. 96-1793, is how to define the 
``medical services'' exclusion. The 8th U.S. Circuit Court of Appeals, 
in St. Louis, ruled in this case that because the services the boy 
needed did not have to be performed by a doctor, they were not medical 
and so remained the obligation of the Cedar Rapids school district. 
In its appeal, the district is arguing that the continuous, one-on-one 
nature of the services, requiring the equivalent of private-duty nursing, 
met the medical test even if performed by a nurse. ``We believe that 
by any definition, private duty nursing is a medical service,'' Susan 
Seitz, the school district's lawyer, told the justices. Both the student, 
represented by Douglas Oelschlaeger, and the government, represented 
by Beth Brinkmann, an assistant solicitor general, urged the court 
to hold that only those services performed by a doctor qualify as 
medical. The case has attracted considerable attention from other 
school districts, faced with rapidly rising costs of special education. 
The National School Boards Association filed a brief urging the court 
to adopt a broader definition of the medical services for which a 
school district would not be responsible. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>