<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981104.0530 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
The Clinton administration, steadily and quietly, built support Wednesday 
for the use of military force against Iraq if President Saddam Hussein 
continues his defiance of U.N. weapons inspections, American officials 
said. In a second day of meetings with Arab allies in the Persian 
Gulf, Secretary of Defense William Cohen asked for and received support 
for launching punitive strikes against Iraq if Saddam does not back 
down, the officials said, speaking on condition of anonymity. Cohen, 
traveling with Under Secretary of State Thomas Pickering and the commander 
of American forces in the region, Gen. Anthony Zinni, went to Kuwait, 
Bahrain and Qatar. The Pentagon has refused to disclose details of 
Cohen's meetings, including the topics he has discussed with each 
country, but the officials said he has asked some gulf allies to provide 
at least indirect support to strikes, like granting permission for 
the passage of aircraft and missiles through their airspace. ``We 
believe we have the support we need for whatever option we chose to 
take,'' an administration official said. The U.N. Security Council 
met Wednesday to debate a resolution expressing outrage at Iraq's 
decision, announced last Saturday, to end all cooperation with inspectors 
searching out Iraq's chemical and biological weapons programs. The 
resolution, introduced by Britain and expected to pass as early as 
Friday, would not explicitly authorize the use of force but simply 
demand compliance. However, the Security Council has already authorized 
the use of force in previous resolutions stemming from Iraq's invasion 
of Kuwait in 1990. The new resolution would nonetheless underline 
the Council's unanimous statement last Saturday condemning Iraq, while 
allowing countries like France and Russia, which have been reluctant 
to resort to force against Saddam, to avoid having to explicitly threaten 
force. President Clinton discussed the wording of the resolution during 
a 25-minute conversation with President Jacques Chirac of France Wednesday. 
The State Department's spokesman, James Rubin, said Washington would 
support any strong statement warning Saddam. ``As you know, we do 
not believe that an additional authorization for the use of force 
is needed,'' he said. ``In our view, previous resolutions provide 
an adequate basis for such a step, if necessary. However, we would 
be supportive and expect a clear, straightforward resolution which 
sends an unambiguous message to Iraq.'' The administration's response 
to this confrontation has contrasted sharply with previous ones. In 
last winter's showdown, the administration sent additional forces 
to the Gulf region and sought to make a public case for the use of 
force. While administration officials have said all options remained 
open, it has kept its efforts low-key. ``We're not doing the saber-rattling 
this time around,'' one official explained. The United States has 
170 aircraft and 13 warships in the area, led by the aircraft carrier 
Dwight D. Eisenhower. Those forces are far smaller than the 400 aircraft 
and 34 warships the administration assembled during the last crisis. 
The Pentagon, however, has put more emphasis on the sea-based weapons, 
doubling the number of cruise missiles in the Persian Gulf. That means 
that Washington has not had to expend as much effort seeking permission 
from gulf allies to launch strikes as it did earlier this year. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>