<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981104.0560 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
In the wake of their midterm triumph, the permanent campaigners in 
the White House must be thinking: Will nobody rid us of this troublesome 
22d Amendment? Why should superpopular Bill Clinton be denied the 
chance to run for a third term? That was some shellacking the GOP 
took this week. Let us count the lessons: 1. Not all politics is local. 
This was an election nationalized by the Impeachment Issue, no matter 
what exit pollsters report. Despite handwringing predictions of rampant 
apathy and turnoff, midterm turnout was 38 percent of the voting-age 
public. That is as high as the controversial Agnew-driven campaign 
of 1970. There is no blinking away the fact that this was a referendum 
on Clinton conduct. This year, core voters of both parties as well 
as swing voters were motivated by the fear or hope of removing the 
president. The difference in most close races that Democrats won was 
sympathy for Clinton. Which means: 2. The majority of Americans who 
care enough to vote do not believe that lying under oath about sexual 
matters _ by itself _ justifies removing this president from office. 
The minority can grumble about how the Clinton example undermines 
the judicial system, or argue that good times should not justify bad 
acts, but the majority rules. Which means: 3. If the president is 
to be called to account, Congress and the independent counsel must 
come up with significant new evidence of a pattern of abuse of power. 
The unwritten rule at Justice is that no indictments should be brought 
before an election, a custom that Ken Starr followed. If he has other 
cases or criminal information that will reveal abuse of power or tampering 
with witnesses, this month is the time to indict. If the Supreme Court 
thinks that government lawyers cannot act as personal attorneys, this 
is the time to force Bruce Lindsey to talk. The House Judiciary Committee 
will proceed in an orderly way, breaking down previous stonewalling, 
but it must present new evidence of wrongdoing beyond Monica. (A Clinton-appointed 
judge has in effect OK'd Clinton fund raising from Chinese intelligence 
sources, and Clinton Justice is happy not to appeal his egregious 
ruling. That travesty bears a close Judiciary look. 4. The religious 
right would be wise to let economic conservatives take the GOP wheel. 
The statehouse victories of the Bush Boys in Texas and Florida and 
George Pataki in New York suggest that tax cuts and attention to local 
schools butter more political parsnips than an aggressive assertion 
of traditional values. Swing voters are evidently not troubled by 
swingers. There's a respected place for moralists and religionists 
in the Republican vehicle; their principled resistance to the corrupting 
gambling epidemic will, I hope, shame GOP fat cats greedy for casino 
bucks. But if races in 2000 are to be won, social conservatives cannot 
be in the driver's seat. 5. The flip side of women voters' condoning 
Clinton's conduct with a subordinated tut-tut is the practical end 
of sexual harassment law as we know it. Paradoxically, nobody will 
have done more than Bill Clinton for the macho predator, or will ruin 
more cases for trial lawyers out to blackmail corporate executives. 
6. Idealism lives. The Democratic victory that did my heart good was 
the squeaker won by Sen. Russell Feingold in Wisconsin. That new Don 
Quixote demonstrated how a campaign finance reformer could win by 
running against soft money and practicing what he preached. Feingold's 
example gave new life to fund-raising reform, which should be handled 
both retrospectively though investigation of the Asian connection 
and prospectively through legislation next year. His Republican partner 
on this issue, Sen. John McCain _ with his blowout victory in Arizona 
_ now becomes the dark horse to challenge front-runner Bush. Finally, 
7. The pendulum of politics swings faster than ever. Remember how 
Clinton soared in '93, collapsed in '94, came back in '96, crashed 
this summer, came back this fall? Do you really think that pattern 
will fail to repeat next spring? Hence, loathed Melancholy; cheer 
up, droopy right-wingers. Re-group around new leaders, challenge the 
president to veto your tax cuts, and watch your heads _ here comes 
that pendulum back again. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>