<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981104.0084 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Lt. Gov. Gray Davis, a cautious career politician once dismissed as 
an uncharismatic underdog, gave the Democrats the single biggest prize 
of this midterm election, defeating state Attorney General Dan Lungren 
on Tuesday, to become the 37th governor of California, according to 
surveys of voters leaving the polls. Davis' victory over Lungren, 
a 52-year-old Republican former congressman from Long Beach, marked 
only the fourth time this century that a Democrat has won the governship. 
It put the Democrats in control of all three branches of government 
in Sacramento _ and thus control of legislative and congressional 
redistricting _ for the first time since Jerry Brown left office 16 
years ago. It was as Brown's chief of staff that Davis began his public 
career in 1975. He has, by his own account, spent the last two decades 
in a single-minded struggle to move a few feet down the hall of the 
state Capitol to the governor's chair, first serving four years in 
the Assembly from a district that included part of Beverly Hills, 
then four years as controller before winning the lieutenant governor's 
seat four years ago. But for years, the prevailing wisdom on Davis 
was that his first name summed up his personality. Despite years of 
tireless fund raising and base-building, this election year began 
with most political professionals deeply doubting his chances of succeeding 
Gov. Pete Wilson, the two-term Republican incumbent who was barred 
by law from seeking a third term. By the time Davis made his final 
campaign swing around the state, with polls showing him with a double-digit 
lead over Lungren, he took gleeful note of the doubters by dubbing 
the trip his ``road-kill comeback tour.'' Davis, a 55-year-old Vietnam 
veteran who won a Bronze Star, pieced together a broad coalition of 
voters by methodically portraying Lungren _ who tried to run as a 
Reaganesque conservative _ as an extremist outside the mainstream 
of a fundamentally moderate and increasingly Hispanic electorate on 
issues from abortion to the environment. Davis neutralized Lungren's 
crime-fighting credentials with his own longtime support of the death 
penalty. Surveys of voters leaving the polls found Davis, the first 
white male to win his party's nomination since Brown, racking up majorities 
among almost all voter groups, except white men, Republicans and Protestants, 
and taking about six in 10 votes from those describing themselves 
as moderates. Lungren won only about 20 percent of Hispanic voters, 
about half of what Wilson won in his first election in 1990, before 
his stands against affirmative action and illegal immigration alienated 
many minority voters. Mervin Field, the dean of California poll-takers, 
said of Davis, ``He's riding the tide of what I'd call contented apathy. 
``He's not going to turn back welfare reform,'' Field said. ``He's 
not going to try to do anything about overturning capital punishment. 
He's not going to do anything real about re-instating affirmative 
action. He's going with the tide.'' Indeed, nearly eight in 10 voters 
said the state's economic condition was good or excellent, and nearly 
half said it would stay about the same in the coming year. Last winter, 
Davis was all but written off by much of the state's Democratic establishment, 
which considered him too phlegmatic to take on Lungren, the two-term 
attorney general. In fact, Davis' very blandness seemed to work in 
his favor, as he slipped past two self-financed millionaire rivals, 
Al Checchi and Rep. Jane Harman, to decisively win the Democratic 
nomination in June. Checchi, former co-chairman of Northwest Airlines, 
and Ms. Harman together spent more than $55 million, most of it on 
dueling television advertisements. Davis, who still managed to tie 
the old spending record of $9 million for a primary, lacked enough 
money to go on the air early and emerged unscathed at the end. The 
big question about Lungren, a vocal Catholic and staunch opponent 
of abortion, was whether he would be seen as too conservative for 
swing voters in a state that is among the most supportive in the nation 
of abortion rights. In his first one-on-one debate with Davis this 
summer, Lungren emphasized how little say a governor has over the 
matter, and managed to rattle Davis by questioning the Democrat's 
past support for the death penalty. Campaign advisers later said that 
Davis had not prepared enough for that first encounter, but he consistently 
dominated the campaign dialogue from then on. Public opinion polls 
showed that he was regarded as better than Lungren on the No. 1 issue 
of education, along with health care, environmental protection and 
abortion and Lungren holding a significant advantage only on the issues 
of crime and taxes. For his part, Lungren never seemed able to move 
much beyond his law-and-order background. Wary of opposition to his 
main educational proposals _ vouchers that would let parents of public 
school children send them to private and parochial schools instead 
_ he seldom mentioned them on the stump. That disappointed some campaign 
advisers, who believed the issue offered him a chance to contrast 
his own ideas with Davis' reluctance to take on the powerful teachers' 
union. By the end of the campaign, according to the polls, Davis was 
drawing the support of fully half of voters who identified themselves 
as moderate Republicans, a vital part of Wilson's winning coalitions 
and the key to any victory in a state where partly loyalty is fairly 
evenly divided. ``I think Gray has always been underestimated, because 
he was in Jerry's shadow for so many years, and because they thought 
of the stereotype and didn't go much deeper than that,'' said Stephen 
Rivers, who managed Davis' first campaign for state Assembly in 1982. 
``It was always, `Oh, he's gray, and not very exciting.' All that 
superficial stuff missed how tenacious he is. He's an incredibly focused 
person. He takes his job both as an elected official and a politician 
very seriously. He's methodical and he's unrelenting.'' 
</TEXT>
</DOC>