<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981104.0355 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
CONNECTICUT Proving his enduring popularity among Connecticut voters, 
Sen. Christopher Dodd, a Democrat, won a fourth term by a landslide. 
During the campaign, Republicans hoped that the incumbent, a close 
friend of President Clinton, would be hurt by the Monica Lewinsky 
sex scandal. But Dodd strongly criticized Clinton over his relationship 
with Ms. Lewinsky, and the Republicans' strategy lost steam. It was 
the Republican candidate, Gary Franks, whose effort was crippled by 
scandal. Franks was dogged by questions over delinquent loans and 
was unable to raise money. Gov. John G. Rowland, a 41-year-old Republican, 
swept back into office on a wave of voter enthusiasm over the state's 
robust economy. His challenger, Rep. Barbara Kennelly, 62, a nine-term 
congresswoman, could not match Rowland's buoyant campaign style. But 
Rowland's popularity was not strong enough to help carry Republican 
candidates to office in two key congressional races. A Democrat, John 
Larson, a former state senator, beat a Republican candidate, Kevin 
O'Connor. And a Republican challenger, Mark Nielsen, was unable to 
unseat Rep. John Maloney, a Democrat. DELAWARE Voters gave Rep. Michael 
Castle, a moderate Republican with a reputation for bipartisanship, 
an easy ride to a fourth term as the holder of Delaware's at-large 
seat. Castle, a former two-term governor, overwhelmed the Democratic 
candidate, Dennis Williams, an aviation company accountant who mounted 
a similarly underfinanced and unsuccessful effort against Castle two 
years ago. In other statewide races, voters showed an inclination 
to split the ticket. A Republican, M. Jane Brady, won re-election 
as attorney general, an office whose recent occupants have seldom 
served more than one term. And another Republican, R. Thomas Wagner 
Jr., was re-elected as auditor. But voters turned the longtime state 
treasurer, Janet Rzewnicki, a Republican, out of office, choosing 
instead her Democratic challenger, Jack Markell, a corporate financial 
officer. DISTRICT OF COLUMBIA Anthony Williams, a Democrat and the 
city's former financial control officer, outpolled the Republican 
nominee, Carol Schwartz, by 2 to 1 in the race for mayor. The outcome 
was little surprise in a city that is heavily Democratic. But some 
residents may be surprised by the new governing style in the mayor's 
office. Williams is an outsider (he only moved to Washington three 
years ago) who built a reputation as a straightforward manager. All 
of which contrasts sharply with the man he is succeeding, Marion S. 
Barry Jr., whose larger-than-life presence dominated the city's politics 
for much of two decades. The city's nonvoting congressional representative, 
Eleanor Holmes Norton, a Democrat, was easily elected to a fifth term. 
MAINE Gov. Angus S. King Jr. made history, becoming the first independent 
governor in Maine's 178 years of statehood to win a second term. In 
the end, it was no contest. King, a former talk show host, benefited 
from the state's healthy economy and rolled over Thomas Connolly, 
the Democrat, and James B. Longley Jr., the Republican. Patricia LaMarche, 
the Green Party candidate, made a respectable showing with 7 per cent 
of the vote. The state's two members of the House, Thomas Allen and 
John Baldacci, both Democrats, faced only token opposition. MARYLAND 
Parris Glendening, a Democratic county executive from a suburb of 
Washington, D.C., won his first term as governor four years ago, by 
a mere 6,000 votes out of 1.4 million cast, and his Republican opponent, 
Ellen Sauerbrey, said for weeks the election had been ston. She tried 
again this year, but in a good year for incumbents in Maryland, he 
won again, by more than 160,000 votes. Ms. Sauerbrey, seeking to become 
the first Republican governor of Maryland in 30 years, emphasized 
her background as a former teacher and promised to build more classrooms. 
Glendening's ads attacked Mrs. Sauerbrey for her positions against 
abortion and gun control, and tried to link her to polluters. In the 
Senate race, Barbara Mikulski, a Democrat, won a third term, defeating 
Ross Pierpont, a retired doctor. All eight members of the House of 
Representatives were re-elected. MASSACHUSETTS Acting Gov. Argeo Paul 
Cellucci, a Republican seeking a full term in office, swept to a narrow 
victory over his Democratic challenger, Attorney General Scott Harshbarger. 
Cellucci, a fiscal conservative and social moderate, ran on a record 
of tax cuts and budget surpluses and benefited from the state's strong 
economy. His victoryn means Republicans will continue to control a 
governor's office they have held since 1990. But there was little 
else they could cheer about in Massachusetts, where Democrats won 
most other statewide offices and maintained their lock on the 10-member 
congressional delegation. Voters re-elected two Democrats, Secretary 
of State William Galvin and Auditor A. Joseph DeNucci, and elected 
Shannon O'Brien, a Democratic former state senator, as treasurer, 
breaking an eight-year Republican hold on the office. Another Democrat, 
Thomas Reilly, the Middlesex County district attorney, was elected 
Attorney General. In the Sixth District congressional race, the only 
one considered competitive, John Tierney, a first-term Democrat, soundly 
beat Peter Torkildsen, a Republican who had held the seat until Tierney 
narrowly defeated him in 1996. By 2-1, voters approved a measure to 
provide public financing of political campaigns. NEW HAMPSHIRE All 
the state's incumbents _ a Republican senator, the Democratic governor, 
and both Republicans in the House _ handily won re-election. Sen. 
Judd Gregg easily beat George Condodemetraky, who did not have nearly 
as much money to spend as the incumbent. Gov. Jeanne Shaheen, the 
state's first female chief executive, drew heavily from Republican 
and independent voters to defeat Jay Lucas, a businessman, according 
to surveys of voters. The governor's race featured sharp debates over 
taxes and education spending. New Hampshire has no income tax and 
its system of financing public schools with local property taxes has 
been ruled unconstitutional. NEW JERSEY The Democrats won control 
of New Jersey's House delegation with the defeat _ for a time, wrongly 
called _ of first-term Rep. Michael Pappas. Pappas, a conservative 
12th District Republican, was unable to fend off a challenge by Rush 
Holt, a physicist who got contributions from 16 Nobel Prize winners 
and strong financial support from the Democratic party. Otherwise, 
it was a night for incumbents. Frank Pallone Jr., the four-term Democrat 
from the Sixth District, was re-elected despite having been battered 
by attack advertisements run by his well-financed Republican opponent, 
Michael Ferguson, a 28-year-old political science professor. A Green 
Party candidate, Carl Mayer, who used his own money to finance his 
campaign, had also been expected to take votes away from Pallone. 
Steven Rothman, a Democrat from the Ninth District, defeated Steve 
Lonegan, who received the support of prominent Republicans like Bob 
Dole. Another freshman, William Pascrell Jr., a Democrat from the 
Eighth District, defeated Matthew Kirnan, the mayor of Verona. NEW 
YORK New Yorkers said 18 years was enough for Alfonse M. D'Amato, 
as they handed Rep. Charles Schumer a decisive victory in the Senate 
contest. But, in one of the year's keenest political paradoxes, the 
voters also gave D'Amato's protege, Gov. George Pataki, a healthy 
margin in his re-election contest. The governor's supporters said 
his resounding victory made it clear that Pataki was presidential 
timber. Schumer had a large war chest and seemed to capitalize easily 
on D'Amato's errors, like his use of a Yiddish vulgarism to refer 
to Schumer. But the Democratic candidate for governor, Peter Vallone, 
never seemed able to draw Pataki into the contest. When Vallone, the 
New York City Council Speaker, was injured slightly in an automobile 
accident during the final days of the campaign, the incident seemed 
to underscore how arduous a task he had taken on in challenging Pataki. 
In most years, the race for attorney general is little more than a 
footnote. But this year's contentious campaign became one of the state's 
most watched as the Republican incumbent, Dennis Vacco, battled Eliot 
Spitzer, the son of a wealthy real estate developer, who had the money 
to conduct an aggressive campaign. The election-night vote count left 
Vacco and Spitzer so close that the race is likely to be decided only 
by paper ballots that could take days to count. PENNSYLVANIA Incumbency 
and Republicanism ruled the day as Gov. Tom Ridge, Sen. Arlen Specter, 
and virtually every sitting House member won. Republicans prevailed, 
however, in the race for the two open House seats. Don Sherwood, a 
wealthy car dealer narrowly defeated Patrick Casey, the son of former 
Democratic Gov. Robert Casey in the 10th District and Pat Toomey, 
the owner of a sports bar and a Republican, beat State Sen. Roy Afflerbach 
for the seat being vacated by Rep. Paul McHale. McHale gained notoriety 
when he became the first Democratic House member to condemn the president 
after Clinton admitted having an ``inappropriate'' relationship with 
Monica Lewinsky. The one looming exception to these trends was the 
race in the 13th District. There, Joseph M. Hoeffel 3rd, a Democrat 
decisively defeated Rep. John Fox. Fox was the only incumbent House 
member in the state to lose. ``The people of the 13th Congressional 
District have spoken,'' Hoeffel told his supporters Tuesday night, 
``and I like it.'' Hoeffel was an exception in other ways. he was 
one of the few Democrats around the counrty to try to distance himself 
from the president. But, after he won, Hoeffel attributed his victory 
to voter disgust with Republican efforts to remove Clinton. `I think 
there was a backlash to the Republican treatment of the president,` 
he said. RHODE ISLAND Gov. Lincoln Almond, the Republican incumbent, 
beat Myrth York, the challenger, in a civil, almost boring, rematch 
that lacked any galvanizing issue. In the 1994 election, when the 
big issue was gambling _ Almond was adamantly opposed, Ms. York less 
so _ he won 47 percent of the vote and she got 44 percent. The rest 
went to the Cool Moose Party candidate, Robert Healey Jr., who was 
back for the rematch. This time, the race was not quite as tight between 
Almond and Ms. York. Almond, who lacks natural political ease, ran 
on his success in bolstering what had been a weak state economy, and 
portrayed Ms. York, a former state senator, as too liberal. Ms. York 
argued that the economy could, and should, be much better. VERMONT 
Sen. Patrick Leahy, a Democrat, won election to a fifth term with 
almost three-quarters of the vote. Leahy, an outspoken advocate of 
civil liberties and farm and nutrition programs, did not face a serious 
challenge. His Republican opponent, Fred Tuttle, a 79-year-old retired 
dairy farmer who received the nomination after he was featured in 
a political spoof film, spoke well of Leahy and said he did not really 
want to go to Washington. Howard Dean, who has been governor since 
1991, won another two-year term by defeating the Republican candidate, 
Ruth Dwyer, a member of the state House. Dean, who has long been popular 
among Democrats, was also endorsed this year by some moderate Republicans. 
. Dean, a doctor, is a former chairman of the National Governors' 
Association. He combined moderate fiscal policies with liberal positions 
on social issues. Bernard Sanders, an independent, won his bid for 
a fifth term in the House. WEST VIRGINIA West Virginia confirmed its 
status was a ``yellow dog'' Democrat state, re-electing three Democratic 
incumbents who faced either token or no Republican opposition. Rep. 
Alan Mollohan and Nick Joe Rahall, easily beat Libertarian candidates. 
Rep. Bob Wise, an eight-term incumbent, was one to draw a Republican 
challenger.The Republican, Sally Anne Kay, did not raise any money, 
broadcast any commercials or show up for scheduled debates with Wise. 
Still she garnered 21 per cent of the vote, to Wise's 73 per cent. 
Joe Whelan, the Libertarian, came in third with 14 per cent of the 
vote. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>