<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981104.0628 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
For weeks, the opinion polls showed that the race was tantalizingly 
close, a suspenseful stalemate that would be decided only when the 
final batch of votes was counted. But in the end, Rep. Charles Schumer 
defeated Sen. Alfonse D'Amato by a wider margin than expected, causing 
pollsters on Wednesday to examine why their assessments were off. 
With 99 percent of precincts reporting, Schumer won by nine percentage 
points. He had 2,384,815 votes, or 54 percent, to 1,961,476, or 45 
percent, for D'Amato. The majority of polls in the final few weeks 
of the race said Schumer was leading by only a few percentage points, 
at most. Some pollsters said Schumer appeared to have gained strongly 
over the weekend, after most polls were conducted. Others said they 
may have overestimated the Republican turnout because they were basing 
their predictions on the last midterm election in 1994, when the party 
did well. And many said they could have done a better job anticipating 
that undecided voters would generally swing to the Democrat. Pollsters 
adjust the results of their surveys in an effort to ensure that the 
group of people interviewed has the same composition as the people 
they believe will vote on Election Day. But if their predictions are 
wrong _ because one campaign does a better job getting its partisans 
to the polls or even because the weather is bad _ then the results 
will be skewed. ``You can't measure who is going to make a surge for 
get-out-the-vote,'' said Lee Miringoff, director of the Marist Institute 
for Public Opinion, whose last poll showed Schumer leading by four 
percentage points. ``You are shooting at a moving target. If the Republicans 
had spent $30 million on the get-out-the-vote effort, you can take 
the polls and put them in the shredder.'' It was not just the Senate 
contest. The polls also failed to predict what would happen in the 
race for attorney general, which is still undecided. The Republican 
incumbent, Dennis Vacco, had margins larger than 10 percentage points 
in some polls, but he is slightly trailing the Democratic challenger, 
Eliot Spitzer, in the actual tally. Like Schumer, Spitzer may have 
garnered a lot of supporters in the final days after many polling 
firms had stopped surveying the race. In the Senate race, most polls 
did in fact give the edge to Schumer. But the lead was so slight _ 
typically just a few percentage points _ that the pollsters were careful 
in how they interpreted it. Generally, the lead was within what is 
known as the margin of sampling error, a figure that is used to qualify 
the accuracy of the polls. So if Schumer had 46 percent to 42 percent 
for D'Amato, and the margin of sampling error was plus or minus four 
percentage points, that could mean that he did not lead at all. It 
could also mean that he was even farther ahead. But the pollsters 
may have played down the Schumer lead when they publicized the polls, 
because they knew that D'Amato had demonstrated a knack in the past 
for waging fierce fights in the final days that pushed him over the 
finish line. In 1992, D'Amato trailed the Democrat, Robert Abrams, 
for most of the election before winning by one percentage point. One 
of the final polls in the race, by Quinnipiac College, came closest 
to predicting the outcome, showing Schumer ahead by eight percentage 
points. Its pollsters credited the survey's accuracy to the fact that 
they were able to detect the late movement of undecided voters. One 
polling firm that had D'Amato roughly even with Schumer in the final 
days was Zogby International. Its last poll, which included surveys 
from last Friday through Sunday, had both men with 41 percent. The 
firm's owner, John Zogby, said Wednesday that he had fallen victim 
to his belief that the turnout would be higher upstate, where Republicans 
dominate, and lower in New York City, a Democratic stronghold. ``I 
just went with history,'' Zogby said. ``I assumed a good Republican 
get-out-the-vote operation.'' 
</TEXT>
</DOC>