<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981104.0334 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Henry Miller thought of dancing, even skating, atop its 22-foot golden-oak 
tables. Joan Didion called it ``a convent for those who live in the 
world.'' Richard Eberhart, the poet, found an unlikely love, ``all 
gaudy pelt, and sleek, gracefully moving'' among the tables, and Bill 
Blass donated enough money to have his name set in stone outside its 
main door. Since it opened on May 23, 1911, the main reading room 
of the New York Public Library has lent itself to fancy flights of 
literacy. And when it reopens on Nov. 16, after a year of restoration 
and a week of previews, its curious mix of gaudy hauteur and inviting 
domesticity will be more evident than ever. Leaf blowers have blasted 
grime from the gilded crevices in the coffered ceiling; the last of 
the World War II black-out paint has been stripped from the 17-foot 
arched windows looking west over Bryant Park. The linings of brass 
lampshades have been painted white to soften the glow on those beloved 
reading tables, most of them with bronze plates for laptop plug-ins. 
And as if the space weren't already aspirational, the ceiling panels 
_ once as murky as a witch's brew _ have been repainted with billowing 
white clouds piled high in a pure azure. The $15 million restoration 
returns high-mindedness to one of the world's favorite solitary occupations 
_ reading. There may be 48 computers on six of the 42 reading tables, 
but they were installed without a nick to the inlaid ebony and oak 
bases extravagantly carved with the city's seal. Here is elegant proof 
that preparations for the future don't have to mean a wrenching break 
with the past. From the start in 1897, when the founding director, 
John Billings, a former Army surgeon, drew a sketch putting the reading 
room on the top floor, far from the dust and noise of the city, the 
library, and especially the reading room, as designed by John Merven 
Carrere and Thomas Hastings, was to be an ennobling space. Great scholars 
and crank-letter writers alike sat at the communal tables: Alfred 
Kazin wrote most of ``On Native Grounds'' in the reading room, stopping 
occasionally to play Ping-Pong in Times Square with a fellow toiler, 
the historian Richard Hofstadter. Norbert Pearlroth sat there for 
50 years, surrounded by open shelves weighted with the works of Sigmund 
Freud, Diderot's Encyclopedia and volumes of baseball statistics, 
as he researched Ripley's ``Believe It or Not'' column. Technology 
has always been part of the library's ennobling mission. It was one 
of the earliest large buildings _ constructed for the then princely 
sum of $9 million _ to be fully equipped with electric lights so that 
working people would be able to use it in the evening hours. Once 
simply Room 315, the reading room, with a capacity for 636 bookworms, 
will officially be known by the unwieldy name Deborah, Jonathan F.P., 
Samuel Priest and Adam Raphael Rose Main Reading Room, in honor of 
the children of Sandra Priest Rose and Frederick Phineas Rose, the 
real estate developer who put up the entire restoration cost. The 
Rose Reading Room, as it is more likely to be called, is one of the 
grandest of spaces in New York City entirely open for public use. 
``It is the key symbolic space within a library that rivals the great 
European libraries,'' said Paul LeClerc, the library's president, 
as he sat in his own glorious office, its walls covered in dark-green 
damask, with a fireplace carved from oxblood-red marble. ``And its 
essence is the most pluralistic, democratic access imaginable. The 
only criterion one needs to get in is curiosity.'' LeClerc started 
coming to the reading room when he was a 19-year-old from Queens doing 
term papers. ``I remember distinctly how upset I was when I came back 
after an absence and the chairs were different,'' he said. ``They'd 
all been replaced by these '70s knockoffs; they were total misfits.'' 
The original oak reading-table chairs, with their easy curve to the 
back and graciously scrolling arms, have been returned or, as necessary, 
copied. (Reproductions of the chairs and reading lamps will be sold 
in the gift shop.) While past presidents steered clear of the huge 
undertaking of restoring the reading room, LeClerc embraced it. ``You 
want to make your mark,'' he said, more matter-of-factly than immodestly. 
Lewis Davis of Davis Brody Bond, the architectural firm that has worked 
on library-renovation projects since 1980, couldn't fathom it. ``What 
would you do with the 400 people in there?'' the architect said. ``Then 
LeClerc decided he wanted to make it his legacy. And he went out and 
got the money and figured out what to do with the people.'' Surprisingly, 
getting the money turned out to be quick work. ``We had a campaign 
going on,'' said LeClerc, still relishing the moment. ``The Roses 
were planning to donate $5 million and had come to talk with me about 
what that would get. We were eating chicken sandwiches. I told them, 
you can name a division, you can create endowment gifts and so on. 
Rose said, `What else do you have?' '' LeClerc then divulged his heart's 
desire and offered to show the couple a master plan for the reading 
room. He left for a few moments, and when he returned, they had decided. 
``It was just spectacular,'' he said. Mrs. Rose knew firsthand how 
desperately the reading room needed a face lift; she'd spent time 
there herself as what she calls ``a retread student'' in the 1970s. 
``It was tragic,'' she said. ``You knew you were in this marvelous 
space, but it was dim and grim.'' Parts of the room were set off with 
temporary walls to shield copying machines and researchers' cubicles. 
Cumbersome microfilm reading machines were a hulking presence. In 
July 1997, the reading room was closed, and construction started in 
earnest. More than 30 construction specialists and artisans were brought 
in to lay hands on the room, which is one of the world's largest uncolumned 
spaces _ roughly the length of a football field. No surface was left 
unrefreshed, from the 18 bronze chandeliers with 1,620 light bulbs 
to the undersides of the reading tables, from which decades of gum 
wads were scraped. Richard Nix of Du-Well furniture refinishers lost 
count of how many chairs and tables he stripped, stained and coated. 
``The craftsmanship on these tables is a wonderment,'' he said of 
the ornately carved gadroons, astragals, volutes, acanthus, leering 
dolphin designs and other classical elements that few could call by 
name (and that's just on the table's waist-high base). ``I don't know 
where they found the people who could do it in the first place,'' 
said Nix, adding that while there was virtually no graffiti defacing 
the woodwork, he had to sand off plenty of cigarette burns. ``Now 
there's a little insight to another time,'' he said. The ceiling was 
``simply a mess,'' Davis said. Grime, water damage _ even the occasional 
hole punched through by a foot _ had rendered the murals unrecognizable. 
``The ceiling became our obsession,'' he said. There was little to 
go by to recreate the color in the murals: old photographs were of 
no use; a glass lantern slide offered some guidance because it had 
been hand painted. Rather than paint directly on the plasterwork, 
the architect commissioned Evergreene Painting Studios of Manhattan 
to recreate them on canvas sections, which were then affixed to the 
ceiling. Still, the room is no Merchant-Ivory stage set. Forty-eight 
computer workstations, 32 with their own printers, secure the Rose 
Reading Room's reach into the next century. Twenty-four of the computers 
will offer access to more than 100 electronic databases, free to all 
library users; the other 24 are linked to the Internet. LeClerc noted 
that even the new $843 million British Library does not give the public 
Internet access. The computers make an eerie impression _ like emissaries 
from the future that have crashlanded in this genteel Beaux-Arts world. 
Most other signs of the present are artfully hidden. The digital call 
numbers that announce when books have arrived from the stacks are 
encased in a bronze frame. The original pneumatic tubes still shuttle 
call slips to the stacks. Cables have been deftly threaded into table 
bases through holes bored up through the two-and-a-half-foot-thick 
floors. But with 33 printers, will noise levels be as low key as the 
wiring? Jean Bowen, the central library's director, is optimistic. 
``That's the beauty of the new reading room,'' she said. ``If you 
don't like the sound of tapping keys, there's plenty of room to move 
someplace else. The last six tables at both ends of the room don't 
even have plug-ins.'' The architects favor more noise, not less. ``It 
shouldn't be a quiet room,'' Davis said. ``The idea is that if there's 
a certain amount of constant noise, people will accept the sound of 
chairs scraping the floor. A room this size can take a lot.'' But 
can it absorb the sound of the seven new copy machines sure to be 
in constant use? While the notion of an ennobling space, classically 
adorned, seems an anachronism in today's utilitarian world, the reading 
room is still a rich source of inspiration for architects intent on 
their own derring-do. Will Bruder, who designed the much-praised Phoenix 
Central Library in Arizona _ a glass and corrugated copper box with 
Teflon-coated fabric sails to shade the sun _ freely borrowed from 
the New York Public Library. Not by chance did he place his one-acre 
reading room at the top of the building. It was in tribute both to 
the mesas of the Southwest and the unusual site of the reading room. 
But no Gilded Age ornament for this architect. Known for his experiments 
in technology-driven, environmentally oriented design, Bruder employed 
computer-tracked mirror louvers and 32-foot columns topped with circular 
glass to catch sunlight, turning his library into a kind of space 
age Stonehenge. ``Technology has become ornament,'' Bruder said. (The 
library has yet to install computers for general use, however.) The 
architect Michael Graves, who just completed the library at the French 
Institute/Alliance Francaise, has been inspired by something more 
quotidian than the New York Public Library's grandeur. ``I don't want 
to sound saccharine,'' he said, ``but there's something of a domestic 
quality about the way the table lights surround you so you never feel 
lost in a larger group. They provide a measure of privacy, without 
destroying the communal feeling.'' In his own library projects, Graves 
has sought to recreate that effect. ``It's easy to make a little room 
where you can squirrel away with a book,'' Graves said. ``And it's 
easy to make a space that's grand and anonymous. But to create a place 
that does both _ making room for the individual within the collective 
whole _ now that's difficult, and really essential.'' A few weeks 
before opening day, Joan Kirwin, a staff librarian since 1961, was 
methodically restacking the shelves with books. She was almost alone 
in the room. Her cart squealed as she rolled it across the floor, 
but she spoke softly, almost awkwardly. ``It's never been a quiet 
place,'' she said. ``More like Grand Central, in fact. I'm so looking 
forward to people coming back in.'' 
</TEXT>
</DOC>