<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981104.0273 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Termites are voracious insects that can literally eat a person out 
of house and home. Sometimes termite activity is apparent when it 
appears as mud tubes on walls. Often, however, the infestation goes 
undetected until the homeowner discovers serious damage in wooden 
studs, beams and joists. That's why it is important to have a termite 
inspection conducted every year by an experienced pest control technician. 
Some homeowners who live in brick or stone houses wrongly assume that 
termites pose no threat to their homes. What these people fail to 
realize is that there is a great deal of wood in the structure of 
any house, and that the termites will penetrate through hairline cracks 
in the concrete and mortar to get at that wood. Consider, for example, 
the recent problems on Liberty Island, s the site of the Statue of 
Liberty. It would seem that an all-metal statue positioned firmly 
on a stone base in the middle of an island surrounded by water would 
be invincible against termite attack, but, in 1994, the National Park 
Service found that it had a serious termite problem. It's unclear 
how the insects made their way to the island; one theory is that they 
traveled over with lumber that was to be used for scaffolding. The 
termites attacked the furniture and display cases inside the museum. 
Eventually the museum had to be temporarily closed so pest control 
technicians could attack the problem. The technicians installed bait 
devices around and in the museum. Thirteen months later, the multiple 
termite colonies were virtually eliminated. Unlike traditional termite 
control measures these bait devices do not rely on pouring toxic chemicals 
into the earth. Instead, a series of monitoring stations are placed 
in strategic locations in the ground surrounding a home. If termite 
activity is detected, the monitoring devices are transferred into 
a bait tube that contains a substance called Hexaflumuron. Hexaflumuron 
does not contaminate the environment because it does not penetrate 
into the surrounding earth. Termites feed on the bait matrix containing 
the Hexaflumuron and return to the colony to feed the colony members. 
They also send other termites out so they too can feed on the bait. 
The bait stops the molting process so the termites cannot grow to 
the next level. Hence the termites die a natural death and the entire 
colony is eliminated. The bait control system has been available to 
homeowners through qualified pest control experts for a number of 
years. As good as this system is, it still has limitations. To be 
effective, the bait stations must be implanted into the ground where 
termites forage for food. Suppose, however, the area surrounding a 
home is largely concrete or asphalt. It is difficult to make a hole 
large enough to position the station. In addition, the bait stations 
work by stopping termites before they enter a structure. But suppose 
the insects have already penetrated into the home? To meet these problems, 
manufacturers developed a variation of the in-ground bait stations. 
These devices have just recently become available to homeowners through 
authorized pest control technicians. It is a simple above-ground station 
that also contains Hexaflumuron. The station can be secured to walls 
or ceilings with screws, caulk or double- sided tape, depending upon 
the surface. Thus the bait station can be installed in any home without 
drilling through walls, floors or ceilings. The bait stations are 
not only for interior use; they can be placed on the exterior walls 
if there is evidence of termite activity. Used in this way, the bait 
boxes serve as a complement to the in-ground stations. Ideally both 
devices should be installed, whenever possible, to eliminate the threat. 
Since these bait stations have no moving parts or electrical hook-ups, 
it might seem that almost anyone can install them and eliminate their 
termite problem. But it's not that simple. The Hexaflumuron bait does 
not attract termites, it only exists as an alternate food source. 
It is essential that the stations be positioned in strategically to 
allow foraging termites to find them. Otherwise, they will be ineffective. 
In addition, they must be inspected frequently to check for termite 
feeding. Bait that has been consumed must be replenished until the 
termites stop feeding. Arthur Katz, president of Knockout Pest Control, 
and a recognized authority on pest control techniques, points out 
that the bait systems are the wave of the future in controling termites. 
However, it is essential that pest control technicians have the proper 
training in using this technology or else it will be of limited value. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>