<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981104.0532 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
What does it take to get a job this winter at the Daily Grind, a coffee 
shop on Bridge Street, this resort town's internationally renowned 
shopping street? For an answer, Kaye Ferry, the owner, inhaled, then 
exhaled. ``Are you breathing?'' she asked the other day. ``Yes? You've 
got a job.'' Decades of following laissez-faire housing policies are 
catching up with Vail and as many as 2,500 jobs may go begging this 
winter. The cause for a labor shortage in Colorado's most popular 
ski town is as clear as the advertising lineage in a recent issue 
of The Vail Daily. The newspaper printed 586 inches of classified 
advertising offering jobs, but only 30 inches of housing advertising. 
For years, Vail could ignore rising housing prices, content to allow 
the members of its work force who live locally to dwindle to 30 percent. 
With the median price of a condominium here approaching $300,000, 
a recent survey calculated that a worker would have to hold down five 
full-time jobs at $10 an hour to live here. Bordered on the east by 
a 10,666-foot-high Rocky Mountain pass, this town historically draws 
its commuters from the west, from Eagle River Valley. Up and down 
the valley, warning signals about the housing crunch have been obvious. 
Last summer, the Bureau of Land Management shortened maximum stays 
in local campgrounds to one week, hoping to cut down on the number 
of local workers who seemed to be on four-month camping trips. Elsewhere 
in the valley, the town of Gypsum passed an ordinance forbidding residents 
from renting their driveways out to workers who lived there in campers. 
With Eagle County housing prices leaping by two-thirds in the 1990s, 
the class divide has become as stark as the Cordillera development, 
$1 million houses sitting high on a bluff over a trailer park inhabited 
largely by Mexican workers. The trailer parks are vanishing, too. 
Since 1990 six trailer parks in the county have been leveled to make 
way for more vacation homes. But if Vail's wealthy residents were 
not overly worried about the social hollowing of their town, the wake 
up call came when business owners realized that business growth down 
valley was diverting their commuting workers. In response, the Vail 
Town Council approved last summer an an ambitious plan known as Common 
Ground, to build 1,600 living units to rent or sell at subsidized 
prices to local workers. But four neighborhood groups immediately 
filed lawsuits challenging the plan, saying that it would build housing 
on land originally earmarked for parks. ``We are not a bunch of elitist 
nimbies who don't want working people,'' said Sally Jackle, leader 
of one of the neighborhood groups. Acknowledging that a housing project 
``would harm our property values,'' she said the groups' guiding principle 
was, ``They should not build on parks.'' Others say that Vail Resorts, 
the area's largest employer, wants local taxpayers to pay for housing 
its workers. Diana Donovan, who served on the Vail Housing Task Force, 
said, ``Vail Resorts would love to make the town of Vail build all 
their housing.'' For business owners, however, the issue is urgent. 
Chuck Ogilby, a motel owner and member of the task force, said: ``Everybody's 
panicked because they don't have enough employees. For the first time 
in my 30 years living here, housing is now at the top of the agenda.'' 
At present, Vail Resorts provides subsidized housing for about 30 
percent of its peak-season work force of 4,400. That portion is to 
rise to 45 percent by the year 2001, according to company construction 
plans outlined by Andy Daly, the company president. ``In the ski industry, 
we are the leader in employee housing,'' said Daly. Indeed, Vail currently 
provides 77 percent of all employee housing offered by ski areas in 
Colorado, according to a recent survey by Colorado Ski Country USA, 
an industry group. The housing problem is only going to sharpen here 
and in other mountain resort towns, predicted Myles Rademan, a resort 
consultant in Park City, Utah. ''The issues are the same in Canada, 
California or Colorado,'' Rademan said from Park City, a ski town 
which imports half of its workers every day. ``It always gets down 
to a certain number of people who say, `If you can't afford to live 
here, tough luck.''' Nationally, the average age of a purchaser of 
a second home is 51, he said. With the aging of the baby boomers, 
about 78 million people are to turn 51 over the next 18 years. Here, 
in Eagle County, demographers forecast that the present population 
of 32,000 will increase by two-thirds over the next 20 years. ``In 
the service business, you want people who are warm, fuzzy, hands on,'' 
continued Rademan. ``If you ask people to commute 100 miles, it is 
not going to work very well.'' With land in Vail selling for $1 million 
an acre, planners have come up with novel sites for building worker 
housing. A proposal to build apartments over Interstate 70 was discounted 
as too expensive. Obtaining a few acres from the U.S. Forest Service 
was discounted for fear of angering people who built homes believing 
they would live next to a National Forest. So far, the only affordable 
housing project that has not drawn complaints is a mixed trailer park 
and apartment complex that is to be built on an old gravel quarry 
site, 45 miles from Vail. Called Two Rivers, the 391-unit complex 
is to be built on a historic flood plain. The contractor promises 
to build Dutch-style dikes to protect the development from the Colorado 
and Eagle Rivers. In Vail, city authorities are scaling down Common 
Ground, hoping to defuse the lawsuits. But Colorado's tightest housing 
market _ 1.2 percent rental vacancies in Eagle County _ continues 
to take its toll. Over the last year, the Housing Task Force had to 
find replacements for two members. They moved away because they could 
no longer afford to live here. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>