<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981104.0338 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
A German company, SAP, produces the best electronic inventory-control 
software in the world. Another German company, Joymania, produces 
Knights and Merchants, a strategy game that involves managing a medieval 
economy from the village up, fighting off marauding armies from neighboring 
provinces, building roads, maintaining efficient supply lines and 
maximizing serf productivity. Never before have I experienced a yearning 
for automated inventory-control software. But you practically need 
it to run this medieval village. The depth and intricacy of economic 
ties in this little burg is awe inspiring. You can't just generate 
random food units, for instance. You must make sausages. And the sausage 
procurement process goes all the way back to the wheat fields. The 
wheat goes to the swine farmer, who supplies the butcher, who delivers 
the sausages to the inn, where industrious laborers and artisans down 
them with loaves of bread and tankards of wine. This entails a vineyard, 
a windmill and a bakery, which must be separately constructed and 
staffed. Everything in Knights and Merchants works this way. Every 
suit of armor, shield, sword, pike and crossbow must be individually 
ordered from the appropriate armorer or weapons workshop, which means 
that the miners and metallurgists have to dig the coal, smelt the 
iron and so on. And they can't do any of that if the woodcutter isn't 
doing his job properly. Even the schoolhouse runs with clockwork precision; 
everyone in this village must be properly trained, including the serfs. 
Even the people who haul rocks around are certified rock haulers, 
and they need to go to school for this. Interestingly enough, the 
educational system is the only thing in this game that runs on cash. 
All the workshops run on raw materials. The schoolhouse eats gold 
bars and spits out personnel, which is why it's important to build 
the metallurgy shop next door, so the freshly smelted ingots don't 
have far to travel. As the manual notes: ``You should always have 
enough gold on hand to train the people you need. Having enough personnel 
is a vital factor in the smooth, organized and trouble-free running 
of your whole economic system.'' In fact, the schoolhouse has to go 
up before you can build anything else. After that, you are required 
to build an inn (``the commoners must be supplied with food'') and 
are strongly encouraged to build it in the town center. The designers 
of this game have very firm, well-founded ideas about urban planning, 
and you will follow them. You have no choice. In the course of the 
game, scrolls arrive to tell you what you're allowed to build next. 
The windmill has to be fully operational before you can construct 
a bakery. You can't build the barracks until the weapons workshop 
is done. Planned growth: it's the law. There are times when construction 
is proceeding apace but you're not allowed to lay the foundations 
for anything else (the serfs seem to have some kind of amazing collective-bargaining 
agreement). At those times, all you can do is watch the village going 
about its business: the woodcutter chopping trees, the mason hewing 
stone, the baker turning out loaves of bread, the vintner stomping 
grapes, and the laborers chewing their loaves and sausages at the 
inn. You can hear the hammers and saws and milling and mining and 
trees falling over, the sounds of peacetime productivity and industry. 
Thought balloons float above the heads of these little people. Icons 
_ a pickax, a knife and fork, a house _ tell you if they're off to 
work, if they're hungry, if they're going home to rest. You can see 
the farmer walking back from the fields, thinking of his house. You 
can peek into the windows of the buildings and see tiny Z's rising 
from the butcher as he sleeps. Meanwhile, the buildings are going 
up, brick by brick. The supporting beams are nailed into place. Even 
though they will eventually be bricked over, you know they are underneath, 
and that somehow makes the virtual buildings seem more solid. The 
scene generates an almost palpable sense of well-being. Everyone's 
working. Everyone's secure. ``These god games, where you have to build 
up an empire and see all these little people running around doing 
things, are very important over here,'' said Frank Michaelis, marketing 
director in the German office of the game's publisher. ``That's what 
people like. The No. 1 PC game right now (in Germany) is Bundesliga 
Manager, which is a soccer management game. You have to buy players, 
sell players. You have to set up a training plan for them _ how much 
they have to do in running, how much tackling. And you have to set 
up your own stadium, buy a lot of marketing stuff, fan material like 
scarves or posters, build up shops where you sell that stuff in the 
stadium. So everything around soccer you have to do. But you're not 
playing yourself. It's just management.'' This is the polar opposite 
of an American sports game, which is all about action, the thrill 
of the moment, the virtuosity of a star athlete and the ability to 
be that athlete, that celebrity _ to score the goal, dunk the basket, 
hear the crowd go wild. American war games are the same. Be the pilot. 
Fight the Civil War again. Take over the world. Even in a strategy 
game like Command and Conquer, which superficially resembles Knights 
and Merchants, every non-military activity is there to fuel the war 
effort. The object is to generate as many generic soldiers as possible 
and send them somewhere to destroy the enemy. That is, after all, 
how we fight our wars. We send some planes, pound a place with bombs 
and fly home. The fighting takes place Over There, and it's a visceral 
experience. In Knights and Merchants, fighting takes place Over Here, 
and it's an economic experience. When the game opens, your village 
is burning. Every building has been set on fire by a foreign army. 
You have to fight off the soldiers, then put out the fires and rebuild 
your village, your entire economy, from the ruins. When you fight, 
the enemy is at the gates. And if you lose, the village will be demolished. 
If you lose, the woodcutter is going to die. If you lose, everything 
you have built will be destroyed again. So you're fighting to keep 
that from happening because it's expensive to rebuild economies. No 
one understands this better than the Germans. Their games reflect 
their reality, just as our games reflect ours. Computer code may be 
the global language of the future. But like all languages, it is marked 
by culture and history. We speak the language differently. That's 
why it's important to see what other countries do with digital media. 
Not so we can understand foreign computer games, but to understand 
Duke Nukem', Total Annihilation and Warcraft _ to understand our own 
games, and what makes them particularly American. RELEASE NOTES `KNIGHTS 
AND MERCHANTS' Published by Interactive Magic CD-ROM for Windows 95 
and 98 $49.95 
</TEXT>
</DOC>