<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981104.0612 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Late last month Congress secretly rejected a plan by the CIA for new 
covert action against Iraq, congressional and administration officials 
say. The CIA sought congressional approval to restart its long-dormant 
covert efforts to undermine President Saddam Hussein's government 
in budget negotiations last month between congressional leaders and 
the administration, officials said. Congressional leaders complained 
that the CIA was trying to slip in a highly sensitive program at the 
last minute without seeking reviews by the House and Senate intelligence 
committees that oversee the agency. Officials said the proposal, backed 
by the White House, was a modified version of a plan that the oversight 
panels quietly rejected in the spring. Congressional leaders saw the 
new request as an attempt to restart the program with little or no 
debate on Capitol Hill. ``Sometimes that is the way the game is played,'' 
said one congressional official who spoke on the condition of anonymity. 
The Clinton administration has been reluctant to conduct major covert 
operations against Iraq since 1996, when Saddam destroyed the two 
most important Iraqi programs of the CIA. In August the army moved 
into Kurdish-held areas in northern Iraq and crushed the Iraqi National 
Congress, a CIA-backed umbrella group for Kurds and other anti-Saddam 
dissidents. The administration removed more than 5,000 Kurds and other 
Iraqis and let them resettle in the United States. The Iraqi National 
Congress virtually collapsed two months after Saddam had executed 
as many as 100 army officers and other opponents connected with the 
Iraqi National Accord, another CIA-backed group that had used defectors 
and agents in the Iraqi military to conduct subversive operations. 
The new plan circumvents the dissident groups that the agency had 
once relied on, officials said. Instead the agency hopes to use new 
agents in Iraq to undermine the infrastructure. Even though the Republican 
leaders in Congress have pushed for new measures against Iraq since 
then, they were dissatisfied with the plans that the White House and 
CIA proposed in the spring. Some Democrats have joined the Republicans 
in voicing frustration, saying those plans were hastily conceived 
and were not focused on overthrowing Saddam, which congressional officials 
say is their goal. Some legislators are also frustrated over what 
they say is the administration's willingness to turn a blind eye to 
the growing evidence that Iraq is still developing weapons of mass 
destruction. ``There is an overall disgust with the administration's 
Iraq policy,'' said one Republican Senate aide on the condition of 
anonymity. Convinced that the administration is not serious about 
covert action, some congressional leaders have supported open military 
assistance to Iraqi dissidents groups. But administration officials 
argue that those congressional leaders have been posturing, proposing 
largely symbolic programs that have no hope of success. Last month 
Congress approved $97 million in military aid to opposition groups 
like the Iraqi National Congress, a plan that Gen. Anthony Zinni of 
the Marine Corps, who commands U.S. forces in the Middle East, quickly 
dismissed as ineffective and unrealistic. The CIA sought funds for 
covert action as part of a $1.8 billion budget increase for the intelligence 
community that Congress provided last month. Despite the disagreement 
over the program, the idea for the overall increase came from Speaker 
Newt Gingrich, according to administration and congressional officials. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>