<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981104.0411 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Lt. Gov. Gray Davis, the Democratic Party's first white male nominee 
for governor of California since 1978, won that prize for his party 
for the first time in those 20 years on Tuesday by piecing together 
a broad coalition that cut across virtually all voter groups, including 
two-thirds of moderates and half of whites. But when the next history 
of California politics is written, Davis' election may also be seen 
as an important milestone on the steady path toward the moment when 
the demographics of California's electorate _ long disproportionately 
white _ catch up with the demographics of its increasingly diverse 
and Hispanic population. Hispanic voters made up about 13 percent 
of the statewide electorate on Tuesday, still well below their 20 
percent share of California's total adult citizen population, but 
a bit more than their 10 percent share in the 1994 governor's race 
and more than double their 5 percent share in 1990. Davis drew nearly 
eight in 10 Hispanic votes, compared with fewer than two in 10 for 
his Republican opponent, state Attorney Gen. Dan Lungren. Another 
Democrat, Assemblyman Cruz Bustamante of Fresno, won the race to succeed 
Davis as lieutenant governor, becoming the first Hispanic official 
to be elected statewide in more than 120 years. All that is in no 
small measure the legacy of the state's retiring Republican incumbent, 
Gov. Pete Wilson, who first won office eight years ago with nearly 
half the Hispanic vote. But in 1994, when Wilson defeated his Democratic 
challenger, state Treasurer Kathleen Brown, with a vocal and polarizing 
campaign to halt illegal immigration, his share of the Hispanic vote 
fell to just under 30 percent. In that campaign, Wilson sponsored 
a ballot measure, Proposition 187, to curtail illegal immigration 
that featured television commercials of immigrants streaming across 
the border as an announcer intoned: ``They keep coming and coming.'' 
Wilson has insisted he meant to target only illegal immigrants, but 
even some leading Republicans have said the campaign was ill-advised. 
``Well they have kept coming, and they're going to be a much larger 
percentage of the vote,'' said Mervin Field, the dean of California 
poll takers. ``They're a more integrated part of the society now, 
and they're clearly voting with the Democrats.'' Over the past four 
years, California Republicans have struggled in vain to rebuild their 
support among Hispanic voters, and among moderate voters over all, 
and Lungren ran extensive advertisements on Spanish-language radio 
and television. But the effort fell far short of Republican hopes. 
With all precincts reporting in unofficial returns, Davis defeated 
Lungren 58 percent to 38 percent, an even bigger margin than Wilson's 
lopsided victory over Ms. Brown. Four years ago, Wilson took just 
over half the votes of moderates, a quarter of Democrats, half of 
women and all socioeconomic groups except the very poor, according 
to surveys of voters leaving the polls. This year, Lungren lost all 
those groups, and held only the slightest edge over Davis among white 
men. Throughout the campaign, Davis emphasized his Army service in 
Vietnam, his support for the death penalty, his wariness about new 
taxes, thereby neutralizing Lungren on such traditionally GOP issues 
and putting the attorney general on the defensive on abortion, gun 
control, education and health care. ``This great victory is more than 
just electing a candidate for governor,'' Davis told his supporters 
on Tuesday night. ``It is a clear affirmation that Californians want 
to take a moderate path to the future. That is who I am, that is how 
I ran, and that is how I will govern.'' Four years ago, by contrast, 
Ms. Brown, the sister of Jerry Brown and daughter of Edmund G. (Pat) 
Brown, California's last two Democratic governors, won the votes of 
just over four in 10 moderates, just under four in 10 men and just 
under seven in 10 Hispanic voters. The overall electorate here remains 
about three-quarters white, so it was not surprising that it was a 
white male Democrat who at last prevailed, though analysts acknowledged 
it was an interesting twist. ``It is ironic,'' said Mark Baldassare, 
survey director for the Public Policy Institute of California, a nonpartisan 
research and polling group in San Francisco. ``But I think the demographic 
shifts are finally beginning to show themselves in elections. ``You 
had a combination of the gender gap and the ethnic and racial gap 
that were all working toward the benefit of the Democrats. As we talk 
about half the population of California being minority in the not 
too distant future, this really points to the importance of having 
a strategy to reach out to those people,'' Baldassare said. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>