<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981104.0277 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
According to recent news reports, I have a cousin by the name of Julia 
Jefferson Westerinen who lives on Staten Island. Next year, when the 
Monticello Association has its annual meeting, I'm going to invite 
Julia and her family to be my guests. We'll be welcomed to the main 
house late in the afternoon for a family reception. We'll be able 
to go upstairs to rooms that have long been closed to the public. 
Children will romp across the grassy lawn behind the house. Everybody 
will stand around drinking Virginia wine and talking about how much 
the youngsters have grown since last year, the way they always do. 
That night, the family will have its annual barbecue somewhere in 
Charlottesville, and the following morning, we'll all gather at the 
graveyard for a memorial prayer for Thomas Jefferson and more than 
100 other relatives who are buried there. But that afternoon, when 
the Monticello Association meets in a hotel ballroom downtown, its 
doors will be closed to Julia and her family, despite the fact that 
as a descendant of Sally Hemings' son Eston Hemings Jefferson she 
is also, according to new DNA evidence, descended from Thomas Jefferson 
himself. Almost two centuries after Jefferson's death, most of the 
members of the association, which comprises 800 descendants of his 
daughters Maria and Martha, of which I am one, have yet to come to 
grips with the notion that the great man fathered children not only 
by his wife, Martha, but by Martha's half-sister, his slave Sally 
Hemings. I hope all that will change in the next year, and Julia and 
my other cousins who are descended from Hemings and Jefferson will 
have the same right I have to join the Monticello Association and 
the same right I have to be buried in the graveyard on a hill behind 
Monticello. The excuse that has always been given to deny descendants 
of Sally Hemings membership in the Monticello Association is that 
there is not ``enough evidence'' that Jefferson and Sally Hemings 
had children together. The association has relied upon reams of ``evidence'' 
from historians over the years that such a relationship would have 
been impossible. It's a sad commentary on the association and on the 
historians friendly to its point of view that its members have had 
to be dragged kicking and screaming by the production of DNA evidence 
into admitting to this possibility. Members of the Monticello Association 
and the historians upon whom they have relied have put no value on 
the oral histories of the families descended from Sally Hemings, which 
have held all along that Jefferson fathered children by her. Over 
the years, there have been two sides to this question _ the ``white'' 
side and the ``black'' side. On the white side, there is voluminous 
written material from Jefferson himself, from his friends and relatives, 
from his journals and records, from contemporaneous histories and 
records kept by others that establish his whereabouts on particular 
days and months of various years. On the black side, there is no written 
material, because slave owners enforced ignorance and illiteracy as 
powerful tools to keep their slaves under control. Historians ignored 
or denigrated the oral histories of the slaves Jefferson owned, while 
valuing the written histories of him and his contemporaries. There 
will doubtlessly be defenses of their methodology, now that DNA seems 
to have proven that an oral tradition of the Woodson family was wrong 
on the ancestry of Hemings' oldest son, Thomas Woodson. Jefferson 
evidently fathered her youngest son, Eston. However, the real point 
is that historians didn't even listen to the voices of the ancestors 
of slaves in the first place, which is racist on its face. Historians 
should not be permitted to skate sideways out of the trap they set 
for themselves with the kind of mea culpa we have heard from Joseph 
Ellis, the author of ``American Sphinx: The Character of Thomas Jefferson.'' 
While only a year ago Ellis was declaring a relationship between Jefferson 
and Hemings to be impossible, this year he says: ``Now, with impeccable 
timing, Jefferson reappears to remind us of a truth that should be 
self-evident. Our heroes _ and especially presidents _ are not gods 
or saints, but flesh-and-blood humans.'' That truth didn't seem so 
self-evident to him a year or so ago. Robert Gillespie, the president 
of the Monticello Association, has been quoted as saying that Jefferson 
was not the kind of man who would have children out of wedlock. He 
said he believed Jefferson was somehow different from the slave-owning 
tobacco farmer down the road who had his way with female slaves any 
time he wanted, and different even from Jefferson's own father-in-law, 
John Wayles, a plantation owner who had two daughters of note: Jefferson's 
wife, Martha, and, with his slave, Sally Hemings. That it has taken 
DNA to establish, finally, that Jefferson was in fact no different 
from these men reveals the painfully short distance this nation has 
come from the days of slavery and how far it has to go. What Gillespie 
should be ashamed of is not Jefferson's sexual history but slavery 
itself. Historians like Ellis have wanted Jefferson to be a more ``perfect'' 
exemplar of America and of democracy. Without saying so, they wish 
he had done the right thing and freed his slaves the morning he sat 
down to write the Declaration of Independence. They have tried to 
push aside what Annette Gordon-Reed, the author of ``Thomas Jefferson 
and Sally Hemings: An American Controversy,'' has pointed out so eloquently: 
that this nation is a family not just in democratic theory, but in 
blood. They have done so because it makes them nervous that in the 
matter of Thomas Jefferson, blacks and whites share not just a common 
history, but indeed a common father. I have been afraid that nervousness 
about shared blood between blacks and whites will make it difficult 
to open up the Monticello Association, and comments this week by Gillespie 
have borne out my fears. At the last meeting of the association, in 
May, he announced that ``if DNA is authoritatively established, there 
will be no option but to allow membership.'' But he seems to have 
changed his mind since the new DNA evidence came in. He now opposes 
allowing any descendants of Jefferson and Hemings into the graveyard 
because the all-white membership of the Monticello Association owns 
the graveyard and, alas, we're running out of space. We don't have 
enough money to maintain a larger graveyard. (Cremations are already 
being encouraged.) The size of the graveyard has been increased one 
time already, and it can surely be increased again. We don't need 
any more DNA analysis. We don't need to split hairs over who is, and 
who isn't, descended from Thomas Jefferson and Sally Hemings. And 
we don't need to worry whether further easements will be granted to 
enlarge the graveyard. It's hard to imagine that the Thomas Jefferson 
Memorial Foundation, which owns the grounds of Monticello, would actually 
deny an easement to make room for the descendants of Jefferson and 
Hemings. Hard to imagine, too, the Monticello Association, grown larger 
by its new Jefferson/Hemings members, couldn't raise the money to 
maintain a larger graveyard. Those aren't problems; they're excuses. 
And they ignore and disrespect the humility and patience of my cousin 
Julia, and of all my other Hemings cousins who want only to be treated 
as descendants of Jefferson, the same way I am. ``I have four children 
and two grandchildren,'' Julia said wistfully. ``It would be nice 
if they did decide to let us come in. Even a little stone would be 
nice.'' We've gone on for far too long believing the fiction that 
one of the great Founding Fathers was something akin to a god. He 
wasn't. He was a man. It is now clear that there is a strong likelihood 
that after the death of his wife, he fell in love with Sally Hemings 
and fathered at least one of her children. The fact that the only 
slaves he freed upon his death had the last name Hemings serves as 
a further reminder of his attachment to Sally Hemings, her brothers 
and her children. It's time to put aside the hairsplitting and get 
on with reconciling ourselves to the fact that this nation was founded 
on the backs of so many slaves who made it possible. I have always 
been proud that I'm a sixth-generation grandson of Thomas Jefferson, 
but pride in one's heritage has come cheaply over all these years. 
Now it's time to pay up. Even if Thomas Jefferson didn't do the right 
thing two centuries ago, we can do the right thing now. As members 
of the Monticello Association we can start by opening our hearts and 
our arms to Julia, and to all our other Hemings cousins. Hopefully, 
they'll accept an invitation that was way, way too long in coming. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>