<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981104.0125 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
The race for attorney general of New York state hung on a razor-thin 
margin early Wednesday morning, with the Democratic challenger, Eliot 
Spitzer, holding a lead of 33,000 votes out of 3.6 million cast over 
the Republican incumbent, Dennis Vacco. With 95 percent of the state's 
precincts reporting at 1 a.m., the vote was: Spitzer: 1,882,236 (48%) 
Vacco: 1,849,401 (47%) State election officials, however, said that 
184,225 absentee ballots had been mailed in by voters, only about 
22 percent of which were from the heavily Democratic area around New 
York City. It could be a week before those ballots are counted. Still, 
the strong showing by Spitzer, a Democrat, stunned the state's political 
establishment, and was at least partially attributable to the unexpectedly 
strong vote for Rep. Charles Schumer in the U.S. Senate race. ``Eliot 
will gleefully ride on those coattails,'' said Steven Goldstein, Spitzer's 
spokesman. He later added: ``I'm nervous as hell and my feet are jelly.'' 
Beyond the coattails, campaign officials said one of the biggest factors 
in Spitzer's surge was an incident in the last week of the campaign 
in which Vacco reportedly referred to ``banditos'' outside ``bodegas'' 
in a discussion of criminals affected by the death penalty. Vacco 
denied using the word ``bandito,'' but the report outraged Hispanic 
leaders around New York City. It occurred just as voters were beginning 
to pay attention to a race that had never been at the top of the news, 
and did not create a favorable impression of an incumbent that few 
voters had come to know. Spitzer capitalized on the comment, and also 
stressed Vacco's opposition to abortion, accusing him of fostering 
an environment that led to the recent killing of a Buffalo abortion 
doctor. ``At the end of the race, Vacco certainly did a lot to revive 
our campaign,'' said George Arzt, a political consultant who was an 
adviser to Spitzer. ``His record on abortion was certainly a factor, 
and the bandito gaffe was another major factor. We thought it could 
go either way, based on our last poll, but it turned out to be a surprise 
even to the staff.'' Spitzer's internal polls never showed him winning 
the race, staffers said. Throughout much of the evening, the momentum 
appeared to be with Spitzer, who took an early lead. But Vacco drew 
closer as midnight approached, occasionally pulling ahead and then 
dropping back, and the race remained tight long after other major 
candidates had finished their victory and concession speeches and 
headed home. A crucial factor in the tight race was the presence on 
the ballot of state Sen. Catherine Abate, who lost the Democratic 
primary to Spitzer but appeared as an Independent Party candidate. 
She got 2 percent of the vote, which would probably have gone to Spitzer. 
Spitzer, 39, a wealthy Manhattan lawyer and former prosecutor who 
won the Democratic primary this year after coming in last four years 
ago, vigorously assailed Vacco for the same reasons some newspapers' 
editorial pages failed to endorse the incumbent: Vacco's decision 
to fire more than 100 experienced lawyers on his staff, who had been 
hired by his Democratic predecessors, and replace them with younger, 
inexperienced lawyers with ties to the Republican and Conservative 
Parties. Because of the firings, many of his office's cases were thrown 
into disarray, and several judges complained publicly about the competence 
of his staff. Spitzer's frequent attempts to remind voters of Vacco's 
opposition to abortion were somewhat defused when a lawyer for several 
abortion clinics said Vacco's office had actually been helpful in 
securing court decisions that set up protective barriers around the 
clinics. But Spitzer raised the issue at every debate and at most 
campaign appearances. As he did four years ago, Vacco, 46, sought 
to make the election a referendum on crime-fighting, playing on the 
common misimpression among voters that New York's attorney general, 
like his federal counterpart, has a major role in criminal law enforcement. 
In fact, the state office mostly defends New York state in civil lawsuits 
and enforces laws not given to local district attorneys. He frequently 
said at campaign events that his top priority was to protect citizens 
from crime, and often pointed to the falling crime rates around the 
state as evidence of his success over the last four years. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>