<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981104.0107 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
REP. CHARLES SCHUMER: Following are excerpts from Charles Schumer's 
victory speech Tuesday night, as transcribed by The New York Times: 
Ladies and gentlemen, I have an announcement to make. Senator D'Amato 
graciously called me a few minutes ago to congratulate me on being 
the next senator from New York. Now I want to thank you. I want to 
thank you, New York. You have honored me with your trust. And I promise 
all New Yorkers that as hard as I fought to win this election, I'll 
fight even harder for everyone in this state and for the country that 
we all love. During this campaign, I've traveled throughout this state 
again and again. I have learned the hopes and the concerns of families 
from one end of this diverse and beautiful state to the other. From 
Buffalo to Brooklyn, from Syracuse to Setauket, from Mineola to Manhattan, 
the desires and dreams and needs of the people of this state are the 
same. And I want to be a senator who will work to bring unity to our 
state and bring our state together. Now, as we enter the 21st century 
and face ever-increasing global competition, competition that can 
make or break America, we cannot afford division, whether it's between 
race, sexual orientation, geographic region or ideology. And I'd like 
to say a word to the young people of America, many of whom are probably 
not watching tonight. But I hope to get this message through over 
the next six years in the senate. I know, I say to you young people 
of New York and America, that there's a lot of cynicism about politics 
and about government. No one needs to remind me or my family that 
campaigns can be hard on those running and on those watching at home. 
Campaigns more often than not must focus on the things that divide 
us. But government and public service must focus more on the causes 
that unite us. I want to tell the young people of New York and America 
that they should not confuse the rough and tumble of a campaign with 
the rewards and the importance of public service. I entered public 
service at the age of 23 because I believed then that government should 
be a calling to make people's lives better and the world a better 
place. Today, at the age of 47, I am about to enter the Senate with 
the same belief, strong as ever. SEN. ALFONSE D'AMATO Following are 
excerpts from the concession speech Sen. Alfonse D'Amato delivered 
Tuesday night at his campaign headquarters at the Hilton Towers in 
New York City, as transcribed by The New York Times. I want to tell 
you, to all of my New Yorkers. I am deeply grateful to each and every 
New Yorker who has given me the opportunity to do that which I've 
loved the most: to work and to fight and to attempt to make a difference 
for the people of our great state. And we've come a long way. And 
we've had a lot of triumphs. And I have to tell you that tonight in 
your vote there was a reaffirmation of that by the election of our 
great governor, George Pataki. Because he's going to continue to work 
to make this state a better place for all of our citizens _ Republicans, 
Democrats, liberals, conservatives, people of every stripe. And I 
have to tell you that's what it's about. I've been honored, honored. 
Never, never in my wildest dreams would I ever have thought when I 
graduated Syracuse Law School and came back home to the little village 
of Island Park, my hometown, and the people who've supported me and 
who I love, never, when my Mama went out campaigning me for the first 
time did I think that I would ever have the privilege of serving the 
people for 18 years. ... I did call Congressman Schumer to _ to congratulate 
him for a hard-fought, wonderful victory _ no, no, he is our senator 
and we want him to be as effective as he can for all the people of 
this great state. Now remember that. That's the key. Doing the business 
of the people. And our governor is going to need the help of all of 
the members from our New York delegation. And so is our mayor, because 
that's what it's about. We had the battle. The battle is over. I am 
proud of having carried the torch. And now that leadership will go 
into the hands of someone else. And we want this state to have the 
kind of leadership that will continue it to be the great state that 
it is and can be. And I tell you, from the bottom of my heart, I thank 
you, I love you. The people of New York, thank you so very, very, 
very much. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>