<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981104.0523 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
The strength of car and truck sales in October continued to surprise 
Wall Street analysts and auto-industry executives as more figures 
were released Wednesday. October turned out to be one of the strongest 
sales months in history and puts the industry on track for its best 
year in a decade. ``I was looking for strong numbers, and these are 
stronger than I expected,'' said David Healy, an auto analyst for 
Burnham Securities in New York. Healy noted in an interview that the 
stronger sales came about even as incentives began tapering off from 
the high levels of last spring and summer. With almost every vehicle 
manufacturer tallying higher sales this October compared with the 
month a year earlier, total vehicle sales in the United States for 
the month totaled 1,368,567 cars and light trucks, a 9.8 percent increase 
compared with sales in October 1997. Car sales rose 7.1 percent, to 
712,407 units; truck sales increased 12.9 percent, to 656,160 vehicles. 
That put the seasonally adjusted annual selling rate for light vehicles 
at 16.6 million cars and light trucks for October, just shy of June 
of this year, when the rate was the highest since August 1987, according 
to Ward's Automotive Reports. General Motors Corp. surprised analysts 
in making a quicker comeback than expected from last summer's 54-day 
strike. Instead of increasing sales by 2 percent, as analysts had 
predicted, GM reported Wednesday that its sales increased 6 percent 
in October compared with those in the month a year earlier, to 408,655 
cars and light trucks. GM light truck sales totaled 180,212 vehicles, 
up 6.4 percent, even without the full production of the 1999 models 
of its large pickup trucks, the Chevrolet Silverado and GMC Sierra, 
which are in their introduction phase after being redesigned. GM's 
full-size sport utility vehicles, including the Chevrolet Tahoe and 
GMC Yukon, and front-wheel-drive minivans, sold as the Chevrolet Venture, 
Oldsmobile Silhouette and Pontiac Montana, had their best October 
sales in history. Small trucks also had large sales increases. GM 
car sales rose 6.3 percent, to 228,443 on the strength of its midsized 
line and large cars from Buick and Pontiac. ``It looks like GM's recovery 
from the strike is moving better than they hoped,'' Healy said. For 
the year, GM sales are off about 4 percent. Truck sales are 5 percent 
higher; car sales are 10 percent lower. Because other automakers, 
particularly Chrysler Corp., which reported earlier in the week that 
its October sales increased 20 percent, and foreign brands are turning 
in stronger-than-expected sales numbers, GM came in just shy of its 
goal for 30 percent market share in October. In addition, GM recognizes 
that it is losing sales because its inventory of vehicles in dealer 
showrooms remains off about 20 percent from levels in the month a 
year earlier, said Donald DeVeaux, GM's director of North American 
market analysis. The inventory shortages are most noticeable at GM's 
largest divisions, Chevrolet and Pontiac, and in their highest-selling 
models, like the Chevrolet Cavalier and Pontiac Grand Am. In the meantime, 
GM plants are running at full capacity and the automaker plans to 
build 1.5 million cars and trucks in the fourth quarter, more than 
any fourth quarter in a decade. At Ford Motor Co., sales of Ford, 
Mercury, Lincoln and Jaguar vehicles rose 2.1 percent, to 333,522 
cars and trucks, on target with analysts' projections but higher than 
Ford expected at the start of the month. Light truck sales increased 
10.1 percent, to 202,741 vehicles on the strength of the Ford F-Series 
pickup, Explorer, Expedition and Lincoln Navigator sport utilities. 
Car sales declined 8.2 percent, to 130,781 vehicles, because of lower 
fleet sales. Like GM, Ford, based on October's strong sales performance, 
will build 1.1 million cars and trucks _ 25,000 more than originally 
planned _ in the fourth quarter. ``The industry blew past what we 
thought it would be,'' said Michael DiGiovanni, GM's chief forecaster, 
in an interview. ``We dodged the bullet of the Asian financial crisis. 
Now the rest of the economic fundamentals look strong.'' DiGiovanni 
noted that lower interest rates and new products, combined with favorable 
demographics _ like aging baby boomers buying luxury vehicles and 
Generation X-ers forming households and buying vehicles to meet their 
needs _ bode well for the industry's near future. ``Internally, we're 
looking at 1999 and wondering if it will be a better year than we 
thought,'' he said. Healy agreed, noting that recent interest-rate 
cuts and future ones would soon show up in car-loan rates, ``a plus 
factor for next year's vehicle sales.'' ``These sales might subside 
a bit but, barring 20-percent interest rates or $2-a-gallon gasoline, 
we're not looking for a collapse in sales or a recession,'' he said. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>