<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981104.0495 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
In defiance of federal officials, and often state legislators, voters 
approved initiatives on Tuesday to legalize the medical use of marijuana 
in Alaska, Arizona, Nevada, Oregon and Washington state. And in Colorado 
and the District of Columbia, where conservatives managed to nullify 
medical marijuana initiatives at the last moment, surveys of voters 
leaving the polls on Tuesday indicated strong support for the measures. 
Drug policy analysts Wednesday said the votes, in which every marijuana 
initiative on a state ballot was approved, demonstrated the sea change 
in attitudes that started with the approval of ballot measures in 
Arizona and California in 1996. ``I don't think any of these propositions 
would have passed five years ago,'' said Mark Kleiman, a professor 
of policy studies at the University of California, Los Angeles. ``It 
is no longer possible to buffalo the American people by screaming 
drugs and having them run away.'' But the drives for the initiatives 
were bolstered by $5 million in advertising over the last year, estimated 
Ethan Nadelmann, director of the Lindesmith Center, a drug policy 
institute in New York. The campaign was financed by George Soros, 
the billionaire investor who financed the Lindesmith Center; Peter 
Lewis, a Cleveland insurance executive, and John Sperling, a Phoenix 
entrepreneur. The votes would give confidence to politicians who are 
afraid to publicly support allowing doctors to recommend marijuana 
to patients suffering from illnesses like glaucoma, cancer and multiple 
sclerosis, Nadelmann predicted. In Oregon and Arizona, the votes were 
direct slaps at state legislatures that had voted curbs on marijuana. 
In Oregon, the Legislature last year restored criminal penalties for 
marijuana possession. On Tuesday, Oregonians voted, 2-1, to make possession 
merely a violation carrying a fine, as it had been since 1973. They 
also voted, by a smaller margin, to approve the medical use of marijuana. 
In Arizona, the Legislature had approved bills last year that essentially 
gutted the marijuana referendum votes of 1996. On Tuesday, Arizona 
voters easily approved two initiatives that restored the 1996 language. 
``In two states, Arizona and Oregon, people overthrew the politicians 
on drugs,'' Sam Vagenas, leader of Arizona's medical-marijuana movement, 
said Wednesday. ``This is the biggest grass-roots movement since term 
limits.'' Opposition to the medical-marijuana movement has come from 
big city police chiefs, Congress, and the White House's top drug policy 
official, Gen. Barry McCaffrey. In Senate testimony last summer, the 
general, who directs the Office of National Drug Control Policy, warned, 
in a veiled reference to Soros: ``There is a carefully camouflaged, 
exorbitantly funded, well-heeled elitist group whose ultimate goal 
is to legalize drug use in the United States.'' Wednesday, the general's 
office emphasized that the state measures ``in no way alter the status 
of marijuana under federal law.'' ``We are concerned about the mixed 
message that children pick up on this,'' Jim McDonough, director of 
strategy for the White House drug control office, said Wednesday of 
the advertising campaigns to allow medical uses of marijuana. Noting 
that the number of marijuana users in the nation had dropped in half 
since 1980, to about 10 million today, he said that surveys indicated 
a recent increase among students. In the District of Columbia, Rep. 
Bob Barr, R-Ga., a conservative, inserted two weeks ago into the district's 
federal appropriation bill an amendment to bar the district from counting 
votes in Tuesday's medical-marijuana initiative. The American Civil 
Liberties Union is suing to overturn the ban. In Colorado, a medical-marijuana 
initiative was also on the ballot, but Vikki Buckley, the secretary 
of state and a Republican, said she would not count the votes because 
the initiative backers did not supply enough valid signatures to place 
the issue on the ballot. Backers are contesting her ruling in court. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>