<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981104.0079 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Sen. Russell Feingold, who defied conventional political wisdom and 
the wishes of his own Democratic Party by sharply limiting the campaign 
money he would accept, was re-elected Tuesday in one of the country's 
most closely watched races. Wisconsin voters handed the senator a 
second term, rejecting the Republican candidate, Mark Neumann, a two-term 
congressman from Wisconsin's First District. Nationally, the Wisconsin 
senate race had come to be seen as a referendum on campaign finance 
reform, even if individual Wisconsin voters did not always see it 
that way. Still, regardless of the motivation, turnout was high in 
a state where voters can register to vote on Election Day. In some 
counties precincts ran out of ballots. Feingold is the co-author, 
along with Republican Sen. John McCain, of a campaign finance reform 
bill that would prevent local or national political organizations 
from spending money on behalf of individual candidates, the ``soft 
money'' that has flooded into campaigns in recent years. Saying he 
was determined to stick to his principles, even it meant sacrificing 
his career, Feingold refused to allow the national Democratic Party 
to spend money to run ``issue ads'' on his behalf, commercials that 
praise or criticize candidates but do not explicitly call for their 
election or defeat. Neumann took no such pledge and millions of dollars 
of soft money poured into his campaign, fueling a series of television 
ads that began in August, a full month before Feingold countered with 
his own commercials. Neumann's commercials and those paid for by groups 
supporting him drilled at Feingold, who was initially about 10 to 
15 points ahead in the polls. One humorous commercial featured a cow 
and accused Feingold of supporting a wasteful study on bovine flatulence. 
Neumann's advertising blitz was so effective, analysts believe, that 
for weeks, polls have shown the two candidates have been in a virtual 
dead heat. Late last month, the Democratic Senatorial Campaign Committee 
tried to circumvent Feingold's dictum by running its own campaign 
commercials on his behalf. He objected vociferously and persuaded 
the Senate minority leader, Tom Daschle, to put a stop to the commercials. 
Neumann, 44, a conservative former math teacher and real-estate developer 
from Janesville who is championed by groups like the Christian Coalition, 
has claimed that Feingold also benefited from issue ads run by outside 
groups. Neumann, who campaigned with the unusual approach of showing 
charts and bar graphs on an overhead slide projector, sought to make 
the election about other issues, trying to appeal to several different 
constituencies. He reached out to conservative Republicans with hard-hitting 
ads highlighting his support for an amendment to ban flag-burning 
and his opposition for the late-term abortion procedure that opponents 
call ``partial birth abortion.'' And he made a play for Democratic 
votes with talk about shoring up the Social Security system and with 
a commercial suggesting that Feingold had voted against Wisconsin's 
senior senator, the popular Democrat, Herb Kohn. Feingold, a 45-year-old 
lawyer and former Rhodes scholar from Middleton, whose father was 
an organizer for Wisconsin's reform-minded Progressive Party, is often 
described as a political maverick. He tends to be liberal on social 
issues and moderate on fiscal issues, occasionally staking out an 
iconoclastic position completely out of sync with his party. He believes 
banning flag burning would infringe on the right to free speech and 
supports the right to late-term abortions in some circumstances. This 
is not the first time Feingold has run an unconventional campaign. 
In 1992, running against an incumbent who outspent him, Feingold ran 
humorous advertisements in which he was endorsed by Elvis Presley, 
traced the map of Wisconsin on the back of his hand and opened his 
closet to find no skeletons. He also painted a set of promises on 
his garage door, pledging to be present for every Senate vote and 
to visit every Wisconsin county once a year. By all accounts, he kept 
those promises. While the candidates sparred over the issue of ``soft 
money,'' they both agreed to limit direct or ``hard money'' spending, 
making their race the only statewide campaign in the country to adopt 
such limits. Both agreed to limit donations from political action 
groups to10 percent of the total campaign money; to raise no more 
than 25 percent of their money from out of state, and to put a $2,000 
cap on the personal money a candidate could spend on the campaign. 
They also agreed to limit overall spending to $1 for each registered 
voter, about 3.8 million people. Champions of campaign finance reform 
feared that if Feingold lost, the movement would not only lose one 
of its leaders, but future candidates would be reluctant to follow 
his example. But despite the national attention paid to the campaign 
finance issue, for many Wisconsin voters, that subject seemed to have 
little impact on how they voted. ``Gosh, I really didn't think about 
it that much,'' said Joan Reinke, 53, who works at a convenience store 
in Middleton and voted for Feingold because she likes ``his persona, 
his attitude, his walk, his way.'' Ms. Reinke said that ``everyone 
said there was something wrong with'' taking soft money, ``but the 
bottom line is who have - if you like them, then you don't care much 
about that.'' Chris Hughes, a 34-year-old lawyer in Middleton, also 
voted for Feingold, and said the campaign finance issue only affected 
his decision ``marginally _ I guess I hadn't spent a lot of time thinking 
about it.'' But Hughes' vote may have been indirectly affected by 
the candidates' differing approaches to campaign finance. He said 
that one reason he voted for Feingold was his disgust with Neumann's 
blizzard of advertising, which he said ``misrepresented Feingold.'' 
In the same way, Betty Petersen, a 57-year-old nurse from Lodi, said 
she paid no attention to the issue of ``outside money as long as they 
were supporting the right issues.'' But she said she decided to vote 
for Neumann at the last minute today because she recalled the message 
of his commercials, which she said were ``very visible.'' 
</TEXT>
</DOC>