<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981104.0525 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Selvin Joynarid Perez was standing under the awning of his small house 
on a bluff overlooking the Choluteca River early Saturday morning, 
keeping an uneasy watch on the torrential rain and the rising waters 
below. Suddenly the earth trembled, he said. He turned to run into 
the house to wake his wife and 3-year-old daughter. He never made 
it. ``When I tried to go into the room where my wife and child were 
sleeping, the earth opened up,'' he said. Within seconds, more than 
45 houses in the Nueva Esperanza neighborhood slid down the bluff 
in an avalanche of earth and wood and tin roofing and human beings, 
toward the roiling black waters below, Perez, 25, said. His wife, 
Maria, and daughter, Kensi, were crushed to death in their beds. On 
Wednesday they were still buried in tons of debris above the river, 
along with at least 11 other people from the neighborhood. Some family 
members and survivors were picking over the jumbled boulders and pieces 
of houses, clawing at the earth in the hope of finding their loved 
one's remains. Perez, a mechanic, was laboring to repair a road leading 
to the disaster site so the government could bring in earthmovers. 
Throughout this Central American capital, victims of the floods and 
landslides spawned over the weekend by Hurricane Mitch were trying 
to reconstruct their lives, though most had little left besides the 
clothes they wore and a thin thread of hope. More than a dozen neighborhoods 
in this city of 800,000 were erased by floodwaters or buried under 
landslides. All over the city, stunned men and women picked through 
the shattered remains of their homes. In some places, like the devastated 
Colonia Soto, hundreds of vultures swirled overhead, apparently attracted 
by the faint but fetid scent of corpses buried in the rubble created 
by an avalanche on Saturday morning. Honduran officials said on Tuesday 
that they had preliminary reports that at least 6,420 people were 
killed by the storm throughout the country and 5,807 were missing. 
Some 600,000 are crowded into thousands of temporary shelters because 
their homes have been destroyed. ``This is the worst,'' said Delmer 
Urbizo, the minister of government and justice, who is overseeing 
the aid operation. ``This has no precedent in the history of the country, 
or even in the history of Central America.'' But many officials here 
say they fear the worst is yet to come. Outbreaks of disease and food 
shortages are likely unless the roads and other installations can 
be repaired. Ninety-three bridges are out along major highways, including 
45 that are completely destroyed. All the major cities in Honduras 
are like islands, cut off from one another. Food and gasoline supplies 
are dwindling, with only a few days worth of both in the capital, 
officials say. The roads leading from the capital to the Pacific and 
Atlantic ports are still impassable. Vast tracts of the country are 
still inaccessible except by helicopter, officials said. Thousands 
of people are cut off by floodwaters in the northern coastal regions, 
especially in La Mosquitia in the northeast. Some are surviving in 
trees and on top of buildings. What is worse, officials say, is that 
many villages and settlements along rivers appear from the air to 
have been literally wiped off the map. The floods have also done untold 
damage to grain, banana, bean and tobacco crops in the San Pedro de 
Sula valley and other important agricultural areas. By some estimates, 
more than 70 percent of the country's crops have been destroyed. There 
was sunshine in the capital on Wednesday. The river had retreated 
into its bed, and in many neighborhoods life appeared to be returning 
to something like its normal rhythm. In Comayaguela, the business 
district, people were shoveling the mud out of storefronts, removing 
debris from damaged factories and digging cars and trucks out of banks 
of earth. But in dozens of communities swept away by floods or buried 
in mudslides, working-class people were struggling to come to terms 
with the disaster. In La Colonia Soto, residents climbed in disbelief 
over the wreckage of their former neighborhood, which was nestled 
between two hills alongside the river. At least 150 houses were destroyed 
by a series of landslides. Most residents had heeded warnings on the 
radio and had taken shelter on higher ground, but dozens had stayed 
behind to guard their properties. Most perished, residents said. The 
scale of destruction in Soto provokes awe. An entire soccer field 
slid down a hill more than 200 yards from its original site and crumpled 
like a giant sheet of paper, plowing under the houses below. Many 
houses ended up 150 yards downhill from where they had been built. 
Others were buried entirely, some with people inside. Marco Albarado, 
a 52-year-old fishmonger, was stacking up boards salvaged from his 
wrecked home. He said his family managed to leave for higher ground 
on Friday afternoon, just hours before an avalanche carried his house 
down the hill and broke it in pieces. Looters had stolen what was 
left of his belongings, he said. He has no way to make a living anymore, 
because the market with his stall was also destroyed. ``We have nothing,'' 
he said, his eyes filling with tears. A couple of miles upstream, 
some residents of Nueva Esperanza were still trying to find the bodies 
of the dead, but their hopes were fading. Several acknowledged that 
the houses that had rumbled down the bluff had been illegally built 
in a zone where construction is prohibited. ``The reality of the thing 
is that it is not the government's fault,'' said Florentino Sanchez, 
who had spent the day digging with his bare hands for the bodies of 
four children of his cousin. The mother's body was found on Tuesday. 
``We never believed the river would do this,'' he said. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>