<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981104.0082 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Giving a major boost to critics of affirmative action, Washington 
state voters Tuesday night appear to have soundly approved an initiative 
that would ban most state-supported forms of the policy. They did 
so two years after California voters made theirs the first state in 
the nation to do so, and the vote is almost certain to spur efforts 
in other states. With 38 percent of precincts reporting, the measure 
known as Initiative 200 was running ahead, 60 percent to 40 percent. 
Under the measure's wording, the state ``shall not discriminate against, 
or grant preferential treatment to, any individual or group on the 
basis of race, sex, color, ethnicity, or national origin'' in education, 
employment or contracting. The language was similar to that used in 
the Civil Rights Act of 1964, but critics of the measure, including 
the state's popular governor, Gary Locke, a Democrat, warned that 
the measure had ``hidden consequences'' and would roll back gains 
made in programs that expand opportunities for women and minorities. 
In votes on other major initiatives, Washington voters gave broad 
support to a measure that would legalize the use of marijuana for 
medical purposes and voted down a proposal to criminalize the late-term 
abortion procedure that critics call ``partial-birth abortion.'' In 
Colorado, a similar abortion measure was evenly split with 40 percent 
of precincts reporting. In Oregon, early returns suggested that that 
state was poised to become the first in the nation to do away entirely 
with polling booths: if trends continue and the measure passes, the 
state will conduct all future elections entirely by mail. Michigan 
voters Tuesday soundly rejected a proposal to legalize physician-assisted 
suicide. At 11:50 p.m., with 56 percent of precincts reporting, the 
measure was losing 70 percent to 30 percent. In California, exit polls 
and early returns indicated that voters were broadly supporting a 
measure to expand casino gambling on Indian tribal lands. The battle 
between the Indian tribes and Nevada casinos led to campaign spending 
of almost $100 million, by far the most money ever spent on an initiative 
in the nation's history. The previous record was $57.5 million for 
a 1996 securities fraud measure in California. In Massachusetts, voters 
backed a campaign-finance reform plan that would provide for public 
financing of most state election campaigns. These were among the more 
closely fought initiatives and proposed constitutional amendments 
on state ballots around the nation. South Carolinians were asked to 
decide whether to remove a 103-year-old passage in their constitution 
that forbids marriage between a white person and a black person, a 
provision that the U.S. Supreme Court has already ruled unenforceable. 
With 80 percent of precincts reporting Tuesday night, 62 percent of 
voters were in favor of removing the language, while 38 percent voted 
not to remove it. In Michigan, where supporters of the assisted-suicide 
initiative hoped to follow the success of a similar movement in Oregon, 
voters were rejecting the idea by a better than 2-to-1 margin. Support 
for the measure foundered in recent weeks when the nation's best-known 
advocate of physician-assisted suicide, Dr. Jack Kevorkian, announced 
that he opposed the initiative: he said it imposed too many restrictions 
and too much bureaucracy on the process. The measure would have allowed 
terminally ill patients to petition the state for the right to take 
lethal drugs. In the first nine months of the Oregon program, state 
officials announced earlier this year, 10 people in that state were 
given the right to take such drugs: eight died after taking the medication 
and two others died before doing so. In Washington state, two years 
after voters in California and Arizona passed measures providing for 
the medical use of marijuana, residents passed a similar measure Tuesday, 
according to exit polls. Voters in Nevada, Oregon and Alaska were 
also considering such measures Tuesday. Lawsuits and objections by 
the Clinton administration have blocked the Arizona and California 
measures from taking effect. Also in Washington, exit polls indicated 
that voters had rejected a proposal to criminalize the late-term abortion 
procedure that critics call ``partial-birth abortion.'' Abortion-rights 
supporters condemned the measure, saying its terminology was overly 
vague and might open the way for banning abortion in general. The 
question before the voters was: ``Shall the termination of a fetus' 
life during the process of birth be a felony crime except when necessary 
to prevent the pregnant woman's death?'' In Massachusetts, with 11 
percent of precincts reporting, the measure to provide for public 
financing of campaigns was ahead, 66 percent to 34 percent. Massachusetts 
would join Maine and Vermont, which have similar policies already 
in place, while Arizona voters were also considering such a measure. 
In Washington state, opponents of affirmative action were claiming 
victory in the fight over Initiative 200, the measure to ban many 
affirmative action programs. ``It means that America is taking a great 
step forward to looking beyond race and minimizing its importance, 
rather than dwelling on it and magnifying its importance,'' said John 
Carlson, chairman of the group sponsoring the initiative. ``It also, 
I think, will hasten the transition of affirmative action from a program 
based on race and ethnicity and occasionally gender to a program that 
is based on people's circumstances.'' Early results also suggested 
that voters were inclined to approve many of the roughly $27 billion 
municipal bond issues on ballots around the country. The proposals 
were mostly for education, environmental and infrastructure projects. 
In North Carolina, for instance, voters appeared to have backed a 
$1 billion plan to repair decrepit water and sewer lines and to extend 
natural gas lines in rural areas. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>