<DOC>
<DOCNO> PRI19981104.2000.2026 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
U.S. officials are calling Hurricane Mitch the worst storm to hit 
Central America this century. Nearly a week ago, Mitch rammed through 
the region killing thousands and threatening the lives of many more 
by shattering bridges, washing out roads, and destroying almost every 
means of communication. The country where Mitch did the most damage 
is Honduras, where 7,000 people lost their lives. The Episcopal bishop 
of Honduras, Layo Fraday, has been using the Internet to tell the 
world about the disaster. He is in the Honduran capital, Tegucigalpa. 
Bishop Fraday, your E-mails are describing Honduras right now as a 
country destroyed by Mitch and still in large part submerged in water. 
Is is still that bad? Well, in certain parts it is because the water 
is trapped. But the realities in this century we have never seen recorded 
in our history, in the history of this country such a devastating 
hurricane. For 6-1/2 days, the skies opened and it rained constantly, 
did not stop raining. A hurricane that was trapped in the mountains 
of Honduras. It arrived to our coast with 180 miles per hour. And 
then it just moved in and it was trapped and then stopped moving. 
It moved very slowly, two miles per hour, and our country is quite 
large. It's the size of the state of Tennessee. And it went through 
the mountains, pounded. It tried to move around. And when it got to 
the border to El Salvador, it decided not to go there and then turned 
back into the country. And it really - It was something out of the 
Bible. We thought that, you know, we missed the message somewhere 
and we should have built an ark. And it actually would have come very 
handy. Where we were in the cathedrals, we were close to death as 
the waters were beginning to destroy the retaining wall. We had several 
hundred people that had to seek refuge in our cathedral. We were all 
crowded, waiting for something to happen. And, of course, there were 
people that were our sisters and brothers, people that lived with 
us, they are gone, they are dead. We know they are dead. One person 
from our church was found, you know, tied to a tree. He thought that 
by climbing the tree, you know, and tying himself, the waters were 
not going to rush him. Well, the waters went higher than this huge 
tree. And it's horrible. It's like written out of Dante. Yeah, I understand 
that part of the problem now is simply trying to recover the bodies. 
That is. And it's really - Seven thousand dead is a conservative figure. 
And I understand the government probably doesn't want to scare the 
people but there are many more dead, I believe. Honduras suffered 
like no other place suffered. And for 6-1/2 days, we were I pure hell. 
We went to hell and back. I wonder, as an Episcopal bishop, when you 
have people who have perhaps in some cases lost their families or, 
in many cases, lost their homes who come to seek refuge within the 
confines of your own church as you mentioned, what do you tell them 
personally in terms of how they can get through this? Well, basically, 
it's the reality of facing death, we need for people to accept that. 
Also, allowing people to be mad. I mean, I am not happy with God. 
I am very, very, very mad with God. Yeah. I am very mad with God. 
But still I say that God reigns, and I have to pray with the people. 
When they come and they tell you the stories, they're the most heartbreaking 
stories, but I tell you, we would still, you know, we have to move 
on and that's what I tell the people. You know, they have to reconstruct 
their lives. They have to reconstruct their families and just move 
on. You know, we need to bury the dead and just move on, be strong 
and just hold to what we believe. And if we don't understand it right 
now why this happened to us here for so many days - I mean, I don't 
know if there's a recorded hurricane that could stay in one country 
for 6-1/2 days. I mean, it's incredible what happened to us. Communities 
that have been raised on the map and Honduras needs help right now. 
We will guarantee that the help is used. I mean, the Episcopal Church 
and the Roman Catholics, and the Evangelical groups, we will guarantee 
that the help is used well. But we need help. We don't have it. Our 
people are hungry, and they're desperate. And they need to reconstruct 
their lives. It is a real disaster. I think disasters horrible things 
come with the blessing, the blessing to realize that you're not alone, 
that you have friends, that there are people that care for you. And 
that is what we have learned that God has been with us through this 
horrible thing. Bishop Layo Fraday, the Episcopal bishop of Honduras, 
we appreciate your speaking with us and we wish you the best of luck. 
Thank you so much. We need it. We need all we can get. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>