<DOC>
<DOCNO> PRI19981104.2000.0372 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
This is THE WORLD. I'm Lisa Mullins. This morning's newspapers in 
Baghdad gave their side of the story. "Empty threats and vicious behavior," 
a front page editorial said, "will not force Iraq to reverse its victorious 
decision." That decision to halt cooperation with U.N. arms inspectors 
has provoked international condemnation. The U.N. Special Commission 
is overseeing the destruction of Iraq's arsenal as a pre-condition 
for the lifting of sanctions imposed on Baghdad for it's 1990 invasion 
of Kuwait. THE WORLD's Andrew North updates the latest showdown between 
Iraq and the United Nations. This latest crisis of weapons inspections 
in Iraq is not following an obvious script. For one thing, it's still 
not clear whether Iraq is completely suspending cooperation. In the 
four days since the announcement, U.N. inspectors have been allowed 
to maintain some of their monitoring equipment, but Iraq's U.N. Ambassador, 
Nizar Hamdoon, denies there's any confusion. We've only allowed some 
inspectors to change some of the batteries and to maintain the cameras 
and the sensors, and that's different from giving them access to the 
monitor regime. But does this now mean that you are saying the inspectors 
should leave totally? No, we have not asked them to leave. They are 
welcomed to stay, but again, without access to those sites. Partly 
because of uncertainty over whether Iraq plans to expel the inspectors, 
the U.N. Security Council has yet to pass a resolution condemning 
Baghdad let alone threatening any action. But former State Department 
adviser Harvey Sickerman says sowing a little confusion is classic 
Saddam Hussein. He will do something outrageous to get attention, 
then when he meets resistance, he'll back off a little bit and leave 
his opponents an exit route. But he always demands that a coin be 
put in the turnstile on the way out so that when the crisis is over, 
he is emerged in the stronger position than before. There's no confusion 
over what coin Iraq wants: the end of the eight-year embargo. Iraq's 
U.N. Ambassador Nizar Hamdoon says that's the message his government 
meant to send with last weekend's decision to bar the UNSCOM inspectors. 
That Iraq cannot afford to keep those sanctions forever. About 6,000 
children die every month needlessly because of those sanctions. And 
we have decided that this would have to come to an end. However, Ambassador 
Hamdoon says that if there were some prospect of the United Nations 
lifting sanctions, Baghdad would be more cooperative. If we are to 
live with the sanctions forever, according to the United States, then 
we will be better off by having the sanctions without the inspections. 
We are prepared to keep the inspections but only when the sanctions 
are lifted. I sympathize with Iraq in its frustration of seven, eight 
years of sanctions. And they need some signal, something positive, 
something to hold onto so that there's hope at the end of a very long 
tunnel. Dennis Holiday recently resigned as the U.N. Humanitarian 
coordinator for Iraq, protesting the impact of the sanctions. Nonetheless, 
he says Iraq must do what the Security Council demands. The whole 
disarmament UNSCOM function is so fundamental to the Security Council 
and to the removal of sanctions that I wish that the government of 
Iraq could find a way of continuing to meet the requirements of the 
member states. And former State Department adviser Harvey Sickerman 
says Baghdad's latest action also makes it difficult for his long-suffering 
friends. The Iraqi advocates on the Security Council, notably the 
Russians but also the French, are very annoyed that their wayward 
pupil has once again disobeyed their advice and tutelage to wait and 
tread softly until they arrange some way for the sanctions to be eased 
or to be lifted. The United States may have a different course of 
action in mind. Defense Secretary William Cohen today visited Bahrain, 
Catta, and Kuwait, the only Arab country willing to back air strikes 
during the previous crisis in February. Cohen is thought to be sounding 
out America's Gulf allies for possible military action against Iraq. 
But this time, the Clinton administration may not need permission 
to strike. The Pentagon says it has enough fire power in its warships 
in the Persian Gulf to go it alone if need be. For THE WORLD, this 
is Andrew North. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>