<DOC>
<DOCNO> PRI19981104.2000.0663 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Latino voters are playing an increasing role in American electoral 
politics. They especially made their presence felt yesterday by helping 
to reelect two key politicians in two key states. Republican Texas 
Governor George W. Bush and California Democratic Senator Barbara 
Boxer won their victories with significant support from their Hispanic 
constituencies. Rudolph De la Garza is the vice president of the Tomas 
Rivera Policy Institute in Austin, Texas. The day after the election, 
where was the battle for the Latino vote the most hard fought and 
with what kind of results? I'm not sure it was hard-fought anywhere 
but it was pursued differently in California and in Texas, and its 
impact was greater in California though more publicized in Texas. 
You know, what I mean by that is that given the closeness of the Boxer 
reelection, I think it's fair to say that the Latino vote, by being 
so cohesive behind her at about 75 to 80 percent, provided her the 
margin of victory. And in terms of the election in Texas, was George 
Bush, Jr. - How significant was it there? The significance there is 
not in helping him win. He would have won without it. The significance 
is that he pursued the vote and got a very substantial portion of 
it. And what about the significance of that vote overall? I mean, 
did it signify to you that some Republicans at least are shifting 
their stand on certain issues to more effectively try and attract 
Hispanic voters? Well, I really do think that Governor Bush made a 
very important change late in his campaign to do exactly what you 
said. Early in his campaign, what he said was, "I'm going to deliver 
the same message in English and Spanish and I'm not going to look 
to Latinos other than symbolically." Late in the campaign, he actually 
took the position on language, which as you know is a major symbolic 
and wedge issue for Latinos. And he came out in support of bilingualism, 
which is a long-standing Latino and Democratic position. And he's 
been criticized already for doing that by right-wing Republican leaders. 
So when Governor Bush did that, in my judgment, he really moved his 
wing of the party out front in a way that was very surprising and 
may have contributed to this much higher support than I think he would 
have gotten otherwise. So if we combine George Bush, Jr.'s reelection 
with the election of his brother in Florida, Jeb Bush, I guess it's 
too simple now at this point to continue to say that the traditional 
Democratic constituencies such as Hispanics, blacks, and Jewish voters 
will continue to vote for Democrats. In California, recall that the 
Democrats got about 80 percent of the Latino vote. So the anomaly, 
the change is in Texas, and the question is going to be: Will the 
Republican Party follow the lead of Governor George Bush? Symbolically, 
Jeb Bush is even more open to Latinos, especially given that his wife 
is Mexican and he's got a Mexican-American son in the classic example. 
I mean, his wife is Mexican, he's Anglo. And so if the party follows 
the Bush lead, the duo Bush lead, if you will, then they really do 
have an opening into the Hispanic vote. But California represents 
the other side of the Republican Party, and in California, the vote 
was approximately 80/20 for the Democrats. Well, of course, it's difficult 
to try and categorize Hispanic voters or any other voters for that 
matter as being monolithic, but I wonder in terms of the numbers that 
you've looked at today, the day after the election, what is the most 
pronounced trend that you see emerging among Hispanic voters? Is there 
one? I think overall, they are still Democratically inclined, but 
they are open to being courted I think would be the way I would say; 
that they are open to being courted in a way that has not been evidenced 
in some time. On which particular issues? Well, I think on the issue 
of language and culture, the symbolic issue of language. If you can 
overcome those problems, then Latinos might be willing to listen to 
some of the economic messages. If you don't overcome that problem, 
as evidenced in California, they're going to beat you down badly. 
Rudolpho De la Garza is the vice president of the Tomas Rivera Policy 
Institute speaking to us from Austin, Texas. Thank you very much. 
We appreciate it. Glad to be with you. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>