<DOC>
<DOCNO> PRI19981104.2000.2335 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Long ago in the heyday of royalty, heads of state often tried to insure 
world peace by marrying into each other's families. Today, the common 
people are likelier to mate cross-culturally, but without plenty of 
sophisticated diplomacy, these match ups can turn into a Cold War. 
That's the lesson in this entry from Tony Kahn's journal. This is 
a little painting that a friend of ours gave us when Parastroika began... 
Lynn Desahn, a native New Yorker and interpreter from the Russian 
in the United Nations has spent most of her life bridging the gap 
between Russia and the United States. Her Manhattan apartment is full 
of souvenirs of that adventure, including her dearest prize, her Russian 
husband, Boris. For her new book, "Wedded Strangers," Lynn explored 
the strains and the satisfactions, the breakdowns and breakthroughs 
of more than 100 Russian-American marriages, including her own 20-year 
union with Boris. What's amazing is that even in years when it was 
extremely difficult for Americans and Russians to get married and 
getting exit visas from Russia and entry visas into the United States, 
and despite the image of the enemy on both sides, there were an enormous 
number of these marriages taking place. Nowadays, with a booming post-Parastroika 
trade in matchmaking, the main problem facing Russian-American couples 
isn't getting together; it's staying together. Take this rough start 
between a Russian woman and an American man who were introduced over 
the Internet. The woman, as soon as she moved into the man's apartment, 
sewed all his sheets together to form the kind of little packet into 
which a Russian puts a blanket. He was not terribly amused. In another 
case, a Russian woman, whenever the man went out to the store and 
bought something, would criticize whatever he had bought because her 
idea was a man couldn't possibly know how to buy food in a store, 
and obviously, any salesperson would cheat him, and he was probably 
getting the worst things in the store. Lynn says the differences crop 
up in every aspect of married life. Take sex. One Russian man said 
to me that his wife treated sex not like an intimate love relationship 
but like a woodworking class, and that she was telling every minute 
what to do, when to breathe, how to do it, and when to stop. Russians 
feel that people do have a certain right to their own mystery, to 
a little inner core and that there is no point in analyzing all of 
this to death, that it's the best way to kill a relationship. Take 
money. Most every day, American financial transactions are for Russian 
voodoo economics. Many Russians still find it basically a somewhat 
mystical concept why if I write you a check, by some very weird process, 
that check eventually finds its way home to me. The same is true for 
savings and financial planning of any kind. I know at least one couple 
where when the American wife suggested the Russian husband buy life 
insurance, he was horrified. He said, "What's the matter? You want 
me dead?" Or of making a will in which you decided who would get what. 
There was the same reaction, "Were you planning to murder me?" Then, 
of course, there's that mine field of married life, just spending 
time with a friend of your own. There was a misunderstanding with 
a couple we know in New York where the man said that he was going 
to go out with a friend for a drink at. When he wasn't back by 4:00 
in the morning, the wife was calling up all her friends to see where 
he was. And when he came in at quarter to 6:00, he was perfectly nonchalant: 
"Well, you knew I was with my friend. What could have happened to 
us? What am I? A small boy I have to call mommy every two minutes?" 
A Russian feels that a friend is someone whom you can say anything, 
whom you can call and who will come over at in the morning much sometimes 
to the distress of the American spouse. Or you may have few friends 
but they are real friends. While an American may say, "Oh, I have 
50 friends," but none of them will be up to snuff in terms of the 
Russian definition. In a sense, there's a specter haunting the Russian-American 
marriage far more threatening than any ex-lover and far more ominous 
than any in-law: the ghost of the Russian past. Survival in Russia 
demanded qualities of Russians that many Americans find dogmatic, 
sneaky, even self-defeating. Lynn says this Russian obstreperousness 
shows up in every aspect of the marriage, from the rearing of children 
to the meaning of honesty. In Soviet Russian, what was a Russian to 
do if there was a party meeting coming up and his best friend was 
supposed to be given a reprimand or be censured at that meeting. To 
go and censure your friend is not very nice. To vote against it, you 
were subjecting yourself to a possible loss of job and all kinds of 
penalties. What was the best thing to do? Call in sick. Is that a 
lie? Yes. What is moral? Yes. And this kind of attitude permeated 
the entire country. Bosses lied to the subordinates, subordinates 
lied to the people under them, husbands lied to wives, wives lied 
to husbands, parents like to children. One Russian said to me about 
his American wife, "My wife is incapable of lying and it makes her 
very difficult to live with." Ten years of Parastroika have done nothing 
to change a national character baked deep into Russian bones. And 
the cultural and historic weight of Russia in all its contradictions, 
from the Russia of the czars to the Russia of the commissars, from 
the Russia of stupendous brutality to the Russia of some of the greatest 
writers who ever lived is a burden every Russian carries in his soul. 
Given all that, it's a miracle a Russian knows what it means to say, 
"I am" to his own identity, much less "I do" to a Russian-American 
marriage. And yet, these marriages survive, sometimes even thrive. 
Before I left their Manhattan apartment, I asked Boris and Lynn one 
last question. If I were to ask each of you if there is one quality 
in the other to which you attribute the longevity of your marriage, 
20 years or so, what would it be? Boris? Boris offered an answer Lynn 
agreed with wholeheartedly: a very deep friendship. I would say exactly 
the same thing. In our case as in any really true marriage, the spouse 
is not just a spouse but your best and number one friend for whom 
you have the kind of feelings you don't have for anybody else in the 
world. As many couples would testify, what ties you together isn't 
seeing eye to eye but deep into each other's hearts, strengths, and 
weaknesses. Russians are drawn to our freedoms and yet feel we're 
superficial. We're drawn to Russia's passions yet feel they're dogmatic. 
Clearly, there's a lot to learn and to gain from each other. Or as 
a Russian might put it, "Since we're going to fight anyway, why not 
fight about something really important?" Tony Kahn's observations 
on Russian-American marriages ring true for our resident expert on 
the subject, THE WORLD's Boris Maksimov. Being married to a Russian 
can be a bit of an ordeal. Just ask my ex-wife. You may have to be 
willing to put up with the occasional predilection for wicked gypsy 
music. Now and then, you'll find yourself staring at a plate full 
of pickled mushrooms from a nearby patch of forest. Obscure relatives 
will suddenly drop by in the middle of the night and will stay for 
a month using your liquor collection liberally and refusing to such 
food and to shower. All that is easy to survive if you treat the whole 
thing as an anthropological field trip. But then comes talking. You 
see, Americans and Russians seem to have pretty different ideas on 
what conversation is all about. For example, what does a polite suburb 
dwelling North American person say when confronted by an utterly stupid 
statement? Say something like, "Mm-hmm, I see what you mean," and 
then proceed to deliver his own point of view, making sure it does 
not appear too obviously the exact opposite of what he just heard. 
While the Russians have no time for this kind of verbal dancing, some 
of their favorite Russian expressions are, "You are wrong. You don't 
understand." Russians seem to believe that talking is a verbal version 
of a menage-a-tois . There is you, there is me, and there's a third 
thing, the subject at hand. Now since the subject at hand is clearly 
separate from you, I feel very free to attack it directly, head on, 
with no reservations or second thoughts, take no prisoners. Destroy 
somebody's argument and keep them pounding until there is nothing 
left. Nothing personal in that. It's the argument, the thought one 
is abusing, not the speaker. The speaker gets nothing but respect. 
After all, you wouldn't talk with someone in the first place if you 
didn't respect them, right? So if you dream of spending a lifetime 
with a Russian partner, do not get upset at seemingly personal outbursts. 
Get used to it. Or even better, try to get the last word in. Boris 
Maksimov usually gets in the last word when he comments for THE world. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>