<DOC>
<DOCNO> PRI19981104.2000.1256 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
For THE WORLD, I'm Lisa Mullins. Today, three years to the day after 
Yegal Amir murdered Prime Minister Yitzhak Rabin, the Israeli's attorney 
general announced another indictment in the assassination. The suspect, 
Aveshine Raviv was an informer for Israel's security services. He 
is suspected of having been aware of Amir's intention to kill Rabin 
and not telling his handlers about it. In the three years since her 
husband's death, Leah Rabin, has been carrying on his advocacy of 
the Oslo peace accord and has not been afraid to mix it up with Israel's 
current prime minister. Today on her way to Yitzhak Rabin's grave 
site, Mrs. Rabin told us how she was spending the day. In the morning, 
I went to a school in a suburban town of Tel Aviv, and I must say 
the three years after the murder, this is a high school, the 12 grade. 
And I think I have yet to attend a more moving, meaningful or real 
program of a memorial service than I saw today. It was absolutely 
very, very, very moving and very wonderful. Children have read what 
themselves have written, and it was all absolute a very, very special 
experience. Mm-hmm. That was in the morning. I'm now on the way to 
the cemetery on Mount. And during these days actually there are endless, 
endless ceremonies everywhere. And there is no end to people going 
to the cemetery. The tomb is by now covered with flowers and candles 
and so is the memorial place in Tel Aviv. And at five minutes to, 
every year there is a siren going off at the memorial place in Tel 
Aviv where he actually was murdered. So I'll be speaking to the people 
in the Knesset, the people who came from all over the world, and I 
shall be speaking to the people who are assembled at the memorial 
before the siren. And what do you intend to tell them? Well, I'm going 
to tell them about how he felt about the Oslo agreement, that this 
was in the foundation of the Oslo agreement his desire, combined of 
course, with Yasir Arafat's desire to put an end to the conflict and 
create a reconciliation. Now reconciliation is a very important word 
when we are looking at what's going on today, because there is no 
mood of reconciliation today. Today, there is a lot of suspicion. 
How optimistic are you that this process, which was begun by your 
husband at Oslo, can be carried through by this administration, specifically 
by this prime minister, Benjamin Netanyahu? Well, I say it has to. 
I don't think he has many, many options but to go on with the process 
or else we will all be in a very, very difficult position. And what 
about some of the divides within Israel itself? As I'm sure you know, 
it has been noted that you and the current prime minister did not 
shake hands at the ceremonies that were honoring your husband on Sunday. 
Well, look, I tell you something. This has nothing to do with anybody 
else but the prime minister himself, not the rest of his government. 
He coming back from the Y Plantation agreement. Instead of advocating 
the agreement, he comes back and illegally leases out incitement against 
the former government, against Oslo, against my husband how terrible 
the agreement was what my husband would have done. I mean, my husband 
has been dead now for three years. And since then, Mr. Netanyahu says 
that my husband would have returned to the six-day war, voted, my 
husband would have divided Jerusalem. My husband, he always said never, 
ever will Jerusalem be divided again; never, ever will we give up 
the idea that Jerusalem, the whole Jerusalem is the capital of the 
independent state of Israel. He said it so very often. And now that 
he's been dead for three years, Mr. Netanyahu takes the liberty of 
saying he would have divided Jerusalem. So can you understand me not 
really desiring to shake his hand? Mrs. Rabin, thank you very much 
for speaking with us. And our condolences on the anniversary of your 
husband's death. Thank you for taking the time to speak to us. Thank 
you very much, thank you. Bye-bye. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>