<DOC>
<DOCNO> PRI19981104.2000.0922 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
One victor yesterday is used to beating opponents down badly. Jesse, 
"The Body" Ventura running under the Reform Party banner was elected 
governor of Minnesota. As Clark Boyd reports, the former professional 
wrestler is just the latest of the world's unlikely political winners. 
I'll do the best job I can possibly do and I'll try to make Minnesota 
proud of me as I'm proud of them. And with that, Jesse "The Body" 
Ventura stepped out of the wrestling ring and into the political ring. 
Call him Jesse "The Governor" Ventura. Ventura is among the more colorful 
characters to be elected to public office in the United States, but 
he's not the first either here or abroad. No, it's not Jesse Ventura's 
World Wrestling Federation theme song. It's marangay, courtesy of 
Johnny Ventura of the Dominican Republic. The two are not related. 
Since May, Johnny Ventura's had two gigs: one as a popular singer 
and another as mayor of the Dominican capital, Santo Domingo. Voters 
must have been convinced that Johnny wheels and deals as well as he 
bumps and grinds. Some of you might remember Minnesota's governor-elect 
as Arnold Schwarzenegger's rough and tumble sidekick in the movie, 
"Predator." We all know that Jesse "The Body" Ventura is not the first 
actor to break into politics. Ronald Reagan, Clint Eastwood, and Fred 
Thompson come to mind. But don't forget that the current president 
of the Philippines, Joseph Estrada, was once a B movie star. Philippine 
journalist Mari Tesvitog explains why voters helped Estrada leap from 
the screen to the state room. He played a role of a defender of the 
oppressed, of the Robin Hood type, who will stand up for your rights, 
and so that's the perception which has stuck through the years. In 
fact, Mr. Estrada will always say that it has been the poor who watched 
his movies; they supported him when he ran for mayor, and then for 
senator, and then for president. But for sheer shock value, nothing 
beats the tale of a certain Italian actress who dared a few years 
back to expose herself to the political fray. Her name is Chicholina. 
She was and she still is a porno star, a porno actress. Italian journalist 
Carlo DeBlasio. We had this woman half naked going in a chauffeured-driven 
car to the Italian parliament, and it was for many Italians something 
that they regretted afterwards. But, DeBlasio says, Chicholina's tenure 
was not a complete loss. She sponsored new legislation having to do 
with her profession. So, you know, more freedom for sexual habits, 
and all those legislations didn't get through but at least there was 
a page in the country. And this was mainly the only positive thing 
of the election of Chicholina for the Italian parliament. Vote for 
insanity. You know it makes sense. Meet Screaming Lord Such, head 
of Britain's Monster Raving Looney Party. For over two decades, Lord 
Such has been trying his hardest to make it into parliament. Here 
are some of his ideas. We're going to have parliament on wheels. We're 
going to move it around the country if we're elected. We're going 
to have this turn into a Disneyland, a looney land, and we're going 
to throw crocodiles in the Thames. So far, Screaming Lord Such has 
failed to get elected. But there are plenty of politicians you might 
consider equally strange who are raising taxes and making music around 
the globe. For THE WORLD, this is Clark Boyd. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>