<DOC>
<DOCNO> PRI19981104.2000.3066 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Its a reasonable question When conflicts break out in the Balkans 
and other European hot spots, why does the United States have to settle 
them? Today, European defense ministers met in Vienna, Austria to 
consider ways to improve their military capability and rely less on 
the American Calvary. THE WORLD's Alan Dow reports. This is the first 
time the defense ministers from all the member states of the European 
Union have gathered, and they've come together with a common purpose. 
I think what we want to do is to address how well Europe would act 
together as individual countries if a crisis came upon that we did 
not require the Americans or the Americans didn't want to be involved 
in. George Robertson is Britain's defense secretary and a key promoter 
of a combined European military command. I think there is a genuine 
desire for a decision-making process that would allow European ministers 
to make decisions and policy and then find that European countries 
who are capable of acting together to deliver on that. At the moment, 
our procedures are very complicated, cumbersome, and not even understandable 
to some of the experts. I think something has to be done about that. 
And I think there is a genuine willingness to look at ways in which 
it can be done. Robertson says a combined military command would not 
replace or compete with organizations like NATO but it could be useful 
in responding to regional conflicts that NATO's cornerstone, the United 
States, doesn't want any involvement in. Washington has long been 
a reluctant participant in Europe's troubles like those of the former 
Yugoslavia. For years, the White House has been urging European leaders 
toward military solidarity. President Clinton reinforced the message 
during a trip to Berlin in 1994. Germany has been the leader in pushing 
for the integration of Europe, for the sharing of power among the 
European nations, and for setting a standard for humane conduct and 
support for democracy and diversity. There's never been much willingness 
in Europe for military union. This is, after all, a continent of nations 
that have spent much of their history fighting among themselves. But 
now with European monetary union less than two months away, interest 
in a common defense force is increasing. I think it will be a multi-national 
force with major players being Britain, France, and Germany. Alexandra 
Ashborne, a defense analyst at the Center for European Reform in London, 
says it's time for a panned European force. Europe needs a credible 
military force for local crises. We're not saying that we would fight 
the Gulf War as a European defense force. That's certainly going to 
be a role for NATO. But there are situations such as in the Balkans 
where we can see that America, for example, might not want to take 
part. And therefore, we need an effective deterrent for people like 
Slobodan Milosevic who till now don't take anything that's just European 
seriously. For now, Washington seems willing to play the lead role 
in diffusing European conflicts, but Ashborne says that may not be 
the case in the future. There's a potential for conflict site press. 
There's obviously that problem in the Balkans. And America does not 
need to be directly involved although it's in American interest, but 
not the kind of job that European military forces can handle very 
adequately if not better than American forces. For now, the idea of 
a joint European defense force is just that: an idea. But many say 
if the European union is to be taken seriously, then one day, it will 
require a unified military capable of defending its own interests. 
For THE WORLD, I'm Alan Dow in London. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>