<DOC>
<DOCNO> VOA19981104.0500.2601 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
There are many places in the world where a large automobile is associated 
with wealth and prestige, but you'd be hard pressed to find a stretch 
limousine on the streets of Japan. There, one quarter of all four 
wheel vehicles sold are mini-cars. And as we hear from Amy Vickers 
in Tokyo, the former relic of the post-war era is getting high marks 
from consumers and environmental groups alike. This is a country which 
values the small car, not just for maneuverability and low cost, but 
increasingly because of environmental concerns. Small cars are better 
for the environment because they are more fuel efficient, and emit 
less smog than larger models. The so-called mini-car is a prime example. 
Mini-cars are light weight vehicles are among the smallest cars made 
in Japan. What sets them apart is their tiny 660 cubic centimeter 
engines, along with strict size limits for the body. Mini car owners 
pay among the lowest automobile tax in the country, benefiting from 
an incentive the government gives for buying environmentally sensitive 
cars. Minis first appeared in the post-war era when they appealed 
to many people because they were relatively cheap to buy and to use. 
As Japan grew more affluent in the next few decades, the minis became 
a popular second car with two car families. According to Jerry Valesquez, 
an environmental scientist at the United Nations University in Tokyo, 
third generation of light weight vehicles are popular, because they 
are both practical and kind to the environment. You simply have no 
space to park your car. And since the roads are so small, it is quite 
good to have a small car. That was the original reason, I think. But 
now because of the environmental issues, I think a lot of people are 
also thinking that since it's a small car, it uses less energy. The 
fuel efficient minis has just gotten a bit bigger. The government 
recently issued slightly larger length and width requirements to meet 
stricter safety standards which went into effect this month. Japan's 
five minis vehicle makers have since unveiled more than a dozen new 
models which are priced as low as $4200, and travel up to 30 kilometers 
on a liter of gasoline. Suzuki, the mini car industry leader for more 
than two decades, is offering the cheapest and most fuel-efficient 
model. Takayaki Nuki, a spokesman for the country, says consumers 
in Japan are increasingly turning to mini cars because they pollute 
less than other vehicles. I do not think everyone cares about buying 
cars which are good for the environment, he says. But the number of 
people who are thinking about this is growing. New innovations in 
the latest generation of minis will appeal to green consumers. Subaru 
has equipped its cars with special transmissions that cut fuel use 
up to 20 percent compared to traditional automatic transmissions. 
Honda has made a new low emission engine standard on all models. The 
potential growth in the mini car market in Japan and around the world, 
has captured the attention of two major carmakers. Toyota recently 
bought out Daihatsu, Japan's second largest mini car maker, while 
General Motors of the United States said last month, it would become 
Suzuki's leading shareholder. Together they plan to develop small 
cars for emerging markets. Amy Vickers for VOA News, Tokyo. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>