<DOC>
<DOCNO> VOA19981104.0500.0576 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Voters throughout the United States did more than select candidates 
for public office, Tuesday, voters in 16 states decided on 61 ballot 
measures on policy issues ranging from the medical use of Marijuana 
to legalized gambling. VOA's Michael O'Sullivan takes a look at some 
of the measures from our California bureau, where 12 initiatives were 
on the ballot. Voters in California approved casino-style gambling 
on Indian reservations, in a race that cost both sides more than $100 
million to promote their message. Opposition to the message was funded 
mostly by Nevada gambling businesses which saw Indian casinos as unwanted 
competition. But the Indian tribes presented the issues as one of 
native self-determination, providing business opportunities for a 
people that has suffered discrimination. Henry Puro, a tribal chairman 
for the San Manuel Indians says, most Californians agree with the 
Indian argument. What we have seen tonight is that California people 
are behind us. They want to see us succeed. I think the tribes want 
to succeed. And like any minority group, we all have to succeed. In 
an issues effecting minority groups and women, Washington State approved 
a measure to ban racial an gender preferences in state hiring and 
admission to public universities. The measure, called Initiative 200, 
is similar to one passed by California voters two years ago. Both 
are aimed at curtailing affirmative action, a selection process that 
takes account of race and gender to increase the numbers of women 
and minority group members in universities and public employment. 
Three states approved the medical use of Marijuana to alleviate pain 
and nausea for cancer and AIDS patients. Arizona had already passed 
such a measure. And voters there reaffirmed. Nevada and Washington 
State joined Arizona in voting YES on similar measures. Michigan voters 
rejected a measure to legalize doctor-assisted suicide. Californians 
banned the slaughter of horses for horsemeat, and also banned the 
use of certain steel leg traps by hunters on animals. And Californians 
rejected a measure that would have increased their influence in selecting 
presidential nominees for the two major parties. Voters said, NO, 
to a measure that would have restricted the primary election vote 
to registered party members, as is required by both Democratic and 
Republican parties. So, California's primary election expressing voter 
preferences before the presidential race, will be largely ignored 
by both parties. Mike O'Sullivan, VOA News, Las Angeles. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>