<DOC>
<DOCNO> VOA19981104.0500.1773 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
While Democrats did not regain a majority in the US House of Representatives, 
they did pick up a hand full of seats. That was setback for Republicans 
who had hoped to strengthen their control of the House by as many 
as 30 seats. In the US Senate, Republicans were kept from increasing 
their majority as they had hoped. VOA's Paula Wilson reports. It was 
a good election day for Democrats, for incumbents, and for the President 
of the United States. When it was all over, the Democratic Party, 
plagued by accusations of perjury and obstruction of justice against 
President Clinton had reason to cheer. Just a month or two ago, it 
was thought that Republicans might be looking at significant election 
gains. But Democrats showed surprising strength, and held them in 
check. With several races still undecided, projections indicated they 
might even pick up several house seats, breaking a long-time tradition 
in American politics. Only once in the 20th Century has the party 
in power, at the White House, gained seats in an election held mid-way 
through a presidential term. The top Democrat in the Senate, Tom Daschle, 
had a simple explanation for the surprise results. He said, the party 
was unified and stressed issues of importance to Americans. I think 
it was the agenda. I think it was working so closely in a coordinated 
effort with the White House, the House and the Senate. Our unity campaign 
really made a difference. One private polling firm asked voters to 
explain the forces behind their ballots. Almost 60% said, the President's 
problems were not a factor. But in the final days of the campaign, 
both major political parties ran television advertising that alluded 
to the scandal, and impending impeachment proceedings in the House. 
Speaker Newt Gingrich denied any attempt by Republicans to turn the 
election into a referendum on Bill Clinton. The news media was vastly 
more fixated on the President and the investigation then the Congress 
was. We talked about saving Social Security, we talked about cutting 
taxes. The election results, however, to the impeachment process. 
The fate of party leaders in the House of Representatives could also 
hang in the balance. They face a vote of confidence later this month. 
In both the House and Senate, there will be a lot of familiar faces 
when the new Congress is sworn into office in January. Almost all 
the House members seeking reelection won. In the Senate, only three 
of the 29 incumbents running, lost. Democrat Carol Mosley Braun in 
Illinois, and Republicans Laught Faircloth in North Carolina, and 
Alphonse D'Amato in New York. After a nasty campaign, Senator D'Amato 
was gracious in defeat. I am deeply grateful to each and every New 
Yorker who has given me the opportunity to do that which I have loved 
the most, to work, and to fight, and to attempt to make a difference 
Democrats also managed to block further Republican gains in state 
capitals around the country. They won the race for Governor in California, 
the nation's most populous state. The state races also provided some 
headlines of their own. Two sons of former President George Bush won 
top offices in Texas and Florida. And in Minnesota, professional wrestler 
Jesse Ventura, best known for his antics in a definitely non-political 
arena, became the first Reform Party Candidate to win a governors 
race. Paula Wilson, VOA News, Washington. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>