<DOC>
<DOCNO> VOA19981104.0500.3114 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
For nearly 30 years, Moiya Brennan has been the vocalist with the 
Irish Traditional bank, "Clannad". It's a word that means family in 
Gaelic, and it's true in this case, because the group is comprised 
of her brothers and uncles. And it has already launched the million 
selling career of her sister, Anya. Now, Moiya has released her own 
solo album, entitled, "Perfect Time". VOA's Bernie Bernard recently 
spoke to Moiya Brennan about her latest project, "Away" from Clannad, 
: Moiya Brennan has been heard with Clannad and dozens of albums, 
as well as on soundtracks to films such as "Harry's Game", "Last of 
the Mohicans" and many others. Her current solo album, "Perfect Time" 
is an outgrowth of her traditional roots with songs in both English 
and the ancient Gaelic language of Ireland. She was pleased at the 
chance to write some of her own songs and experiment with percussion 
and world music. I wanted to do the solo album, just to sort of see 
if I was capable of any writing, and also being influenced by world 
music and that. I was fascinated with that, and just to merge a couple 
of different cultures together. And that was great fun. So, I sort 
of felt that it was, that I was able to sort of maybe release a bit 
of, you know, my personal self in this album. So, it is very personal 
and very spiritual in that way. On "Perfect Time", Moiya Brennan delves 
into Irish culture and history for her lyrics. She honors spiritual 
thinkers such as St. Patrick and St. Columba, who helped convert Ireland 
to Christianity. Moiya also presents songs such as "Heal This Land", 
a plea for reconciliation which could be applied to Ireland or any 
country that struggles with internal conflicts. I really believe that, 
you know, I suppose, it's getting back to believing that prayers can 
be answered, and that it is one of the ways that you can see healing 
in the land. Because, you know, if we don't compromise, if we don't 
become humble, if we don't look towards love, our children will be 
ashamed of us. And that's really what the song refers to in that way. 
So, it is nice if people can adopt it to their own situation. In her 
career, Moiya Brennan has seen the international appeal of Celtic 
music increase over the years, especially with stage shows such as 
Lord of the Dance, and River Dance. She's proud of the fact that even 
pop and Bach artists are incorporating the sounds of Celtic fiddles, 
drums, harps and bagpipes. It is amazing. I think that because we 
haven't been afraid to experiment with the music, in particularly 
some great players that would share music. Not to be afraid that you 
are not going to lose anything, but also just keeping the doors open 
to sharing the music in various different ways. And I think it's really 
being a very healthy attitude and approach. You know, the core of 
the Celtic music, it is wonderful, and it's great that people delve 
into it and gain such influences from it. Moiya Brennan is currently 
playing showcases in book and music stores across the United States. 
She'll return in early 1999 for a full solo tour to support her latest 
album, "Perfect Time". I'm Bernie Bernard. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>