<DOC>
<DOCNO> VOA19981104.0500.1265 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
In 1995 author Daniel Goldman offered a new definition for what it 
meant to be smart. His international bestseller, "Emotional Intelligence" 
argued that in placing so much on standardized intelligence tests, 
educators overlook other key factors in a child's future success including 
the ability to manage emotions, build relationships and to empathize 
with others. Now, the Harvard trained specialist on brain behavioral 
science has written a second bestseller. It's called "Working With 
Emotional Intelligence", that applies those same ideas to another 
arena. He spoke recently about his new book with VOA's Nancy Beardsley. 
Daniel Goldman says, "Working With Emotional Intelligence" was inspired 
by the way the business community responded to his earlier book, "Emotional 
Intelligence". Companies around the world told him, that the same 
qualities he was urging parents and schools to foster in children, 
were also in great demand in the world place. And they had statistics 
to prove it. That got me intrigued, and I started to look at data 
from close to 200 companies, internationally. And that data really 
surprised me, because it showed that emotional intelligence based 
abilities were about twice as important as IQ plus technical skill 
combined for being a superior performer. The higher you went in the 
organization, the more it mattered. For top leaders, it was about 
85% of what distinguishes stars from Average performers. Now that 
doesn't mean you don't need a certain level of intelligence and technical 
skill to get into a field. Of course you do. But, once in the field, 
it's abilities like: being able to work on a team and collaborate, 
or persuade people that your ideas are good ones, or to know who in 
the organization is a critical person to persuade, or the motivation 
to keep improving your performance, or self-confidence. And those 
kinds of abilities are based on emotional intelligence. And you write 
that this kind of intelligence is especially important in today's 
workplace. Why is that? Well, with the global market making things 
much more competitive. And with companies having to do more with fewer 
people, and people having to be more effective in their own jobs, 
these abilities which are what make people effective, are coming to 
the forefront. So, for example, 20 years ago, I didn't hear people 
saying, our people absolutely have to have the competence which is 
called, "adaptability to change". Now that is essentially. You didn't 
hear much about teamwork. You didn't hear much about being able to 
take advantage, in a positive way, of the fact that the new work place 
is made up of people increasingly who come from different groups, 
different ethnic groups, different nationalities and so on. So, there 
is a whole set of abilities which the realities of the modern marketplace 
are bringing to the fore. And I was interested to read, that you consider 
this to be true around the world, despite the fact that there are 
such cultural differences from country to country, I think, and in 
terms of what kinds of social interactions are valued. Well, you know, 
everyone around the world experiences the same emotions, but different 
cultures teach people how to express those emotions differently. I 
was surprised when the book, "Emotional Intelligence" came out, that 
it became a bestseller around the world. When I have talked to people 
in Asian countries, for example, they said one of the things they 
liked was that my chapters on "Empathy" and "Relationships" seem to 
validate deep cultural values, but to do so from a scientific perspective. 
I heard that also in Latin America, and in some European countries. 
What are some of the consequences for talented smart people, who don't 
have emotional intelligence? They'll plateau in their career, or else 
derail. The good news though, is it all is learnable. Unlike IQ which 
can't really change much, emotional intelligence tends on average 
to improve as we age. And if you haven't somehow learned the particular 
skills you need for your work, the good news is that you still can 
learn them, if you get the right kind of support. Are there some companies 
you found that are doing a particularly good job at helping their 
employees learn emotional intelligence? Well, one of my model programs 
is from American Express. They're financial advisors division has 
a program on "Emotional Confidence." It started as an experiment, 
but it found that financial advisors, who were really sales people, 
improved sales so much when had gone through the course. Which helped 
them, by the way, manage their own feelings of uneasiness about broaching 
a topic like, say, life insurance. And helped them also empathize 
better with the clients and so on. The improvement in sales was so 
great, that now they give it routinely to everyone hired in that division. 
Dr. Goldman, thank you very much. Daniel Goldman is the author of 
"Working with Emotional Intelligence". I'm Nancy Beardsley. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>