<DOC>
<DOCNO> VOA19981104.1600.0486 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Following last month's Wye River accord between Israel and the Palestinians, 
the United States has been urging moderate Arab leaders to resume 
contact with Israel. And push ahead with the broader aspects of the 
middle east peace process. The 19 month stalemate in the negotiations 
prompted Arab states to halt moves toward normalizing ties with Israel, 
and suspend multi-lateral talks on issues like economic cooperation 
and water sharing. Douglas Roberts reports the Clinton Administration 
wants those efforts revived, but the Arab world appears reluctant. 
The Wye River Accord prompted predictable condemnations from hard-line 
Arab states, but it is the reaction of moderate leaders in the Arab 
world that is of more importance to the United States efforts to push 
ahead with the peace process. Several governments on the oil rich 
Arabian Peninsula have called the agreement a good step forward. On 
the other side of the Arab world, Mauritania, dispatched its foreign 
minister to Israel to congratulate Prime Minister Netanyahu for excepting 
the accord, and to urge him to move speedily to implement it. But 
perhaps the most significant Arab response came from Egypt. The most 
powerful Arab state, the first to make peace with Israel, and a key 
US ally in the region. Statements from President Mubarak and Foreign 
Minister Musaf make clear Cairo's support for the Wye River Accord, 
but the stress that it must be fully implemented before Arab nations 
will agree to resume moves towards a normalization of ties with Israel, 
or the multi-lateral negotiations that were launched after the 1991 
Madrid Conference on the Middle East. US officials have made no secret 
of their disappointment with the Egyptian response. Deputy Peace Negotiator 
Aaron Miller says the Wye River Accord should have overcome the doubt 
and skepticism in the Arab world, and allowed what he terms, "the 
institutions of the peace process to begin functioning again." Well, 
it's not a perfect agreement. It's going to be difficult to implement. 
But, there is an agreement. And I think it would be inappropriate 
and sad if we had to wait through a 12 week period of implementation 
before we were able to work together with our friends in the region 
to reenergize and to reactivate many of these institutions, as well 
as marshaling their support for what will be a historic process among 
the Palestinian community as they seek to implement this agreement. 
Some US experts on the middle east say, they understand and to some 
degree sympathize with the Arab response to the Wye Accord. Judith 
Kipper is a Senior Analyst at the Washington Center for Strategic 
and International Studies. I think that the reluctance of Arab states 
to associate themselves with the Wye River Agreement, and with the 
potential renovation of the peace process is understandable. Because 
it has taken almost two years, and with so much difficulty to get 
what is a very small agreement. And while the United States is trying 
to persuade Arab states to support it, there are serious problems 
in Israel in adopting it. Ms Kipper says the Arab attitude may change 
once the Wye River agreement is implemented, and there are concrete 
changes on the ground. What the Arabs are interested in is to see 
Israel returning more territory to the Palestinians, and seeing the 
Palestinians do what they have to do to start the final status talks. 
Because in the region, people are really sick and tired, fed up with 
this conflict, and would like to see it resolved. US officials acknowledge 
the frustration felt throughout the Arab world, during the long stalemate 
in the Israeli/Palestinian negotiations. But they insist that the 
Wye River Accord has put the peace process back on track. And it is 
important, they add, for moderate Arab leaders to show their support. 
Douglas Roberts, VOA News, Washington. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>