<DOC>
<DOCNO> VOA19981104.0500.1993 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
The US Defense Secretary, William Cohen, is traveling through the 
Middle East, and then through Europe, seeking support on how best 
to handle Iraq's latest defiance of the United Nations. President 
Clinton and British Prime Minister Tony Blair have agreed, by telephone, 
with all options remain open in trying to force Iraq to allow UN inspectors 
to resume their search for banned Iraqi weapons. As VOA's Max Ruston 
reports, from the United Nations Headquarters in New York, Britain 
has sponsored a UN resolution that could lay the groundwork for the 
use of force if Baghdad does not relent. The proposed resolution condemns 
Iraq's suspension of cooperation with UN weapons inspectors, and demands 
an immediate and unconditional reversal of that policy. It also uses 
words that diplomats say marked a first step towards justifying the 
use of force against Iraq. It describes the situation in Iraq as a 
continuing threat to international security. And says Baghdad's suspension 
is a flagrant violation of Council resolutions. The wording is similar 
to a Council statement issued Saturday, but diplomats say, once those 
words are in a resolution, they carry the force of international law. 
Participants in the Council discussion say, they expect the resolution 
to be approved before the end of the week. Council members say they 
do not want to escalate the latest crisis with Iraq, by explicitly 
threatening military action. They say the proposed resolution is carefully 
worded to keep all options open, while making it clear to Iraq that 
the current situation is unacceptable. US Ambassador, Peter Burley 
is President of the Security Council for the month of November. My 
government, as you know, from President Clinton and others of our 
senior leaders has not ruled out any option here. But, our strong 
preference is to go on a step by step process. Here at the United 
Nations we want the Security Council to take the lead, and to react 
strongly and in a united fashion to Iraq. We think that's the best 
policy, and we hope the council will do that. Other diplomats say 
they are still taking a wait and see approach to the situation. And 
statements from Iraqi officials over the last few days, have not been 
entirely consistent. Some Iraqi officials have said, they will resume 
cooperation only if sanctions imposed after the Gulf War are first 
lifted. Others have indicated the situation could be diffused if the 
Council first carries out a comprehensive review of resolution concerning 
Iraq. Security Council members have already said, they support the 
idea of such a review, but only after Iraq resumes cooperation with 
weapons inspectors. The proposed resolution discussed Tuesday, reiterates 
that position. Max Ruston, VOA News, United Nations. In Iraq, the 
government of Saddam Hussein has stepped up its rhetoric against the 
United States, as well as the United Nations. And is telling its people 
to prepare for confrontation. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>