<DOC>
<DOCNO> VOA19981104.1600.0310 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Democrats did much better than expected in Tuesday's US Congressional 
mid-term elections, and that could slow the Republican led impeachment 
drive against President Clinton. VOA National Correspondent Jim Malone 
has been looking at Tuesday's election results and drawing a few preliminary 
conclusions. Republicans ran into the unexpected Tuesday, an energized 
group of Democratic voters who may have done President Clinton a big 
favor. Republicans had been expecting to expand their majorities in 
the House, the Senate, and among the nation's governors. But a high 
democratic turnout, particularly among African American voters propelled 
a Democratic surge, which helped their candidates across the country. 
Democrats went against history with projected gains in the House of 
Representatives and held their own in the senate. Traditionally the 
party, which controls the presidency, loses congressional seats in 
mid-term elections, especially during a president's second term. Voter 
exit polls indicated that most people did not cast their ballots based 
on the congressional impeachment inquiry facing President Clinton. 
Local issues and personalities dominated most of the congressional 
races. And the strong national economy worked to the advantage of 
most incumbents. But Democrats say Republicans overplayed their hand 
in pushing for an impeachment probe of President Clinton, helping 
to fuel a big turnout of Democratic voters at the poles. The Democratic 
leader in the House, Congressman Richard Gephardt of Missouri says 
that Democrats were sending Congress a message. Wrap up the impeachment 
probe quickly, and move on to other issues. It says the people stood 
up and said, hey, we want you to listen to us, we want you to take 
up our issues, health care, education, social security. I think that's 
what people were saying tonight. Republicans were clearly disappointed 
with the election results, but many of their incumbents did win, especially 
Republican governors in the northeast and Midwest. House Speaker Newt 
Gingrich tried to put the best face on the disappointing Republican 
effort, by looking to the future. The fact is, everywhere the Republican 
governors could get the message out, we did very, very well, and the 
Republican Party has a very, very bright future. The House and Senate 
Republicans need to work together from day one next year, to both 
save Social Security, and cut taxes. And I think, frankly, that will 
set up a year 2000 where we will win the presidency, and have a remarkable 
couple of years in 2001 and '02. The election results are clearly 
good news for President Clinton and for Democrats seeking to block 
his impeachment in the House. On the other hand, Republicans may have 
learned a painful lesson about taking their core supporters for granted. 
And about the importance of delivering a clear message to voters about 
where their party would like to take the country in the future. Jim 
Malone, VOA News, Washington. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>