<DOC>
<DOCNO> VOA19981104.0500.2170 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Israeli Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu has again postponed bringing 
the Wye River Peace Accord before his cabinet for ratification. That 
postponement prompted a telephone call from US Secretary of state, 
Madeline Albright. She wants to find out why. As VOA's Al Pessin reports 
from Jerusalem, the Prime Minister says the Palestinian Security Plan 
is not complete until 30 known Palestinian terrorists are arrested. 
On Monday in Washington, US officials said the Palestinian Security 
plan had been delivered and was everything that was expected. But 
on Tuesday, Prime Minister Netanyahu said that one thing he was inspecting 
was missing. I Wye and I spoke yesterday to Secretary Albright about 
receiving this important guarantee. And if we receive it, I'll convene 
the government, and if not, I'll wait and I won't show the ministers 
an incomplete agreement. Later Defense Minister Yizhak Mordechai revealed 
which element Israel believes is lacking in the Palestinian security 
plan., details on the promised arrest of 30 Palestinians wanted in 
connection with fatal attacks on Israelis. The list of 30 murderers 
that killed Israeli people, and it has been agreed that those 30 people 
have to be in the prison. We would like to have a list of those people, 
with the plan, with the time line. When we find out, we can be much 
more comfortable about what we agreed in Wye Plantation. Israeli officials 
say the Palestinian leader, Yasir Arafat was made aware of the problem, 
and they predict it can be solved soon. But in the meantime, Palestinian 
officials were angered by the latest Israeli ratification delay. Among 
them was Palestinian Information Minister Yasir Abad Rabow. I have 
no confidence at all that they will respect their signature, and that 
Mr. Netanyahu is a man of peace. Israel's objection to the Palestinian 
Security Plan puts it at odds with the United States, which has taken 
on an unprecedented role in implementing the Wye River Agreement. 
The United States is to help the parties monitor compliance. And has 
promised to state its views publicly as the process goes on, although 
it has no specific enforcement role. In all Israel has postponed its 
planned two day cabinet meeting on the Wye River Agreement, three 
times, as it waited for the Palestinian Security Plan. The plan was 
presented to US officials as required on Monday, the day the agreement 
was to take effect. But on Monday, Mr. Netanyahu announced Israel 
is not bound by the Accord until its cabinet and Parliament ratify 
it, a process which is not expected to be completed until late next 
week. Mr. Arafat accepted the delay, but both leaders say, they hope 
they can stick to the Accord's complex time table, anyway. During 
the coming two weeks, most of their required steps are to be taken 
by the Palestinians who ratified the agreement on Friday. The Accord 
calls on the Palestinians to implement the Security Plan starting 
next week, and to begin a program to confiscate illegal weapons. Israel's 
first major commitment is an initial troop withdrawal scheduled to 
be done by November 16th. Israel says the ratification problems might 
push that back a few days. In addition, during the next two weeks, 
Israeli, Palestinian, and US officials are to convene several monitoring 
committees, and several sets of negotiations. Most important among 
them is the tough negotiation on a final Israeli/Palestinian Peace 
Treaty which is to be completed by Next May. Al Pessin, VOA News, 
Jerusalem. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>