<DOC>
<DOCNO> VOA19981104.1600.2964 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Hong Kong bankers are concerned about a brewing nightmare in China, 
the possibility of more defaults on foreign loans by financial institutions 
on the mainland. As Amy Vickers reports from Hong Kong, one high profile 
company has already been closed down by the government after it defaulted 
on a multi-million dollar payment to US investors. The health of China's 
non-bank financial institutions is weighing heavily on Hong Kong's 
international banking community these days. Most of these mainland 
companies, known as international trust and investment corporation 
or ITICs carry high levels of foreign loans which they may be unable 
to repay. Just how many billions of dollars they owe remains unclear. 
Investors are wondering whether they will have access to take the 
losses if the ITICs do not pay up. Last month, China's central bank 
ordered the closure of one of the largest non-bank financial institutions 
called GITIC, the investment arm of Guang Dong province in southern 
China. The company had defaulted on an interest payment. Analyst Jeffrey 
Chan estimated 2.5 billion US dollars. Obviously we don't know the 
full details about the problems of GTIC, but I think some may be, 
say cases involving say bribery or whatever, or these official - the 
Chinese top officials like Ju Wong Gi would not like to see. And so 
that's why he bite the bullet and do the necessary thing because. 
Andy Shay, China analyst for the investment bank, Morgan Stanley in 
Hong Kong says Beijing has the ability to pay off foreign creditors 
thanks to its huge foreign reserves, but he is unsure if that will 
happen. Still he praises the government shutdown of GITIC since it 
was an open acknowledgment of the company's troubles. We perhaps borrowing 
too much money in the past. And a lot of that money was borrowed without 
the Central Government approval. And the Central Government has become 
more aware of what has happened. And therefore the Central Government 
is moving to contain the risks. We had to close down GITIC and perhaps 
more will come. Mr. Shay sees a potential advantage to the ITICs troubles. 
He says the closures of many of these companies will ultimately benefit 
China's economy. Local officials are rushing to reassure creditors 
that the ITICs they run are financially sound. An official at the 
investment arm of Fujiyon province admits international financing 
has dried up. But says that his company has sufficient internal resources. 
And the mayor of Shenjen, just across the border from Hong Kong says 
the city is capable of meeting its financial obligations. Bankers 
abroad hope these Chinese officials are right. Amy Vickers for VOA 
News, Hong Kong. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>