<DOC>
<DOCNO> VOA19981104.1600.2105 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Delays by Israel in beginning implementation of a new peace accord 
with the Palestinians have US officials concerned even though they 
say it will not alter the time table. The October 23rd agreement, 
signed in Wye Mills, Maryland, was to go into effect last Monday. 
The Israeli delays highlight the fragility of the Wye Accord's security 
arrangements and how they will be enforced. It's a concern shared 
by the Palestinians. How much security is enough in the Middle East. 
That's the question examined on today's addition of Dateline. Here's 
Pamela Taylor. The Wye agreement's time table calls for the first 
stage of an Israeli pullout of the West Bank on November 16. This 
will give Palestinians control over an additional 13 percent of West 
Bank land, in exchange for stepped up efforts to combat terrorism 
directed at Israel. In addition, during the next two weeks, Israeli, 
Palestinian, and US officials are to convene several committees and 
set some negotiations leading to a final Israeli/Palestinian peace 
treaty by next May. The Wye Accord is seen as a critical jump-start 
for this final agreement. But it took nine days, and the personal 
intervention of President Bill Clinton. As the interim agreement was 
signed at the White House President Clinton had fine words for all 
those involved, as we hear in this report from corespondent Al Pessin. 
Now ordinary Israelis and Palestinians once again can become partners 
for peace. Israeli Prime Minster Benjamin Netanahu. This is an important 
moment to give a secure and peaceful future for our children and the 
children of our neighbors the Palestinians. And the Palestinian leader 
Yasir Arafat: We will never leave the peace process, and we will never 
go back to violence and confrontation. No return to confrontation 
and violence. But fine words will only take them so far. Friday's 
Wry River Memorandum is both a remarkable step forward, and a reminder 
of the difficulties, disagreements, and distress inherent in the peace 
process. In one way it is an enormous break through. But at the same 
time, it is only an agreement to do what has already been agreed on. 
And all sides agree, much work remains ahead to fulfill the promise 
of Wye River, and to fulfill the other even more difficult tasks still 
ahead. Israel and the Palestinian Authority overcame disagreements 
on land, security, and many other issues which had seemed unresolvable 
during the last 19 months of stalemate. But they did so, only with 
President Clinton pushing them every step of the way and promising 
an unprecedented US role in implementing this agreement. That promised 
role could avoid many of the implementation problems of the past. 
But it is an untested approach which could present problems of its 
own. The United States will be in the position of arbitrator. For 
Israel the agreement represents a historic shift for Mr. Netanyahu, 
the Likud Party and its allies. For the first time, they fully endorse 
the Oslo Process and the concept of giving up control of parts of 
the biblical land of Israel. But it also puts the Prime Minster and 
his political allies at odds with right-wing supporters who are not 
prepared to make that historic shift. It could mean early actions, 
which would complicate implication of this accord. For the Palestinians, 
the accord inspired reactions ranging from cynicism to relief, to 
hope. Many are skeptical that much in this document will ever really 
be implemented. And they note that earlier agreements were implemented 
only partially, and almost never on time. But others are relieved 
that after more than a year and a half, the peace process at least 
has a chance to get back on track. That feeling of relief renewed 
hopes that some day in the not too distant future, there might be 
a Palestinian state. The negotiators have precious little time for 
self congratulations. The time table for implementing this agreement 
and reaching the next one is short, 12 weeks for the current accord, 
just six months to reach the next one. And as tough as these last 
talks were, the most difficult issues remain ahead, Jerusalem, refugees, 
final borders, and Palestinian statehood. President Clinton called 
the days ahead, hard and hopeful and the task urgent. Now both sides 
must build on that hope, carry out their commitments, begin the difficult 
but urgent journey towards a permanent settlement. The president said 
this memorandum will test whether having made the difficult decisions 
he spoke of earlier in the week, both Israeli and Palestinians are 
truly ready to take the even more difficult practical steps to really 
make peace. VOA, Jerusalem correspondent, Al Pessen. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>