<DOC>
<DOCNO> VOA19981104.0500.0375 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
US elections, the Republican Party maintained its dominant hold on 
the state governorships. But the Democrats scored some notable wins. 
And the most surprising upset of the election, a colorful independent 
candidate captured the governorship of Minnesota. VOA's Rick Nunes 
has more. Going into the elections, Republicans held 32 of the 50 
state governorships. Based on the results of the 1998 voting, that 
will not change much, if at all. Two of former President George Bush's 
sons won election as governor in Florida and Texas. George W. Bush's 
easy reelection in Texas gave his presidential aspirations a solid 
vote of confidence. Mr. Bush, known as a compassionate conservative, 
actively courted the state' large Hispanic vote, not traditionally 
drawn to Republicans. In his acceptance speech, the Republican Governor 
said, the results prove his party can broaden its appeal. Tonight's 
resounding victory says my compassionate conservative philosophy is 
making Texas a better place. But today's election says something more. 
It says that a leader who is compassionate and conservative can erase 
the gender gap, can open the doors to the Republican Party to new 
faces, and new voices. Public opinion polls show Governor Bush would 
win decisively over Vice President Al Gore in a presidential showdown. 
Mr. Bush's younger brother, Jeb Bush, got a widely anticipated victory 
in the governor's race in Florida. With their respective wins, Jeb 
and George W. Bush become the first brothers to serve simultaneously 
as state governors in almost 30 years. Nelson Rockefeller and his 
brother, Winthrop, were governors of New York and Arkansas between 
1967 and 1973. The Democrats won governorships in the southern states 
of Georgia, Alabama, and South Carolina. And, for the first time in 
30 years, captured the top job in the mid-western state of Iowa. The 
biggest prize for the Democrats came in California, where Lieutenant 
Governor Gray Davis emerged victorious. A Democrat hasn't occupied 
the governor's office in California in 16 years. And that could be 
important for the presidential election in the year 2000. As the most 
populous state in the country, California has the highest number of 
electoral votes in presidential contests. Governors serve four-year 
terms as Chief Executive Officers of their respective states. In the 
most shocking result of the day, the Minnesota governor's race went 
to Jesse, the Body, Ventura, who ran on the Reform Party ticket. Mr. 
Ventura compared his triumph to the 1980 US Olympic Hockey team, who 
pulled off a stunning victory over their heavily favored counterparts 
from the former Soviet Union. Nobody gave them a chance, and what 
happened, they shocked the world. Mr. Ventura is a former Naval Officer, 
an actor, and retired professional wrestler. Rick Nunes, VOA News, 
Washington. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>