<DOC>
<DOCNO> VOA19981104.1600.3134 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
This is VOA News Now. Time for our weekly look at the most popular 
films at North American theaters. Alan Silverman has the list, it 
starts with a thriller. It's "Bride of Chuckie", a sequel to the 1988 
horror hit, "Child's Play" about a homicidal doll named Chuckie. This 
time around he get a mate. All right let's go. Oh, sure, I'll steer 
and you can work the peddles. We're dolls, you dope. Bride of Chuckie 
ends up in fifth place. At number four, "Antz", a cleverly computer 
animated tale about Antz. In case you haven't noticed we antz are 
running the show. We're the lords of the earth. Hey, don't talk to 
me about earth, okay. Because I just spent all day hauling it around. 
Antz, spelled a-n-t-z features the voices of, among others, Woodie 
Allen, Sylvestor Stallone, and Sharon Stone, and the computer animated 
fable digs into fourth place. The first animated film from the young 
Dream Works Studio, ANTZ has now become the most successful non-Disney 
cartoon feature. Practical Magic is in third this week. Sandra Bullock 
co-stars as a young witch who wants to find love without witchcraft. 
So what kind of craft do you do? Magic isn't just spells and potions. 
Practical Magic also stars Nicole Kidman, Aiden Quinn, Stockard Channing, 
and Dianne Weiss. The number two film, also a fantasy comedy, has 
a social message. You can throw the whole universe out of whack. It's 
too weird, David, this place gives me the creeps. In Pleasantville, 
a pair of 1990s teenagers magically zapped into a 1950s television 
show, bring color and controversy to the seemingly well ordered black 
and white world. Reece Witherspoon co-stars. This world is perfect 
for this world which is 50s television. Not even the '50s, but '50s 
television was so, you know, perfect, white, middle America, suburban 
life styles. The '50s really weren't that way. There was a huge undercurrent 
of hate, and turmoil and dissension and fear. That I think it's great, 
mean I think it's great for people of my generation to see a film 
like this. Because the way we remember the '50s is through our parent's 
stories about how wonderful it was, or all the great things that people 
accomplished. But you can't really imagine all the things people had 
to deal with, until you really see them represented. Well what's outside 
of Pleasantville? It doesn't matter, it's not important. What's outside 
of Pleasantville? Pleasantville settles into second place, bumped 
from the top by the latest from horror film maker John Carpenter, 
"Vampires". The Vampire movie is not as easy as you might think. Because 
it is so familiar to us, and because it is a generic topic. So, I 
jump back in by making a western, and pushing all the limits that 
I possibly could, political incorrectness, violence, everything, just 
pushed it out as far as I could get it. All right, I think we've got 
a nest inside this place. We've got at least six goons, maybe more. 
Chances are we'll find the master in here somewhere. Rule number five, 
if you find the nest, you find the master. They usually won't leave 
it on its own. So it is strictly by the book today, gentlemen. Get 
to work. James Woods stars as a bounty hunter, scouring the American 
southwest for the bloodthirsty villains. Look, okay, here's the deal. 
It's a vampire picture kids, okay. So, the bottom line is we've got 
to go out there and say, how do we make the audience have a really 
good time with vampires as the bad guy instead of the KGB or you know 
the Russian Mafia, which is reasonably believable. So, what you have 
to do is, go out there and play it really, really straight. You've 
really got to convince the audience that those people who are really 
just sort of nice, tall people, are now, in fact, the most horrible 
blood sucking vampires this side of the White House, you know. He's 
thirsty! He smells your blood, Padre. Oh, God. John Carpenter's "Vampires" 
takes the biggest bite at the box office, to open up at number one, 
the new most popular movies at North American theaters. Alan Silverman 
for the Voice of America in Hollywood. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>