<DOC>
<DOCNO> VOA19981104.1600.1282 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
A new controversial exhibition on the legacy on the legacy of Sigmund 
Freud, founder of modern Psychology opened in October at the library 
of Congress. Sigmund Freud, Conflict and Culture was scheduled to 
open three years ago, but loud dissent among some scholars who saw 
the show as pure propaganda, forced the library to put it on hold. 
But as Robin Rupley reports, whether one agrees with Freud's theories 
or not, the exhibition does illuminate his profound influence on popular 
culture. She's a very nice women, and I didn't have to lie down on 
the couch, she had me sitting up. So, I told her about the family, 
and about my feelings towards men, and about my relationship with 
my brother. All this happened first hour, that's amazing. I mean I've 
been for 15 years, I have nothing like that. Well I told him my dream 
and then I cried. You cried, I never once cried. That's fantastic 
to me. I whine. Writers of movies and books, along with just about 
everybody else have long been fascinated with the mysteries of the 
mind. Early 20th Century researcher and physician Sigmund Freud supplied 
lots of theories to ponder about what motivates humans to do the things 
they do. For the exhibit, Sigmund Freud, Conflict and Culture the 
Library of Congress is displaying almost 200 items from Freud's life. 
The exhibit traces the researcher's early beginnings in Vienna to 
his early training in neurology, to creating his theory of psychoanalysis 
as treatment for mental illness. The purpose of this exhibition is 
to explore the impact of Freud's thinking on the 20th Century. And 
in order to do that, to make clear some of the key ideas that Freud 
developed in his work on individuals and on society. Michael Roth 
is the curator of the Library of Congress exhibit. He says before 
Freud, treatment for mental illness largely consisted of hypnosis 
and various types of shock therapies. Then around 1910, Freud concluded 
that by talking, or free associating with a specially trained physician, 
a patient could get to the root of the problem, ultimately finding 
relief. Critics of Freud however, say his theories were never based 
on scientific evidence to be accepted as fact. One of the loudest 
dissenters is Frederic Cruise author of the book, "Unauthorized Freud, 
Doubters Confront a Legend". They're not just Hollywood thieves, as 
one might gather from the Freud show. There are assumptions about 
who caused what. For example, if children are autistic, the Freudian 
habit of mind induces up to look for mistreatment of the child by 
parents. If a child is homosexual, maybe the mother didn't treat the 
child correctly. There are elements of blame which are implicit in 
psychoanalysis. Here ye, here ye, in the opinion of this court this 
child is depraved on account of he ain't had a normal home. Hay, I'm 
depraved on account I'm deprived. So, take him to a head shrinker. 
Film clips, television exerpts, magazine and comic book covers are 
also included in the Library of Congress exhibition, demonstrating 
how Freud's psychological references had crept into our everyday language. 
Also displayed is a replica of Freud's office, including his famous 
couch, and correspondence where he discusses some of his cases. Other 
documents highlight where Freud first made use of psychological terms 
that are now such a part of the American consciousness, they border 
on cliche: repression, oral fixation, Oedipus complex, and sometimes 
a cigarette is just a cigarette. UNKNOWN WOMAN Doctor, how long is 
it going to take to pull him out of this? UNKNOWN MAN He's suffering 
from acute melancholia, together with a guilt complex. Curator Michael 
Roth says great care was taken to give the Freud exhibition balance, 
so as not to portray him as a hero. Quotations of opposing points 
of view are written all along the top of the display cases. I think 
the fear expressed by critics was that since psychoanalysis as a therapeutic 
practice has diminished considerably in importance over the years. 
That there were economic reasons why psychoanalysts would want to 
prop up the image of Freud. But it was never the intention. He is 
much more interesting and complex as a speculator, as a thinker, as 
a writer who made mistakes, who perhaps had insights rather than as 
some kind of hero that we need to pay homage to. Michael Roth adds 
that while Freud might not have always had the right answers, he was 
one of the few people in history to come up with an entirely new set 
of tools to try to understand human nature. Sigmund Freud, Conflict 
and Culture will be at the Library of Congress until January 3rd, 
where it will then travel to New York City and finally to the Sigmund 
Freud museum in Vienna, Austria. This is Robin Rupley. The trouble 
is he's lazy. The trouble is he drinks. The trouble is he's crazy. 
The trouble is he stinks. The trouble is he's growing. The trouble 
is he's grown. Krupke we've got troubles of our own. Gee Officer Krupke 
we're down on our knees. Cause no one loves a fellow with a social 
disease. Gee, officer Krupke what are we to do? 
</TEXT>
</DOC>