<DOC>
<DOCNO> VOA19981104.1600.2644 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
The Surgeon General has ordered blood banks across the United States 
to notify hundreds of thousands of people that they may have contracted 
a deadly disease without knowing it. Jane Hughes has details of the 
planned alert. The United States Government is gearing up for the 
huge task of notifying the first 300,000 of an estimated one million 
people who may have contacted hepatitis C from tainted blood transfusions 
between 1988 and 1992, before the advent of Hepatitis C blood screening 
tests. Hepatitis C is an insidious disease, causing no symptoms over 
an average period of 16 years. It can damage the liver so badly that 
ultimately the only effective treatment is a liver transplant. Surgeon 
General David Satcher believes the government has a duty to share 
its knowledge with the people who may have become infected so that 
they can care for themselves and avoid infecting others. People deserve 
to know what we know in terms of the risks that they have received 
blood from a person with Hepatitis C. Also I think that there are 
some things that we can do even in terms of treatment, even though 
we don't have a cure, the treatment is improving every day and also 
I think we can talk with people about life style and how to minimize 
the risk of spreading this disease to other people. The virus is part 
of a family of microbes, Hepatitis A-E that all infect the liver, 
the organ responsible for filtering and breaking down waste products 
in the blood. If the liver is damaged to the point where it can no 
longer do its job, a blood protein called bilerubin begins to accumulate 
in the blood and tissues, turning the skin and eyeballs yellow. This 
condition is called jaundice, and it's the symptom most people think 
of when they think of Hepatitis. In Hepatitis C, jaundice is a very 
late symptom that signals severe irreversible liver damage, that can 
lead to liver cancer or liver failure. Hepatitis C affects 170 million 
people worldwide. In the United States, there are about 4 million 
chronic cases, affecting nearly 2 percent of the American population. 
It is the most common blood born infection in the United States, four 
times the size of the AIDS epidemic, although far less lethal, causing 
10,000 deaths a year. Surgeon General David Satcher is concerned about 
what he calls this silent epidemic. It does not cause symptoms in 
many cases for many years, if ever. So, there are a lot of people 
with this disease who don't know it. Also we've had difficulty in 
terms of having an accurate test, a reliable test that we could say 
this person received blood that was contaminated with Hepatitis C 
and we need to inform them. The blood banks will urge recipients to 
arrange for lab tests to determine if they have Hepatitis C and to 
seek medical advice. The National Institute of Diabetes and Digestive 
and Kidney Diseases has suggestion for those who test positive. One 
option is Alpha Interferon, the only medication approved for use in 
Hepatitis C in the United States. It is given by injection three times 
a week, it's expensive, has many side effects, and is only effective 
in one quarter of those infected with chronic hepatitis C. According 
to the Center for Disease Control and Prevention, since 1994 the risk 
for transfusion transmitted Hepatitis C infection in the United States 
has been almost zero. The major sources of the Hepatitis C virus today 
are intravenous drug abuse, unprotected sex, and possibly tattooing, 
body piercing, and cocaine snorting. I'm Jane Hughes. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>