<DOC>
<DOCNO> VOA19981104.1600.2396 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
The chief hurdle to a real peace in the Middle East is finding a way 
to insure that both sides, Israelis and Palestinians, feel secure 
from attacks or harassment by one on the other. Joe Montville of the 
Washington-based Center for Strategic and International Studies says 
security is the key. The security issue is really the fundamental 
issue of whether the Palestinians and Israelis can build communities. 
Because that's really what the peace process is all about. Many people 
don't realize that when we think of Palestinians, almost 20 percent 
of the Israeli population is Palestinian. And there is no way that 
either community can seal itself off hermetically through political 
deals or treaties. They are invariably intertwined and interdependent. 
And in fact we've seen the leopard skin makeup of this current agreement 
which sort of reminded me of the early days of the agreements we were 
trying to negotiate in the Balkans. Which seem to be forcing these 
people to live, neighbor to neighbor, and it seems so impossible with 
the lack of security that exists right now. Well, leaders can make 
deals and hope that they will work. But there is a real need for a 
supplementary process of peace building on a people-to-people level. 
Because part of the assumption of the negotiation is that at some 
point the Palestinians will acquire a responsibility for the well 
being and security of certain settler communities. And it's not at 
all inconsistent with the tradition of Arab and Muslim hospitality 
for minority groups to benefit from a tradition of magnanimity and 
hospitality. In fact what you are outlining here is, people-to-people 
discussions certainly is more of a long-term approach. But the short-term 
approach of having it policed does seem doomed to fail here, doesn't 
it. How can Mr. Arafat, for example, seriously and effectively crack 
down on his people when we have polls that show that 45 percent of 
the Palestinians oppose this agreement, and one third support continued 
attacks against Israel. Well, the fact is that if Arafat and the Palestinian 
Authority are to be partners in this peace process, they have to affirm 
their authority. They can't be competing centers of legitimacy in 
the use of force. This is a kind of logic that is required. If he 
is to be the leader of the Palestinians, and the polls consistently 
show a majority support him as the leader, then he has to be able 
to control his people. Is one of the ways of helping to insure that 
this security issue can be handled, that if we can lower the level 
of rhetoric and propaganda on both sides. That, that might be as important, 
or more important than policing? Well I think it is critically important. 
My sense is that the Palestinians have sort of been holding in reserve 
that, purging of the language calling for Israel's destruction, as 
a bargaining chip. But they can no longer do that, because they really 
are right at this point where they have to establish their commitment 
to the concept of literally multi-ethnic communities. And there is 
no question that, as far as the Israelis are concerned, the expunging 
of this language, is a critical requirement in establishing working 
trust with the Palestinians. The moral imperative of history is that 
the Israelis and the Palestinians must find a way to live together 
in security. We've found, in all of our work in conflict resolution 
and in inter-ethnic dialogues that once you start talking in the safest 
place, people start discovering what they in common as human beings. 
And a natural empathy kind of develops through this interaction. Jews 
and Muslims have to talk. They have to work to recognize what values 
they share. Joe Montville, a former foreign service officer who served 
in the Middle East is now head of the Conflict Resolution Division 
of the Center for Strategic and International Studies in Washington. 
How much security is enough in the Middle East, was a question examined 
on today's addition of dateline. I'm Pamela Taylor. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>