<DOC>
<DOCNO> VOA19981104.0500.2376 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
In Central America, rescuers are still pulling bodies from the mud, 
pushing the death toll from Hurricane Mitch to more than 9000. More 
than 7000 people are dead in Honduras, and more than 2000 were killed 
in Nicaragua. Many survivors are stranded on rooftops, cut off by 
swollen rivers and washed out roads. And officials fear they may starve. 
VOA's Bill Rogers traveled along this utter devastation, Tuesday, 
and has a report. The sound of tramping feet breaks the silence in 
the Nicaraguan countryside as hundreds of people travel the ruined 
roads in the northwestern part of the country. Many carry much needed 
supplies for relatives left homeless by the storm. Others are fleeing 
the devastation for the country's capitol, Managua. Motor vehicle 
traffic is stalled in long lines where bridges have been watched away. 
Near the city of Leone, some 60 kilometers northwest of Managua, floodwaters 
of the Lisapa, Santa Maria and, Chapichone rivers have watched away 
bridges and even whole communities, scattering rocks, tree trunks, 
and other debris throughout the landscape. The bloated bodies of cows, 
half buried in the mud, litter the riverbanks permeating the air with 
the stench of death. Survivors like 17 year-old Oswalde Romone Rivera 
tell of waking up in the middle of the night to find their house filled 
with water. He said, the flood waters swept his house away. We managed 
to escape and take a few cows with us, but that was it. Mr. Rivera 
said he was very scared. Others like Milton Juarez describe how they 
desperately waded through swirling waters until they reached higher 
ground. He said we made it to an island of dry ground that was clear 
of the flood waters. I was able to save 30 people, but as for the 
rest of my neighbors, I haven't seen them. In the nearby community 
of La Paz Gherhat 13 people were killed, including a women who was 
found with her dead child clasped in her arms. Casualties were much 
higher north of Leone, in Poseltega on the flanks of the Casitas volcanoe. 
Some 1500 people were killed over the weekend, when a massive landslide 
tumbled down the side of the volcanoe. Nicaraguan authorities estimate 
that more than 2000 people were killed, and thousands of others are 
still missing following the flooding and mudslides caused by the torrential 
rains from last week's hurricane. Aside from the dead, Nicaraguan 
officials believe some 400,000 people have been left homeless. Bill 
Rogers, VOA News in Leone, Nicaragua International aid efforts are 
underway, with aircraft, personnel, and supplies from the United States 
and Mexico already on the scene or about to arrive. The European Union, 
and the International Red Cross are also pledging major contributions. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>