<DOC>
<DOCNO> ABC19981207.1830.0066 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> CAPTION </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Good evening. Before this week is over, it is very likely that the 
house Judiciary committee will vote on articles of impeachment against 
the president. As of now, their decision is something of a foregone 
conclusion, which means that sometime in the next ten days or two 
weeks, the full House of Representatives will be obliged to decide 
whether Mr. Clinton should be impeached. Tomorrow, the president's 
lawyers will begin their defense of him. They will argue that his 
behavior in the last couple of years has been wrong, but not wrong 
enough. Still, there's a new wrinkle in the defense. ABC's Sam Donaldson 
is at the White House tonight. sam. The White House planned to call 
witnesses before the committee to specifically argue and complain 
about prosecutorial misconduct has been dropped. Because over the 
weekend, house democrats told the president's team that continued 
bashing of independent counsel Kenneth Starr won the get him a Single 
new vote and might lose key moderate republicans. But as you say, 
aside from that, the strategy of arguing the standards, not the evidence, 
remains in place. President Clinton seemed to be hard at work today 
on other issues will not go to Capitol Hill. Gregory Craig and Charles 
ruff, not David Kendall, will make the arguments with the help of 
legal and constitutional witnesses. We have two days to make a case 
here. And we will spend a good bit of time talking about the constitutional 
standards, because that's what we're in right now. Four witness panels 
will range from a discussion of the standards to how to evaluate the 
evidence, to what constitutes abuse of power, to what constitutes 
perjury. Three democratic members of the 1974 Judiciary committee, 
all of whom voted to impeach President Nixon, will argue that Mr. 
Nixon's abuse of power was different from and far greater than Mr. 
Clinton's alleged abuse of power. And Yale professor will assert that 
any house Bill of impeachment voted now will expire with the end of 
this Congress and can't be used to hold the senate trial next year. 
House Judiciary committee chairman Henry Hyde was unimpressed. I'd 
like to hear some evidence rebutting the facts that we have amassed. 
We have heard from so many college professors that I think I'm gonna 
ask if we can get college credit for attending the seminars. Some 
moderate republicans are urging the president to show more contrition. 
Lockhart says he knows of no plans to do that. He's well aware, keenly 
aware of what he has done wrong and has apologized to those who are 
affected. There is a great deal of nervousness here. The move to make 
a deal on censure appears to be losing steam. Although there may be 
no plan for the president to speak out publicly now, he may do that. 
Thank you, Sam, Sam Donaldson at the White House tonight. Articles 
of impeachment, of course, are the formal charges against the president. 
The house Judiciary committee is likely to draft and then vote on 
three of them. They will cover the issues of perjury, obstruction 
of justice and abuse of power. Here's ABC's Linda Douglass. Most republican 
house members believe the strongest case against mr. Clinton is perjury. 
The charge that he lied under oath both in the Paula Jones case and 
in his grand jury testimony. i do. Republicans may accuse the president 
of different grand jury lies than Kenneth Starr did. Sources say they 
will shy away from sexually explicit allegations that Mr. clinton 
lied about which parts of Monica Lewinsky's body he touched. Instead, 
GOP committee lawyers cite new charges such as lying to the grand 
jury about whether he gave false testimony in the Jones case. The 
obstruction of justice charge is likely to include allegations that 
he tried to get Lewinsky and his secretary, Betty Currie, to lie. 
Sources say abuse of power will include lying to the American people 
and a New charge. That the president used his power as president "to 
prevent Paula Jones -- "From pursuing her case in court." No charge 
will be final until the president finishes making his case. Linda 
Douglass, ABC News, Capitol Hill. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>