<DOC>
<DOCNO> APW19981207.0392 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Briefly returning to work with a bang, President Boris Yeltsin fired 
most of his top aides on Monday and assumed personal control of two 
key government agencies during a surprise foray into the Kremlin. 
After just three hours at his office, Yeltsin returned to the government 
hospital where he has been for the past two weeks. The Kremlin shakeup 
removed several top aides who had publicly questioned the president's 
health in recent weeks. ``You can see how vigorous I am,'' Yeltsin 
was quoted by presidential spokesman Dmitry Yakushkin as telling the 
stupefied aides. The president will remain in the hospital as long 
as necessary to fully recuperate from pneumonia, Yakushkin said. He 
refused to say when Yeltsin will be released, adding that it would 
depend on the treatment. Yeltsin dismissed Chief of Staff Valentin 
Yumashev and his deputies Yuri Yarov, Mikhail Komissar and Yevgeny 
Savostyanov. Gen. Nikolai Bordyuzha, 49, the secretary of the presidential 
security council, was appointed the new chief of staff, while the 
other posts remain vacant. Bordyuzha, who will serve in both posts, 
was chief of the Border Guards before his appointment to the security 
post earlier this year. Yakushkin said Yeltsin had dismissed the aides 
because of their failure to stem crime or respond to several incidents 
of political extremism, including anti-Semitic remarks by a Communist 
deputy in the Russian parliament. ``That undermines confidence in 
the president and in the government as a whole, and that is inadmissible 
in the current difficult economic situation,'' the spokesman said. 
Yeltsin has a habit of unexpected and often unexplained dismissals. 
The latest round of ousters was also thought to reflect his unhappiness 
over the aides' unusual candidness about his health in recent weeks. 
Yumashev and other Kremlin aides openly said that Yeltsin is too weak 
to handle day-to-day affairs or to make foreign trips and suggested 
he leave control of the economy and other current affairs to Prime 
Minister Yevgeny Primakov. The Russian media has said that the passive 
and defeatist aides were further eroding Yeltsin's power. The dismissed 
aides handled the workings of the Kremlin and the president's routine 
and had considerable influence. ``The president wanted to show who 
is the boss,'' Alexander Shokhin, the head of the moderate, pro-government 
Our Home Is Russia parliament faction, told reporters. ``He's like 
a lion who licked his wounds and now roared at those who thought he 
was already out of the game.'' Ultranationalist Vladimir Zhirinovsky 
praised the president for cleaning the Kremlin of what he described 
as corrupt, weak ``slime,'' while Moscow Mayor Yuri Luzhkov added 
his support. Communists have long assailed the aides fired by Yeltsin, 
but their No. 2, Valentin Kuptsov, criticized Yeltsin anyway. ``After 
every illness or holiday of the president we always expect inexplicable 
personnel reshuffling,'' he said. In his brief flurry of activity, 
Yeltsin also said he would begin overseeing the justice ministry and 
tax police _ without replacing the actual heads. The move is aimed 
at stepping up fight against endemic corruption and other crime, Yakushkin 
said. A top democratic lawmaker, Galina Starovoitova, was murdered 
last month in St. Petersburg in an apparent contract killing. Her 
unexplained death outraged and shocked many Russian politicians and 
ordinary people. Yakushkin denied that the move reflected Yeltsin's 
dissatisfaction with Primakov's handling of the agencies, saying it 
was intended to simply streamline the government. ``In the current 
situation, the government must be like one fist,'' he added. Yeltsin 
all but disappeared from sight when he entered a government hospital 
Nov. 22 with pneumonia, the latest in a long string of health problems 
in recent years for the Russian leader. Many of Yeltsin's opponents 
claim he hasn't been seriously involved in national affairs for a 
long time and is no longer fit to lead. Despite calls for his resignation, 
Yeltsin and his doctors insist that the president will serve out his 
term, which ends in 2000. Also Monday, Yeltsin replaced the head of 
a government communications agency and set up a panel intended to 
streamline Russia's arms trade. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>