<DOC>
<DOCNO> APW19981207.0372 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
The IOC on Monday appointed the little-known European computer group 
Sema as the chief Olympic information and technology sponsor for 2001 
to 2008. The French-English company will take over from U.S. giant 
IBM, which ends its 38-year partnership with the International Olympic 
Committee at the 2000 Sydney Games. The IOC described the eight-year 
deal with Sema as the biggest sports-related information technology 
contract ever awarded. While the IOC decline to disclose figures, 
the deal is believed to be worth around dlrs 220 million. Sema will 
head a consortium of three companies in the IOC's new Olympic Information 
Technology Group. The companies will provide the computer technology 
and results systems for the summer games of 2004 and 2008 and winter 
games of 2002 and 2006. The Salt Lake City Winter Olympics in 2002 
will be the first games operating under the new technology arrangement. 
Under the deal, Sema will become a partner in the IOC's TOP corporate 
sponsorship program starting Jan. 1, 2000. TOP sponsors pay around 
dlrs 40 million for exclusive Olympic advertising rights. The IOC 
said Sema will provide the systems integration, operations management 
and applications delivery for the Olympics. The company will also 
help develop the IOC's Internet sites. IOC marketing director Michael 
Payne said the partners for venue results management and for computer 
hardware will be announced in early 1999. The Swiss watchmaker Swatch 
is favored to win the results contract, with Compaq and Sun Microsystems 
in the running for the hardware deal. Payne said the three companies 
will contribute around dlrs 500 million in cash and value-in-kind 
services to the games as part of their partnership, with the IOC and 
organizing committees putting up around dlrs 200 million for the installation 
and maintenance of the new system. The contract with Sema will be 
signed Saturday in Lausanne by IOC president Juan Antonio Samaranch 
and Sema chief executive officer Pierre Bonelli. Payne said Sema was 
chosen ahead of several other companies, including EDS and Arthur 
Andersen. Sema is a relatively anonymous European computer services 
and defense technology firm employing 16,500 people. The high-profile 
tie-in with the Olympics should put the company on the world map. 
Sema provided information systems at the 1992 Barcelona Games and 
has been involved in other sports events such as the 1994 World Cup, 
the 1996 European Soccer Championship and the 1998 Commonwealth Games. 
``It's not a very well known brand name but they come to the table 
with a tremendous amount of knowledge and understanding,'' Payne said. 
``The IOC's primary decision was to ensure we had the best technology 
solution and to create as risk-free a scenario as possible.'' IBM 
was roundly criticized for failures in the computer results system 
at the 1996 Atlanta Olympics. The IOC and IBM parted ways in an acrimonious 
split earlier this year when negotiations broke down over a new eight-year 
deal. The IOC said IBM's demands to be paid hundreds of millions of 
dollars for its services would bankrupt organizing committees in Salt 
Lake and other host cities. IBM wanted local Olympic organizing committees 
to share the technology costs. IBM executives were upset by an IOC 
decision to seek a more profitable sponsorship deal for internet services 
and sites at upcoming games, a role IBM held in the past two Olympics, 
at Nagano and Atlanta. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>