<DOC>
<DOCNO> APW19981207.0389 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Set to tighten their grip on power, Serbian lawmakers met Monday to 
pass a law granting state officials lifelong privileges, including 
high salaries, paid servants and security. The law, drafted by supporters 
of Yugoslav President Slobodan Milosevic, has been criticized by opposition 
parties and independent media since it comes amid worsening economic 
situation in the country. Despite fierce criticism, the law is expected 
to be passed by the deputies from Milosevic's Socialist Party and 
allied ultranationalists and neo-Communists. The 250-seat assembly 
will also adopt the 1999 budget and a series of measures imposing 
enormous taxes for various utilities, including private cars, mobile 
phones and weapons. The cash-strapped government is hoping to accumulate 
some 6 billion dinars (dlrs 600,000) by the move, reported Belgrade 
VIP news digest. The laws are certain to put further financial strain 
on Serbia's impoverished citizens with the country's average salary 
about dlrs 50 and unemployment reaching some 50 percent. Despite growing 
poverty, Milosevic and his government have so far faced little unrest. 
The workers have avoided street protests led by the opposition. Critics 
accuse Milosevic and his aides of accumulating wealth while destroying 
Serbia's economy in the past decade of their rule. In his opening 
speech, Premier Mirko Marjanovic praised government achievements in 
the past year, blaming the hardship on international isolation of 
Serbia and the additional costs to finance police crackdown in Kosovo, 
where ethnic Albanian rebels have been fighting for independence. 
One fourth of the 1999 budget, or 21.5 billion dinars (dlrs 2.1 billion), 
will go to financing police, the main pillar of Milosevic's decade-long 
rule in Serbia. The rest will go to social programs, education and 
other costs. Under the law on ``the rights and obligations'' of the 
state officials, such people as the president, parliament speaker, 
prime minister and others will receive salaries 10 to 20 times the 
national average. The president of Serbia will enjoy benefits such 
as a special residence provided by the government. He will travel 
free of charge and have lifelong pension worth 85 percent of the salary 
as active president. After his mandate expires, the president will 
be granted three paid servants, a car and an administrative clerk. 
His wife also will enjoy benefits. Other Serbian officials would have 
similar privileges, which also include personal bodyguards for the 
official, his family and house. The law is likely to be implemented 
retroactively, for the period since 1990 when Milosevic was president 
of Serbia. Milosevic became president of Yugoslavia, which includes 
Serbia and Montenegro, in July 1997. ``There is no end to the arrogance 
and greed of the authorities, and their cruel scoffing of millions 
of impoverished citizens,'' the opposition Serb Democratic Party said 
in a statement. ``The law ... is really a law on enriching the state 
officials.'' 
</TEXT>
</DOC>