<DOC>
<DOCNO> APW19981207.0597 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Kosovo rebels refused Friday to accept anything short of independence, 
rejecting a key element of a U.S.-proposed settlement as new border 
shootings put dangerous strains on the province's fragile peace. Escalating 
violence in Kosovo, including a shootout Friday in the province's 
second-largest city, has lent new urgency to American-led efforts 
to get Serbs and ethnic Albanians to agree on a plan for Kosovo's 
future. Thirteen ethnic Albanians have been reported killed this week. 
The Kosovo Liberation Army dealt a further setback to diplomacy Friday, 
dismissing recent signals that the rebels were ready to support a 
U.S. proposal. The ethnic Albanian guerrillas said in a statement 
distributed in Pristina that they won't accept any political solution 
``which would harm the ideals of our people toward independence, or 
which would cement, even temporarily, an imposed joint life in an 
anti-Albanian, anti-democratic'' system. A KLA political representative 
signaled last week that the rebels were ready to postpone independence 
and accept a plan giving ethnic Albanians greater self-rule. But the 
KLA said Friday it was ``undeterred'' in its ``just fight until our 
independent and democratic state is established.'' The rebels said 
they would publish a detailed response later on a revised U.S. plan, 
which called for an interim political status for Kosovo and was distributed 
to the Serb and ethnic Albanian sides this week. A Western diplomat, 
who declined to be named, called news of the KLA's rejection discouraging. 
Dozens of people have died in sporadic clashes since an Oct. 12 peace 
agreement halted more than seven months of combat in the secessionist 
Serbian province, which is populated overwhelmingly by ethnic Albanians. 
Ethnic Albanian political leader Ibrahim Rugova renewed his call for 
international military intervention in the wake of the latest violence. 
``NATO ground troop deployment would provide a greater sense of security,'' 
he said at a news conference. The flareup in violence this week is 
``a sign that we need a special security force which will protect 
citizens and stop violence in Kosovo,'' Rugova said. A reported clash 
Friday that killed a woman in the western town of Pec raised the death 
toll from the last three days to 13 _ all ethnic Albanians. The Serb-run 
Media Center said six people also were wounded in a shootout that 
erupted after a man and woman attacked a Serb policeman guarding Pec's 
hospital. The two reportedly shot and wounded the policeman, then 
fired his automatic rifle and also injured five bystanders. The Serb 
center said the female attacker was killed by other guards while her 
partner escaped. In other reported violence, Yugoslav border guards 
reportedly shot at 10 ethnic Albanians who tried to cross illegally 
into Yugoslavia from Albania and allegedly fired at the guards first. 
The shooting, which could not be independently confirmed, came a day 
after Yugoslav army border guards said they shot and killed eight 
ethnic Albanians trying to enter Kosovo from Albania. That was the 
single worst breach of the informal, 2-month-old cease-fire. The Organization 
for Security and Cooperation in Europe, which is assembling a force 
of 2,000 unarmed international verifiers in Kosovo, declined to single 
out Serb forces or Kosovo rebels for the rising violence. ``Both sides 
are in this conflict are guilty of violating the cease-fire agreement,'' 
it said, condemning violence ``from any quarter.'' A KLA commander, 
however, disputed the army's account of Thursday's killings, saying 
they were refugees returning to their village of Velika Krusa in southwestern 
Kosovo _ not guerrillas launching an attack. The commander, who gave 
his name as Sylemetaj, said six of the dead were students and most 
were from the same family. Hundreds of people were killed and up to 
300,000 were left homeless after Yugoslav President Slobodan Milosevic 
launched a crackdown last February against rebels who demand independence 
for Kosovo. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>