<DOC>
<DOCNO> APW19981207.0361 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
A summary of financial and business news from The Associated Press 
at 1200 GMT. Stories carry ``f'' or ``i'' category codes and move 
on this circuit in expanded form: HONG KONG (AP) _ Most Asian stock 
markets closed higher Monday, with key indexes in Hong Kong and Seoul 
surging nearly 5 percent after their banks cut interest rates. Hong 
Kong's blue-chip Hang Seng Index rose 465.68 points, or 4.7 percent, 
to close at 10,428.82 on the back of unexpected rate cuts in both 
Hong Kong and China and a sharp rebound on Wall Street on Friday. 
Share prices on the Seoul Stock Exchange also surged on expected plans 
by the heads of the nation's top five conglomerates to sharply pare 
the number of affiliates that each controls. The main Korea Composite 
Stock Price Index rose 23.81 points, or 4.9 percent, to 514.52. Tokyo's 
benchmark 225-issue Nikkei Stock Average rose 83.52 points, or 0.57 
percent, to close at 14,723.49. Meanwhile, the dollar was quoted at 
118.96 yen in late afternoon trading, up 0.64 yen from late Friday 
in Tokyo. (ASIAN MARKETS) SEOUL, South Korea (AP) _ Samsung, South 
Korea's second-largest conglomerate, said Monday it would swap its 
fledgling automobile subsidiary for Daewoo Group's home appliance 
businesses. The dlrs 10 billion deal was the highlight of plans announced 
by the heads of the nation's top five conglomerates to sharply pare 
the number of affiliates that each controls. In all, the Samsung, 
Hyundai, Daewoo, LG and SK groups said they would spin off at least 
130 of their 264 subsidiaries in a move to raise some 20 trillion 
won (dlrs 16.6 billion). If successful, the sales, mergers and swaps 
would let each of the giant groups lower debt levels to twice their 
equity by the end of l999. The announcement came after conglomerate 
leaders met with President Kim Dae-jung, who has been pressing them 
to restructure their bloated, overlapping empires. Analysts generally 
hailed the announcement, but some questioned whether the conglomerates 
can find buyers for many of their money-losing affiliates. (SKOREA-CONGLOMERATES) 
MOSCOW (AP) _ The battered Russian ruble continued to slip Monday, 
heading for a record low since financial crisis hit Russia in August. 
The ruble plunged again Monday, closing at 20.4 to the dollar, down 
0.8 from Friday. A team of experts from the World Bank also arrived 
in Monday in Moscow to discuss the terms of an earlier promised dlrs 
1.5 billion loan for structural reform, as well as a dlrs 800 million 
social reform credit and a dlrs 800 million loan to streamline the 
ailing coal industry, the Interfax news agency reported. The loans 
are part of an IMF-led dlrs 22.3 billion bailout package that was 
agreed upon before economic crisis forced the government to devalue 
the ruble and put a 90-day moratorium on foreign debt Aug. 17. (RUSSIA-ECONOMY) 
MELBOURNE, Australia (AP) _ The world's tallest tower _ if you count 
the communications antenna on top _ is to be built in Melbourne, nudging 
out Toronto's CN Tower by just over 19 1/2 feet (six meters). The 
CN Tower in Toronto, Canada has laid claim to the world's tallest 
structure since it was built in 1976 and stands at 1,815 feet (553.3 
meters), including its communications antenna. But under international 
rules measuring buildings, antennas do not count toward the height 
of the building. Purists who spurn antennae on their skyscrapers consider 
the 1,483-foot (452-meter) Petronas Towers in Kuala Lumpur, completed 
in 1996, the world's tallest building. Victorian state Premier Jeff 
Kennett announced Monday that the Grollo tower concept had won the 
bid for the Docklands site on Melbourne's western fringe. The 1,837-foot 
(560-meter) obelisk, estimated to cost up to 1.5 billion Australian 
dollars (U.S. dlrs 930 million), will include 120 floors of apartments, 
a luxury hotel and offices. (AUSTRALIA-TALLEST TOWER) TOKYO (AP) _ 
Japan's Nissan Motor Co. and electronics giant Hitachi Ltd. have agreed 
to strengthen their ties by jointly developing advanced technology 
for cars and auto components, the companies announced Monday. The 
cooperation will include developing technology to create the next 
generation of environmentally friendly vehicles and intelligent transport 
systems, Nissan said in a statement. The companies hope to produce 
an automated driving system sometime after 2000 and also plan to collaborate 
on cutting-edge brake systems, the statement said. Japanese media 
reported Nissan and Hitachi aim to gain a competitive edge in advanced 
car technologies through the arrangement. Many Japanese automakers 
have been forming strategic alliances with domestic rivals and overseas 
car makers as Japan's recession and economic woes in Asia push down 
profits. (JAPAN-HITACHI-NISSAN) 
</TEXT>
</DOC>