<DOC>
<DOCNO> CNN19981207.2130.0051 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> CAPTION </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
"CNN Headline News." I'm Kathleen Kennedy, in for Lynne Russell. Thanks 
for joining us. House Judiciary committee chairman Henry Hyde says 
there's a "compelling case" for impeaching President Clinton. Beginning 
tomorrow, the president's lawyers will have 30 hours over 2 days to 
prove him wrong. There are signs the White House is expecting the 
house Judiciary committee to recommend at least one article of impeachment 
against Mr. Clinton. Unidentified sources say the Clinton administration 
has been reviewing a List of 30 republican members of Congress who 
officials believe could be persuaded not to vote for impeachment if 
the matter reaches a full house vote. Tomorrow morning, they will 
begin calling 14 witnesses to defend the president. First, four legal 
experts will discuss the historical precedents and constitutional 
standards for impeachment. Next, three former members of the house 
Judiciary committee who voted to impeach President Nixon will suggest 
there isn't evidence Mr. Clinton abused his presidential powers in 
the Monica Lewinsky matter. A third panel, including former Watergate 
prosecutor Richard benveniste and washington attorney James Hamilton, 
will evaluate the evidence gathered by starr. On Wednesday, five former 
federal prosecutors will discuss prosecutorial standards for obstruction 
of justice and perjury. White House press secretary Joe Lockhart says 
President Clinton's attorneys will present "exculpatory" evidence 
that independent counsel Ken Starr did not include in his report to 
Congress. I think that we want to do here is lay out a serious case 
in defense of these allegations, and first and foremost, at the beginning, 
talk about the constitutional standards and then move toward the president's 
counsel. Alleging the facts. I think one of the things that you have 
to recognize is that the committee didn't call anyone, so there's 
no one necessarily to rebut. We have the report from the independent 
counsel, and we will address the allegations that are raised in that 
report. Judiciary committee chairman Henry Hyde says he would like 
president clinton's lawyers to present "witnesses on the facts." Hyde 
says he hasn't heard anybody say Monica Lewinsky is a liar. It's expected 
the 14 people on the defense witness list will offer expert testimony 
on perjury, impeachment, and historic context. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>