<DOC>
<DOCNO> MNB19981207.2100.0063 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> CAPTION </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
We begin with an extraordinary turn of events in Washington. If people, 
by chance, stopped following this story, if only briefly, if americans 
just looked away for the past few days, what they would find tonight 
in the nation's capital is sudden momentum, heading toward potential 
impeachment. It may be as simple as anger toward the president for 
what's been called his overconfidence. Perhaps his arrogance in answering 
the last batch of questions sent his way. Tonight, this is where we 
are. The president's lawyers are scared and scrambling at the pros 
ect that their man would only be the second president impeached in 
this nation's history. There is a real possibility it might be headed 
that way tonight. We begin with the latest from the White House. Here 
is David Bloom. Brian, tonight a key republican, Henry Hyde, says 
there is a compelling case for the president's impeachment. A top 
White House aide acknowledges that the president gave and this is 
a Direct quote, snotty and lawyerly awers to chairman Hyde's 81 questions, 
there by increasing the likelihood Mr. Clinton will be impeached. 
The president's lead lawyer has for the moment been pushed to the 
sidelines. White House aides are debating whether Mr. Clinton should 
send a contrite letter to Congress or find some other way of swaying 
the two dozen or so moderate republicans who control the president's 
fate. The post election air of bravado is gone. The president is cleanly 
aware of what he's done wrong. I can assure you that the Con trigs 
is real and is there. This this letter to the committee, T White House 
says over the next two days, 14 scholars and former prosecutors will 
testify on the president's behalf, arguing that republicans are plotizing 
impeachment and damaging the presidency . There is no comparison to 
Watergate. The charge that Mr. Clinton lied under oath about his relationship 
with monica Lewinsky is a he said-she said case that would never be 
prosecuted. White House counsel rough rough well lead -- Charles ruff 
rill lead the defense. We haven't heard anybody say Monica Lewinsky 
is a liar. Among the defenders tomorrow, a former democratic congressman 
who in 1974 voted to impeachment President Nixon. He is a Jesuit priest. 
I think he is sorry. He clearly has confessed to God and we must assume 
God has forgiven him, why can't we? The president may have a back-up 
plan. A Yale law professor will testify that there can be no Senate 
trial of there Clinton next year unless the new Congress votes to 
impeach the president. A new Congress for the president would have 
five more democratic votes in the house. David Bloom, NBC news, the 
White House. After election day with republicans hammered in several 
key races around the country, a lot of people were predicting that 
the impeachment inquiry would fade away quickly with possible little 
more than a reprimand for the president when it was all over. A lot 
has changed in the past few weeks since then. The White House has 
been forced to change its own attitude. A look at where things stand 
tonight on both ends of Pennsylvania avenue and why from NBC news, 
Gwen Ifill. The pressure is building. You are aware the house judiciousry 
committee is discussing the impeachment and charges as we speak, right? 
Conservatives lobbying for impeachment. The full house deeply divided 
over the ipet fate. I am disappointed frankly in the way the White 
House handles it as well as the committee. Congressional democrats 
compiled a list of about 30 republicans they hope to tip the scales. 
In the committee, Henry Hyde says he is prepared to support impeachment, 
even if no democrats agree. I would feel sad, but nonetheless, you 
know, you take what you can get. What is the president likely to get? 
Three major charges now being drafted by the committee. Perjury based 
on Mr. Clinton's sworn denials of his sexual relationship with Monica 
Lewinsky. Struction of justice. Did Mr. Clinton urge aides to find 
Ms. Lewinsky a job to keep her silent? Abuse of power. Did the president 
urge his secretary to cover up his relationship? Congressional democrats 
complain that republicans have prejudged the case The pressure is 
on a it is great. Throor's going to walk the line do as they're told. 
One republican voting against impeachment says the White House may 
have already alienated lawmakers they need to win. The White House 
clearly knows that if they try to lobby members of congress, it could 
blow up in their face. What do republicans want from the White House? 
An admission of guilt and some sign of Con -- contrition. Gwen Ifill, 
NBC news, the capital. NBC news Washington bureau chief moderator 
of "et the press," Tim russert joins us this evening to talk about 
what is going on in Washington. If someone had been out of the country 
not seeing the news coverage over the past several days, what changed? 
What happened to bring impeachment right back as such a real possibility? 
The president's response to the 81 questions submitted by the Judiciary 
committee was met with a White House letter that many members of the 
congress, both democrat and republican considered arrogant and they 
believed demonstrated on behalf of the president, a lack of contrition. 
It is now the view of the republicans that only voting for impeachment 
will force the president to fess up and face the responsibility for 
his behavior. Is this, in part, a message that this White House has 
been throughout giving the appearance of a bunch of folks too smart 
by half and playing this more as a plig game? Even a White House advisor 
described the letter as snotty tonight. It's been this rollercoaster 
of Bill Clinton's career. He makes a mistake, makes nice, thever reverts 
back to his old form. The house Judiciary committee will vote out 
articles of impeachment this week. 10 days from now, the full house 
will meet and debate whether to impeach william Jefferson Clinton. 
The math is very simple. You need 218 votes to impeach. There are 
218 votes necessary. There are 228 republicans. Now, five republicans 
have said they won't impeach, but three democrats said they will. 
By my calculation, the White House must win over nine more moderate 
republican votes against impeachment. Twen now and next Thursday, 
or the president will be im-- impeached. This calls for a prediction, 
more of a reality check as we sit here tonight. If you are chef justice 
of the United States, are you making plans on your calendar to preside 
in the Senate over a trial? The odds are 50/50. That means you must 
begin preparation. The Senate will have a trial if necessary, which 
creates a whole new complication because the trial of Andrew Johnson, 
130 years ago, the last time a president was formally impeached, lasted 
for three to four months. That would grind to a halt any hopes of 
bipart sanship -- bipartisanship on social security, at least for 
the unforeseeable future. The White House has to find a way to convince 
nine more republicans that impeachment is not a way to go. Our thanks 
to moderator of "meet the press," Tim russert. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>