<DOC>
<DOCNO> MNB19981207.2100.0745 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> CAPTION </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
As we reported before the break, tomorrow President Clinton's lawyers 
will open his defense from the house judiciousry committee. With us 
tonight to shed light on what we might expect in terms of strategy 
for that defense, what we might hear from the 14 witnesses scheduled 
to testify. Dick thornburg, former two-term governor of Pennsylvania. 
And Julian epstein, democratic minority chief counsel for the house 
judiciary committee. They are choosing to do this kind of law symposium 
style with a bunch of the Elder statesmen going back to learned attorneys 
like nikolas katzenback. What is the downside of that strategy? It 
is misleading to refer to these persons as witnesses. They're not 
there to offer testimony. Advocates. Exactly. They're there to address 
what's in the record now. They're not going to quarrel with that record 
extensively. On the perjury charge, for example, I think they'll say 
by the president's definition, he told the truth. Even if he didn't 
tell the truth, he didn't commit perjury. Even if he did commit perjury, 
that's not a high crime and misdemeanor that could lead to impeachment. 
Mr. epstein, do you concern with David Bloom's assessment at the top 
of the broadcast this evening that Mr. Kendall has been pushed to 
the side, and do you agree with father congressman drinen that we 
can presume God has forgiven Bill Clinton? I don't know. I'll leave 
the religion part to him. I think the White House is going to come 
up and present a couple of messages this week. I think the first thing 
they're going to say is they agreehat the president's conduct was 
wrong. They agree when he held a press conference in January 21, denying 
a sexual affair with Monica Lewinsky, that was wrong. At the same 
time, they will also say the legal case against the president is, 
in fact, this weak. The president went before the grand jury and agreed. 
He admitted he had an improper sexual affair. Now the charge against 
him is that he didn't admit to an improper sexual affair by the Con 
torted definition of the Paula Jones attorneys. When you strip away 
the other charges, this is in fact a very weak case. I think the country 
will hear that this year. The important point is we're at a critical 
youngture in this process. We're faced with two unfortunate extremes. 
There is a choice between impeaching the president for only the second 
time in this country's history. And to move over into a Senate trial, 
which would go on for six to eight months and result in the potential 
removal of the president with all the political and economic chaos 
that could result. The other choice is do nothing and say nothing, 
which everyone agrees is wrong. The republican leadership led by Tom 
delay is denying what the American people want most. What they want 
most is an expression that president's conduct was wrong. He's -- 
his misleading the nation was wrong in his January press conference, 
but not remove the president from office or go through a Senate impeachment 
trial that will go on for months. Governor thornburg, could it be 
there are good courtroom lawyers and good hearing lawyers and Mr. 
Kendall, perhaps, doesn't have a television viewer-friendly persona 
when it comes to live hearings? Well mercifully, I think his absence 
will mean we'll be spared any further vilification of judge Starr. 
That's for a good reason. We've been hearing for months how judge 
Starr abused Monica Lewinsky, kept her from her lawyers, imprisoned 
her, in fkt -- effect when first confronted with the investigators. 
We learned in April this year, a judge gave judge Starr a virtual 
clean bill of health on all those charges and because he was unable 
to defend himself the last time around because of the fact thought 
was under -- that order was under seal, there is now obviously no 
further hay to be made by these kind of relentless attacks. Beyond 
accountability, why can't the public be told status reports on judge 
starr from wherever, a three-judge panel, press release from the department 
of justice, based on judge Starr tells us this is where he's heading 
in the investigation, we believe him to be proceeding at pace? Well 
that's a very interesting question. At the heart of this whole matter 
of leaks, one of the items in contention before the urt hearing in 
the district of Columbia is what is a leak? This court would appear 
to stretch that to cover just the kind of thing you referred to kind 
of running common try or trying to dispel any attacks that are made 
on the prosecutor unjustly by defense council. I have a lot of respect 
for general thornburg, but I remember under his own tenure during 
the bush admiration during the investigation of Bill Gray, justice 
officials were filed for engaging in leaks. I believe it was the same 
one the court is using this time. No it is not. That's the key to 
it. Ken Starr has been an object because he's been considered to have 
been a Partisan. He is considered to have been engaged in a campaign 
to wage through the leaks, a campaign of public opinion against the 
president. That's not the issue. The issue now is the allegations 
bruss. That's right. The committee on Judiciary has done no independent 
investigation on its own to validate any of the allegations that judge 
Starr sent to us. Sadly -- I think we'll see this week the legal case 
against the president is, in fact, very weak. We lack the tools to 
do our own independent investigation this evening. General thornburg, 
Mr. epstein, thank you very much for coming on tonight. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>