<DOC>
<DOCNO> MNB19981207.2100.2402 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> CAPTION </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
We want to continue now our discussion of our top story this evening, 
the coming vote on impeachment in the house Judiciary committee. We're 
joined tonight by a member of that committee. Ohio republican congressman 
Steve chabat who was a member of this committee, expressed support 
in favor of dafting articles of impeachment against the president. 
He is with us tonight from Capitol Hill. Congressman, we made a point 
at the top of this broadcast, if Americans had traveled out of the 
country, not seen "meet the press," "face the nation" this week, not 
read a newspaper, we're talking about just a period of four to five 
days really. This thing has changed, turned around almost 360 degrees. 
Well, I think we're all taking this very seriously. I know all the 
members of the committee are. We've looked at a lot of evidence. We're 
doing what we think is right, and the process is moving forward. Let's 
get down to specifics. If a vote had to be taken tomorrow, how do 
you think the committee would come down, and followup would be, how 
do you think minds if minds will be changed by this panel of 14 witnesses, 
Dick thornburg called them advocates the White House is sending down? 
I don't think it's appropriate for any of us on the committee to say 
we're for impeachment or against impeachment until we heard all the 
evidence, until the president has had an opportunity to present his 
side of this. Tomorrow and the next day are going to be the president's 
opportunity to present his side. His attorney is apparently chosen 
to call a lot of professors and some attorneys. Again, from all indications, 
they're not going to address the facts. That's most unfortunate because 
there's really been no defense, no disputing of the facts in this 
case. Even some democrats have told the White House, you should have 
the president, at minimum, get a contrite letter down to the hill 
as fast as possible. At very most, either come down and testify or 
somehow choose a venue and go on television again, but contrition 
has to rule the conversation. Do you concuwith that? Would that help 
you? Well, I certainly think that the president being sorry for what 
he's done would be helpful, but the bottom line is, he needs to come 
clean. He needs to once and for all tell the truth in this matter. 
He's danced around the truth on the 81 questions that were submitted 
to him and his attorneys, he was very evasive in his responses. Bottom 
line is, I think, not only Congress but American people, want to get 
to the bottom and get to the truth in this. Contrition, without Candor, 
doesn't do much for you? That's right. It's a very serious matter. 
The charges are very significant. Perjury, obstruction of justice, 
witness tampering, abuse of power. I think just saying I'm sorry at 
this late date isn't going to cut it. Try to answer this absent party 
affiliation and forgetting who the president is right now, do you 
think it is in any way beneath the president to come, in this early 
stage, down to the hill, raise his right hand and take questions from 
the committee? Well, we have invited the president to come to the 
committee at his convenience. To testify, answer questions we might 
have. He has chosen to send down his attorneys and now to send down 
a number of professors and other lawyers, but has chosen not to come 
himself. That's certainly his choice. We're going to -- I think it's 
an open invitation. We would like to hear from him any point. The 
vote is coming soon. Congressman, I would like to thank you, having 
received the view of one republican on the Judiciary committee, we're 
going to shift gears and talk to a democrat, Harold Ford, who has 
been to the White House Christmas ball this evening. First of all, 
did you have in contact with the president this evening? How would 
you sum up the mood on what is supposed to be a nonpartisan White 
House evening? I imagine he is telling us it was a delightful affair 
at the White House, and it was in fact totally nonpartisan or perhaps 
even bipartisan. We mentioned at the top all 535 members combined 
were invited. Congressman chabat, are you still with us? Congressman, 
can you hear me? Yes, I can. That's good. Let's continue with you. 
Congressman Ford was a late edition -- addition here. We can't hear 
him, but he can hear us. Tomorrow's witnesses that go on for two days, 
just as a matter of scheduling so the American people can understand 
what's going on over the next, say, five committee business days. 
We hear from the White House by proxy over 30 a lotted hours, then 
your committee attorneys, both majority and minority get to come back 
and go over exactly what? Ha has been established so far? yes. They'll 
review the testimony as we heard it. I assume the counsel will probably 
review judge Starr's report to some degree and look at the facts and 
what the evidence is. I will listen to both sides and then I would 
assume that chairman of the committee, assuming the evidence subassistant 
yates this, chairman Hyde, will move forward on articles of impeachment. 
Then there will be opening statements and debate on that, and we'll 
move forward in the committee. Congressman Ford, let's try this again 
because of the lateness of the hour and lack of audio for a while, 
we don't have time to talk about the party. Let's talk business. Would 
it help the president's cause if he, at minimum, sent a letter down 
to the hill and appeared before the commit snee The president testified 
before the grand jury. He offered to send his attorneys. I, like most 
Americans works like for the committee to get through with this work 
as quickly as possible and let us get back to celebrating the holiday 
season, but get back to the real issues we were elected to do it's 
unfortunate at this point, Mr. Williams, Mr. delay and others in the 
party have taken the lead on this issue. They igzpword -- ignored 
the sentiment of the nation and the Congress. My good friend Steve 
chabat, who I have great respect for, will move forward as the president's 
attorneys come before the committee, that they listen closely to what 
they have to say and understand this is indeed a Grave and serious 
moment. You need public outrage to impeach the president. We don't 
have public outrage. I've been very outspoken about the president's 
Congress as he has. Really, many of us are ready to put this behind 
us. I would urge the republican leadership to listen to Peter king 
and more importantly, lisstonet American people. They always know 
best and showed us on November 3, their vote counts and that's what 
makes the difference. Public outrage isn't mentioned in the constitution. 
This is true but the offense to which the president's charnled with 
is not mentioned either plrks Williams. If we had that clarity, we 
perhaps wouldn't have that point. Sorry about the audio problems there 
thanks very much for coming on the air with us tonight. Happy holidays 
and thank you. Thank you. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>