<DOC>
<DOCNO> MNB19981207.2100.2985 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> CAPTION </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
One of New Jersey's favorite sons, Bruce springsteen is back these 
days with arelease of a new C.D. called "tracks." Bruce springsteen 
doesn't do many television interviews, as you may know, but he recently 
spoke with Bob Costas. The conversation begins with springsteen's 
emergence in the music business in the 1970's. It's being haled all 
over the country, a warm welcome to Bruce springsteen. Crazy janey 
and a mission man were back in the Ally well while Billy with his 
friends all duding up for Saturday night I read some time in the mid 
1970's you're in London and there are posters up, proclaiming you 
the future of rock 'N' roll. I've seen the future of rock 'N' roll, 
his name is Bruce springsteen. What did you do? I took them down. 
Ier to them down. It was inappropriate reaction, I thought, at the 
time. I guess I was trying to say, this was mine. You're walking around 
town ripping this thing off walls and lamp posts? It was in a theater. 
Postly in this theater we were about to play in that evening. I felt 
it was insulting to the audience, you know? I got nuts. And I was 
right. I was right. Hey, if I was going to come out and be good, then 
I'd be good. In if I wasn't going to be good I didn't want somebody 
telling people what to think. I felt, I can come out and hold my own. 
The screen door slams Mary's dress waves And then involvement few 
artistsened have popular appeal as springsteen has. Winning eight 
grammies and an Oscar, packing clubs, arenas and football stadium. 
His following is loyal and passionate in all of music. A discount 
face all alone again You said, I didn't want to be heard, I wanted 
to be understood. Obviously what you had to say has been understood 
at some level by millions and millions of people, but when you turn 
up the AMP, you're going to get some distortion. That's a deal you 
almost have to make, right sf It depends. People come to popular music 
for a lot of different reasons. They want something to vacuum the 
floor by or wash your car by on Sunday. That's an important idea. 
When you come on stage, you have to remember two things. It has to 
feel like the most important thing in your life on that particular 
life, and works it's only rock 'N' roll. I believe it is a form that 
can contain political ideas and serious ideas, and certainly I operate 
on that premise. It may not always work. There are times it doesn't 
work. I think you've got to go ahead like it does work, you know? 
Born down in a dead man's town the first gig I took was when I hit 
the ground and end up like a dog that's been beat to too much till 
you spend half your life just covering up born in the U.S. I was born 
in the U.S. Most people know the story of some people misinterpreting 
"born in the U.S." President Reagan thinking it was Pat rotic and 
quoting it. Beyond that, you talked about trick or treaters coming 
to your house, 11 or 12-year-old kids having no memory of Vietnam, 
but they sure now, hey, bruce, "born in the U.S.," baby. They were 
born in the U.S. I don't know if they were picking up on social side 
of the song or not, you know? People work, you work in "war, what 
is it good for?" That was direct and understood. You've got to get 
it in the chorus. War what is it good for absolutely nothing say it 
again Was part of the motivation behind the four-hour shows the idea 
of hey, I'm going out there to work. I come from a working class background. 
I'm not just a guy who has some talent and caught a free ride, I want 
my fox and everyone to know I'm out here to work. When I become successful, 
I'm going to still write stories about those people? I didn't have 
-- I think I wanted people to come in and leave feeling like they 
got more than their money's worth, whatever they paid for the ticket. 
That idea was important to me. The idea of giving more than you had 
to when you came out on stage. I didn't come from a particularly political 
household and didn't start out with some particular ideology. I followed 
my gut and wrote about things that are port. I try to do that I'm 
going down to the well tonight I'm going to drink till I get my fill 
but I'm hoping he when I get hold Fords I'm not sitting around thinking 
about it but I probably will You were concerned that 26, 27, 28, with 
writing songs that wouldn't seemed out of context if you performed 
them when you're 40. Is there anything you look back on now and say, 
I can't perform that now? May have been interesting, but I cannot 
do that now. You're using the word 40, actually many's at 50. Right. 
It keeps getting bummed up, doesn't it? Jack is out singing satisfaction 
at 50. There is part not satisfied or he wouldn't be out there doing 
it. You see yourself doing this in some form or another and creating 
new music, 15, 20 years down the road from here? As long as you're 
driven to do so, you know? I don't have any other occupation I'm going 
to be moving into, you know? I'm hoping this one will see me through. 
Bob Costas with Bruce springsteen. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>