<DOC>
<DOCNO> NBC19981207.1830.0228 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> CAPTION </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
This is all very high stakes. No one wants the stain of even an impeachment 
recommendation on his presidency, but the Clinton White House may 
have been overconfident after the election. And now the president's 
future may be in the hands of a small knot of moderate republicans. 
NBC's Gwen Ifill, on the pressure game. The pressure is building. 
You're aware that the house Judiciary committee is discussing the 
impeachment and the charges as we speak, right? Conservatives, lobbying 
for impeachment. But the full house deeply divided over the president's 
fate. I am disappointed, frankly, at the way that the White House 
has handled it, as well as the way the committee has handled it. Congressional 
democrats have compiled a list of about 30 undecided republicans they 
hope could tip the scales against an impeachment vote. But house Judiciary 
committee chairman Henry Hyde said today he is prepared to support 
impeachment, even if no democrats agree. I would feel sad, but you 
take what you get. What is the president likely to get? Three major 
charges now being drafted by the committee -- perjury, based on mr. 
Clinton's sworn denials of his sexual relationship with Monica lewinsky. 
Obstruction of justice, did Mr. Clinton urge aides to find Ms. Lewinsky 
a Job as a way of keeping her silent? Abuse of power, did the president 
urge his secretary to cover up his relationship? Congressional democrats 
complained today that republicans have prejudged the case. The pressure 
is on, and it's great. They're going to walk the line. They're going 
to do as they're told. One republican who will vote against impeachment 
says the White House has a delicate job ahead. The White House clearly 
knows if they try to lobby Congress it could blow up in their face. 
What to republicans want from the White House? An admission of guilt 
and some contrition. What are they likely to get? Nothing that will 
change any minds on the polarized house Judiciary committee. Gwen 
Ifill, NBC news, the capitol. And if it does pass the full house and 
goes to the Senate, what then? It would be a trial in every sense 
of the phrase. NBC's Pete Williams tonight. It would truly deserve 
the title "trial of the century." If the house voted to impeach, senators 
would start the formal preparations in January for turning the Senate 
into a courtroom. People 100 years from now, 200 years from now, will 
give this event meaning. History will give this event meaning. And 
that's why I think we need to take it very seriously. The Senate has 
tried only one president for impeachment, Andrew johnson, 130 years 
ago. But current and former Senate officials say the rules are clear 
enough from impeachment trials for 10 other federal officials. Step 
one -- send a formal summons to the president, giving him around 20 
days to respond in writing to the charges. Step two -- the prosecutors 
members of the house chosen when the impeachment articles were passed 
send the Senate their replies. Step three -- the president's lawyers 
file legal motions, hoping to get some evidence or even the charges 
themselves, dismissed. But if that doesn't work, step four -- the 
full Senate trial, probably by mid-February, to decide the president's 
fate. The Supreme Court's chief justice, William rehnquist, would 
preside, sitting in the Senate president's chair in the front of the 
chamber. The house members, acting as prosecutors, and the president's 
lawyers would sit at special tables set up on the Senate floor. Each 
side, presenting and cross-examining witnesses. The senators themselves 
listen to evidence and vote to resolve legal disputes. But other than 
that, they don't speak, addressing their questions to witnesses in 
writing. It takes a two-thirds vote to convict on any impeachment 
count. That's 67 from among the 55 republicans and 45 democrats who 
will make up the Senate next year. If convicted on any count, and 
that's a big if, the president would immediately leave office. The 
Senate could also forbid him to hold any other federal job. Either 
way, he'd have no right to appeal. Pete Williams, NBC news, at the 
capitol. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>