<DOC>
<DOCNO> NBC19981207.1830.1258 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> CAPTION </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Now to an alarming report concerning one of America's favorite vacation 
choices -- cruises. Thousands have fun, relaxing winter vacations 
aboard cruise ships every year. But several recent incidents on the 
high seas are raising new concerns about safety from crime. Here's 
NBC's Kerry Sanders. This month, December. One of the busiest months. 
In fact, vacations, already booked solid. And with all the new business, 
a new concern on the high seas -- crime. January last year, Samantha 
Romero claims she's sexually assaulted in her cabin. I felt like I 
ruined our lives. August, 1998, a woman identified only as "Jane Doe" 
claims in a Lawsuit she is sexually assaulted while on vacation by 
a crew member. The suspect, now fighting a federal extradition order 
from Italy. And earlier this year, 23-year-old Amy Bradley disappears 
while on a cruise with her family. Her parents suspicions include 
murder. Both, angry with what they say was the captains low priority 
to find her. It's horrible the way that they have reacted. Not a phone 
call in eight months, no correspondence, nothing. Despite the cruise 
lines feeling of despair for the Bradley situation, there's just no 
indication of any wrongdoing by anyone. Royal Caribbean says it takes 
Amy Bradley's disappearance seriously. Industry critic Charles Harris, 
once in charge of security on more than eight ships. Everything is 
done for the company, not for the passenger. Camply kating matters, 
because ships are in foreign waters, it is often unclear who has the 
authority to investigate a criminal allegation. Charles lipcom specializes 
in cruise-line litigation. People forget when they get on a ship, 
and it's flying a liberian flag, or a panamanian flag or a Bahamian 
flag, they are not in the United States. They are in Liberia, and 
Liberia doesn't care about them." Miami -- the busiest cruise ship 
port in the country. The FBI here investigates, an allegation of a 
serious ship-board crime every other week. But the responsibility 
of notifying the FBI of a crime lies with the victims not the cruise 
lines. The nation's biggest cruise-line company, carnival, says the 
industry is safe. On any given day, we have some 38,000 people at 
sea. The cruise ship environment is substantially safer than any American 
town of that size. There's no evidence of a crime epidemic on cruise 
ships. But when Americans are victims of high crimes on high seas, 
critics say the standing order is, first rescue the cruise line's 
reputation. Kerry Sanders, NBC news, Miami. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>