<DOC>
<DOCNO> NBC19981207.1830.0067 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> CAPTION </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Good evening. One week from tonight the full House of Representatives 
could very well have a recommendation from the Judiciary committee 
that President Clinton should be impeached. That would trigger a series 
of rancorous debates and votes the president is desperate to avoid. 
He does not want to become only the second president in history to 
face an impeachment trial in the Senate. So tonight, his White House 
team is scrambling. NBC's David Bloom at the White House now on this 
crucial week in Bill clinton's life. Tom, tonight a key republican, 
Henry Hyde, says there's a "compelling case" for the president's impeachment. 
And a top White House aide acknowledges that the president gave, and 
this is a direct quote, "snotty and lawyerly" answers to Hyde's 81 
questions, thereby increasing the danger Mr. Clinton will be impeached. 
Tonight, the president's lead lawyer, David Kendall, has for the moment 
been pushed to the sidelines. And White House aides are debating whether 
Mr. Clinton should send a Contrite letter to Congress or find some 
other way of swaying the two dozen or so moderate house republicans 
who control the president's fate. The postelection air of bravado 
is gone. Mr. Clinton's spokesman said today the president is "keenly 
aware of what he has done wrong." I can assure you the contrition 
is real and is there. In this letter to the committee, the White House 
says over the next two days, 14 sclars and former prosecutors will 
testify on the president's behalf. Arguing that republicans are politicizing 
impeachment and damaging the presidency, that there's no comparison 
to Watergate, and that the charge under oath about his relationship 
with Monica Lewinsky is a he said/she said case that would never be 
prosecuted. Charles rough will lead the president's defense. But republicans 
are complaining that no one is disputing the facts. We haven't heard 
anybody say Monica Lewinsky is a liar. Among the defenders tomorrow 
a former democratic congressman who voted no impeach President Nixon. 
He is a priest. I think he's very repentant. And his own minister 
said that he clearly has confessed to God. And we must assume God 
has forgiven him. But the president may have a back-up plan. A Yale 
law professor will testify for the White House that there can be no 
senate trial of Mr. Clinton next year also the new Congress authorizes 
the impeachment of the president. Where the president would have five 
more democratic votes in the house. tom? 
</TEXT>
</DOC>