<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981207.0081 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
In June, the House of Representatives voted to condemn, by name, the 
three white men in Texas who were charged with murdering a black man 
by dragging him behind a pickup truck. This was one of dozens of resolutions 
adopted in the 105th Congress expressing the approval or disapproval 
of lawmakers. Other resolutions involved happy matters, like the one 
congratulating Mark McGwire on breaking the home-run record; grave 
ones, like the one expressing condolences to the families of those 
killed in the bombings of the U.S. embassies in Kenya and Tanzania, 
and matters over which the Congress has no control, like the one urging 
President Mobutu Sese Seko of Zaire to resign. Yet many Republicans 
who had no compunction about voting to express strong opinions on 
these far-flung topics say now that Congress has no business passing 
a resolution censuring President Clinton for personal conduct that 
the lawmakers find deplorable. Some, like Rep. Tom DeLay, R-Texas, 
the majority whip, who has been on television day after day arguing 
for impeachment and against censure, say that censure would be unconstitutional 
because the Constitution does not specifically give Congress the authority 
to punish the president in any manner other than impeachment. Clinton's 
opponents also argue that censure would be a meaningless slap on the 
wrist, particularly in the case of a president who seems to have a 
limitless capacity to endure shame, and would not address adequately 
the disgrace they feel he has brought to the presidency. To many politicians, 
the arguments against censure seem preposterous. ``It would be strange,'' 
said Sen. Joseph Lieberman, D-Conn., if lawmakers could freely pass 
resolutions stating their views on almost every kind of behavior but 
not on conduct ``that has threatened the Clinton presidency and stirred 
broad and deep emotions among the American people.'' Still, in most 
cases, congressional expressions of opinion _ whether in resolutions 
about new baseball legends or corrupt African dictators _ are in fact 
meaningless, even frivolous. There have been instances, however, when 
resolutions stating the views of Congress have indeed carried weight. 
The Gulf of Tonkin resolution of 1964 was used for years by supporters 
of the Vietnam War as evidence of congressional concurrence with the 
military commitment. Similarly, the Persian Gulf resolution of 1991 
was seen as a stamp of bipartisan political approval of the war against 
Iraq. The Constitution explicitly directs Congress to discipline its 
own members, and the House and Senate have passed censure resolutions 
occasionally over the years. Sometimes, as in the case of Sen. Thomas 
Dodd, D-Conn., in 1967 or Sen. Dave Durenberger, R-Minn., in 1990, 
both of whom were reproached for ethical lapses, the action had little 
consequence other than to dissuade relatively obscure politicians 
from running for re-election. But the Senate's condemnation of Sen. 
Joseph McCarthy, R-Wis., in 1954 for conduct that brought ``the Senate 
into dishonor and disrepute'' marked the end of an era of what the 
Senate called distortions and misrepresentations, sent one of the 
most dominant political figures of his time packing and led to a Democratic 
majority that lasted 26 years. And the House's vote last year to reprimand 
and fine Speaker Newt Gingrich for ethical violations was an indication 
that seeds of opposition to Gingrich were sprouting among his troops. 
Rep. Peter King, R-N.Y., argues that an official, public censure would 
indeed be a severe blow to someone like Bill Clinton, who worries 
about his place in history. Of course, the underlying reason for the 
opposition to censure among most Republicans in the House is neither 
the constitutional question nor the issue of whether the punishment 
would be meaningful. It is that DeLay and most of his fellow Republicans 
in the House are determined to press ahead with a vote on impeachment. 
If censure becomes an option, it could drain votes from their cause. 
Rep. Bill Paxon, R-N.Y., called censure ``nothing more than a political 
out.'' That, presumably, is why Rep. Bob Livingston, R-La., the speaker-designate, 
will not say whether he will even allow a vote on it. Ultimately, 
many politicians agree, censure is the most likely outcome. There 
may not be enough votes in the House for impeachment. There certainly 
is not the two-thirds majority needed in the Senate for conviction. 
And if Congress fails to remove the president from office, many Democrats 
as well as Republicans will still want an official way to express 
their disapproval of his conduct. But it is hard to envision how Congress 
gets from here to there. The waters are uncharted. The only time a 
president has been censured or otherwise officially reproached by 
Congress was in 1834 when the Senate voted to denounce President Andrew 
Jackson in a policy dispute involving the removal of the secretary 
of the Treasury. The resolution did not actually contain the word 
censure, but most authorities treat the vote as amounting to the same 
thing. The resolution was revoked three years later when Jackson allies 
gained control of the Senate. In the 19th century, Congress considered 
censuring several other presidents, and censure resolutions involving 
lower-ranking executive branch officials were adopted by the House 
in a few instances. But until now, no censure resolution against someone 
other than a member of Congress has been seriously discussed in this 
century. Despite the paltry record of precedents, a small band of 
moderate Republican representatives opposed to impeachment, led by 
King, assembled a censure proposal last week and circulated it at 
the White House to get the president's reaction. The measure would 
condemn his conduct, require him to acknowledge that he had deceived 
the American people and impose a fine. The authors described it as 
a way short of impeachment to express Congress' disapproval and prevent 
the president from getting off unpunished. Democrats worked on their 
own censure resolution. Censure could take the form of a concurrent 
resolution, meaning that it would express the views of Congress but 
not require the president's signature. Or it could be a joint resolution, 
a measure resembling an ordinary bill, which would be approved in 
identical form by the House and Senate and signed by the president 
and thus carry the force of law. The Tonkin Gulf and Persian Gulf 
measures were joint resolutions, and some lawmakers who favor censure 
see a parallel here. The Constitution gives Congress the power to 
declare war, just as it gives Congress the power to impeach. These 
resolutions were steps short of a declaration of war, just as censure 
would be a step short of impeachment. The White House would not discuss 
its reaction to these proposals other than to say, as the press spokesman 
Joe Lockhart did Friday, that the president's advisers were ``aggressively 
listening.'' But the discussions were a clear indication that the 
president was interested in a back channel as an alternative to impeachment. 
Most authorities agree that Congress cannot require the president 
to pay a financial penalty. To do so would be a bill of attainder, 
a legislative punishment of an individual, which is forbidden by the 
Constitution. So the president would have to agree to the fine. Then, 
there would be no one to challenge its legitimacy. The question is, 
if the president goes along, would it really amount to punishment? 
</TEXT>
</DOC>