<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981207.0135 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Libraries have long been the front lines in the battle to preserve 
freedom of speech and the corollary liberty, the freedom to read. 
Recently, the battle intensified when libraries began offering their 
patrons the use of computers with access to the Internet. The new 
thrust aims at Internet smut and Web porn. Cyber-censors warn that 
such material curdles the minds of viewers _ adults as well as children. 
They want to filter it out _ so that the electronic stream of Internet 
data that flows into a library computer doesn't contain even tiny 
bits and pieces of information about forbidden sex. Trouble is, despite 
claims to the contrary, no software filter has ever been built that 
only blocks out material that is either obscene, under the legal definition, 
or child pornography. Neither category of speech is protected by the 
First Amendment and access to such material can be legitimately prohibited. 
However, even the best and most expensive filters block speech that 
is protected. To cyber-censors, that doesn't matter. To them, the 
First Amendment is an inconvenience, a troublesome buzzing thing that 
interferes with their control of the flow of information. Last year, 
a unanimous U.S. Supreme Court struck down two major provisions of 
the Communications Decency Act that were intended to protect minors 
from ``indecent'' and ``patently offensive'' communications on the 
Internet. The high court said that ``in order to deny minors access 
to potentially harmful speech, the CDA effectively suppresses a large 
amount of speech that adults have a constitutional right to receive 
and to address to one another.'' The court found the law unconstitutional. 
The court's opinion ended with these words: ``The interest in encouraging 
freedom of expression in a democratic society outweighs any theoretical 
but unproven benefit of censorship.'' Cyber-censors don't believe 
it. Or haven't read it. Or don't know what the high court means. So 
it's no surprise that the Internet policy adopted by Loudoun County 
(Va.) Library Board of Trustees in October 1997, which required site-blocking 
filters on all computers with access to the Internet, was struck down 
this Nov. 23. Cyber-censors don't get it. The library purchased a 
commercial site-blocking software called X-Stop manufactured by Log-On 
Data Corp., but the board of trustees recognized that X-Stop might 
not filter out all sexual material on the Internet. A policy was written 
that would plug up any holes in the filter. The library's 1997 Internet 
policy prohibited adult patrons from pulling up Web sites that contain 
material ``deemed Harmful to Juveniles'' _ whatever that means. Would 
a Web site that informed a reader of rape and violence in federal 
prisons be harmful to minors? The 1997 policy mandated that Internet 
computers ``be installed in close proximity to, and in full view of, 
library staff'' without privacy screens on the computers. The policy 
warns that public access to soft-core pornography ``could create an 
unlawful sexually hostile environment, and might incite dangerous 
criminal misconduct.'' The policy treated all the library patrons 
like prepubescent children who wanted nothing so much in life as a 
peek at sexual material. And it forced the librarians who worked there 
to act like stern mothers who just knew their kids were trying to 
get away with something naughty. The library receives its funding 
from tax dollars. The library board is selected by elected county 
officials. The library is a quasi-governmental agency _ and as such, 
it must abide by the U.S. Constitution. A group of citizens who live 
in Loudoun County, calling themselves Mainstream Loudoun, filed a 
lawsuit in federal court claiming that the library policy infringes 
on their right to free speech under the First Amendment. The lawsuit 
was joined by a number of Web site providers whose sites were blocked 
by the X-Stop filter: Christopher Filkins for The Safer Sex Page; 
Jeremy Meyers for Books for Gay and Lesbian Teens/Youth; San Francisco 
Examiner columnist Robert Morse; artist Sergio Arau, whose work is 
published on Web sites; and the American Association of University 
Women. Judge Leonie Brinkema of the U.S. District Court of the Eastern 
District of Virginia covered all the bases in declaring the library 
policy and use of filters unconstitutional. The library was under 
no obligation to provide Internet access to its patrons, Brinkema 
wrote, but once it did so, the library is ``restricted by the First 
Amendment in the limitations it is allowed to place on patron access.'' 
The government can only limit access to protected speech if it has 
a compelling interest, and then it must narrowly tailor the way it 
accomplishes its goal. Brinkema found that the library board could 
not support its contention that unrestricted use of the Internet would 
create a sexually hostile work environment. The library board's expert 
could only find three isolated incidents nationally and one in a different 
Virginia library where patrons used Internet access to look at pornography. 
Nor could the expert find a single complaint from library employees 
anywhere in the country that blamed unfettered Internet access for 
creating a hostile workplace. Therefore, the judge pointed out there 
is no compelling government interest. The use of filtering software 
on all the library computers, the judge wrote, isn't narrowly tailored 
to accomplish the library's goal. The filter blocks too many legitimate 
Web sites containing protected speech that have nothing to do with 
obscene material. Repeating a theme in the Supreme Court's CDA ruling, 
the judge wrote that the policy restricts the access of adult patrons 
to the level of what is deemed unfit for minors. The library board 
does not know what sites are actually blocked by the X-Stop filter. 
The owners of X-Stop would not supply that information. Therefore, 
the filter and the policy together created an unconstitutional prior 
restraint against blocked Web sites. For these reasons, the judge 
granted a summary judgment against the library so that it could not 
enforce its 1997 policy. It is unlikely the library board will appeal. 
On Dec. 1, the library adopted a more reasonable policy that allows 
patrons to use filtered or unfiltered forms of Internet access. Internet 
computers may have privacy screens installed. Parents will decide 
whether their children may use filtered or unfiltered Internet access. 
Brinkema's decision is a victory for freedom of speech that will send 
tiny ripples out westward across the nation. Nevertheless, cyber-censors 
never rest. There will be other cases, other libraries under the gun. 
(Charles Levendosky was recently re-elected to serve on the Freedom 
To Read Foundation Board, the litigating arm of the American Library 
Association.) 
</TEXT>
</DOC>