<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981207.0527 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
For years, New York City's public hospital system has faced one financial 
crisis after another. And each time, the city's Health and Hospitals 
Corp., by far the world's largest public-hospital collective, has 
scratched its way back to solvency. These days, even its biggest critics 
have been forced to tip their hats: The corporation has balanced its 
budget, cut costs and begun an essential transformation _ from little 
more than a collection of urban hospitals with bustling emergency 
rooms to a complex health-care organization with far more of an emphasis 
on primary and preventive care. But the somewhat belated rise of managed 
care in the city _ and particularly the imminent start-up of mandatory 
managed care for people on Medicaid _ is threatening the corporation 
with its biggest fiscal challenge yet. And a growing chorus of critics 
and supporters alike is expressing concern that there is no cohesive 
plan to deal with the problem. Even the corporation's president admits 
that some public hospitals may eventually have to close. In essence, 
the hospital system is like an aging discount store that now finds 
itself competing with a state-of-the-art Wal-Mart on one side of the 
street and a Target on the other. And its business quandary is essentially 
the same, too: No matter how much it cuts costs, how will it find 
enough customers, and revenue, to thrive? For the public hospital 
system, the customers are patients _ fewer and fewer of whom have 
been filling its beds of late. And a growing number of those patients 
have no insurance and so cannot pay. Most dauntingly, though, the 
city hospitals are in a fierce fight for their bread and butter _ 
Medicaid patients _ with the private hospitals, which have discovered 
that Medicaid money is better than nothing as managed-care companies 
cut reimbursement rates. And experts agree that the problem will worsen 
over the next few years as mandatory managed care gives many poor 
people the option of private hospital care for the first time. ``Right 
now, it is not clear where HHC is going,'' said Dr. Bruce Siegel, 
the former president of the hospitals corporation who is now chief 
executive of Tampa General Health Care in Florida. ``They have little 
or no subsidy. Their patient volume is dropping, their uninsured are 
rising and there is no plan on the horizon on the city, state or federal 
level to deal with this. A crisis is either happening now or is imminent.'' 
Much is at stake as the public-hospital system _ whose 11 hospitals 
and more than a dozen other health centers represent roughly one-third 
of the city's hospital beds _ confronts capitalism for the first time 
in its 28-year history. Even though Medicaid patients should benefit 
from their new status as a hot commodity in health care, the public 
hospitals have historically existed as a safety net for another group 
of patients _ those who cannot pay for their care. Indeed, the system 
has always used part of its Medicaid revenues to pay for the uninsured, 
whose numbers have been growing across the nation but especially in 
New York, where they are around 50 percent above the national average. 
Now, as the public hospitals contemplate a loss of Medicaid business, 
some experts say the hospitals are in danger of becoming essentially 
charity hospitals for the uninsured. As such, with revenues falling 
and cost-cutting likely to rise, there is concern that those remaining 
patients may end up underserved. Of course, no one can predict where 
all this change will ultimately leave the city's hospitals, or when 
that moment of truth might arrive. While public hospitals across the 
country are under similar pressures, the sheer size of New York City's 
system makes it a case unto itself. And while city officials hope 
to start phasing in mandatory managed care early next year, it is 
unclear when the federal government will approve the final plans. 
Dr. Luis Marcos, president of the Health and Hospitals Corp., insists 
that in the short term, the hospitals corporation's recent improvements 
will allow it to weather the storm. But many health-care experts say 
it is increasingly clear that something significant will have to give. 
The corporation will almost certainly have to go to the federal and 
state governments to seek more money for the uninsured, and it is 
uncertain how much, if any, they will give. Without an infusion of 
cash, deeper layoffs and service cuts are likely. And ultimately, 
the corporation may have to face the greatest political hurdle ever, 
closing some of its hospitals, as Marcos acknowledges. ``If we're 
going to be honest,'' Marcos said, ``if Medicaid managed care results 
in the corporation losing significant numbers of patients coupled 
with the emphasis on primary care, the day will come when some hospitals 
in this corporation will no longer be.'' Layoffs and other cost-cutting 
measures have already caused union leaders and some public officials 
to raise questions about care in some of the hospitals. And in recent 
months, the Health Care Financing Administration, the federal agency 
that runs Medicaid and Medicare, has come out with several critical 
reports on the Health and Hospitals Corp. ``I think that the public 
hospital system is starting to feel squeezed,'' said Charles Brecher, 
professor of public health administration at the Wagner School at 
New York University. ``Whether there are some hospitals that are not 
adapting as well as they should have may be showing up in these reports.'' 
The hospitals agency has tried mightily to get its financial house 
in order in the years since Mayor Rudolph Giuliani took office in 
1993 after a campaign in which he made privatization of public hospitals 
part of his platform. That plan never saw the light of day, so his 
next option was to push the corporation, which last year had a budget 
of $3 billion, to fly on its own and compete with the rest of the 
hospitals in the city. And the city has virtually eliminated its subsidy 
for the corporation; it was $293 million in 1993 and shrank to $80 
million in 1998. Cutting Back on Costs and Reflecting Trends In the 
last few years, the hospitals corporation has cut plenty of fat while 
investing in important infrastructure, like complex computer systems. 
The average time that a patient stays in a city hospital has decreased 
to 5.7 days, from 8.2 days in 1992. That is an important cost reduction, 
because hospitals are paid by the case, not length of stay. The hospitals 
corporation has also worked to catch up with the national trend toward 
outpatient care, a shift driven by managed care and by medical technology 
that allows more procedures to be done out of hospitals. The corporation 
has seen a 9.1 percent increase in visits to its clinics since 1992, 
and its ambulatory surgery cases have climbed more than 60 percent 
in that time. The net result, helped by a one-time accounting maneuver, 
is that the hospitals agency ended the 1998 fiscal year $21 million 
in the black, a far cry from 1992, when it received far more outside 
funds and lost $172 million. ``I think they have done a lot of really 
good things,'' said Martin Arrick, a director of Standard &AMP; Poor's 
who specializes in health care. ``Their financial results have improved.'' 
The most difficult question is what will happen once mandatory managed 
care starts kicking in for Medicaid recipients. Not only are many 
patients likely to go elsewhere, but insurance reimbursement rates 
under the managed-care system will also shrink. As mandatory managed-care 
plans go into effect, the corporation projects a $100 million loss 
over four years, even though the federal government is planning to 
provide it with $500 million over five years in transition money. 
And the share of its patients who are uninsured, which has risen from 
9 percent to 10 percent of its base in just a year, is expected to 
continue to climb. Marcos acknowledges that losing Medicaid patients 
could cripple the corporation since they represent roughly two-thirds 
of all its patients. ``If they choose a managed-care company that 
doesn't do business with us,'' he said, ``we lose them. If we lose 
Medicaid, we lose our revenue stream. If we lose that, we are out 
of business.'' Hopes for Its HMO and Marketing Efforts While the corporation 
is hoping that it can keep much of its patient base through its own 
health-maintenance organization, Metro Plus, and through aggressive 
marketing and courting of patients, its officials concede that patients 
will indeed be lost. But, they insist, all the efficiencies will compensate. 
The corporation is also counting on the fact that public hospitals 
and clinics are all that are available in a few areas of the city 
and that sheer familiarity will keep some Medicaid patients loyal. 
``There is no question there will be less patients,'' said Rick Langfelder, 
the corporation's chief financial officer. ``But if we focus on the 
right things, it won't be a nightmare.'' But many health-care experts 
and advocates for the poor are worried about the impact of cost-cutting 
on care for the poor as revenues dwindle. ``Over the next few years, 
HHC should be able to balance its budget,'' State Comptroller Carl 
McCall said in a recent report. ``But the challenge will be to do 
so and not reduce services to the people who need them.'' Other analysts 
from several city agencies, who would not speak on the record, echoed 
that fear. It is nearly impossible to assess the quality of care in 
hospitals without spending extensive time in them, and while union 
officials have derided the quality in hospitals where there have been 
layoffs, they are concerned about jobs as well as patient care. But 
some health-care experts contend that the spate of recent citations 
by the federal Health Care Financing Administration points to cracks 
in the hospital system. And officials at the federal agency say a 
series of these findings in such a short time is highly unusual. Last 
summer, the federal agency found enough problems with things ranging 
from outdated medicines in supply closets to lapses in care at Lincoln 
and Harlem Hospitals to write up deficiency reports on both. Then, 
this fall, the agency fined the hospitals corporation $3,050 a day, 
charging that it had improperly relocated nursing-home residents when 
it abruptly closed the Neponsit Health Care Center, a city-run nursing 
home in Queens. Corporation officials said they closed Neponsit because 
the corporation did not have enough cash to fix its physical flaws. 
And two weeks ago, Kings County Hospital Center was cited for failing 
to give some patients timely emergency care. In each case, the state's 
Health Department also weighed in with criticisms. Difficult Decisions 
Behind the Criticism Marcos asserts that those slaps are little more 
than politically motivated harassments, stemming from his office's 
difficult decisions to lay off Harlem Hospital Center employees and 
change Lincoln's medical affiliate contracts, both in the name of 
creating a more efficient organization. In the case of Neponsit, Marcos 
said government regulators unfairly criticized the corporation after 
the fact. Hospitals corporation officials also say the reports do 
not give the corporation its due for all its advances in patient care 
_ including upgrading much of its surgical equipment, reducing waiting 
times in some of its clinics and improving outreach efforts by offering, 
for example, free mammograms in poor communities. With the coming 
of Medicaid managed care, many of the city's poor will have a chance 
to vote with their feet. ``I feel very good about how healthy and 
viable this corporation is,'' Marcos said. ``We are moving in the 
right trends; patient care is very, very good.'' But what worries 
many health-care experts is whether all the issues facing the hospital 
system can be coped with at once. ``If you step back,'' said James 
Tallon, the president of the United Hospital Fund, a health-care policy 
group, which recently did a study of the city hospitals corporation, 
``the report says there is an element of improvement at HHC. But that 
is balanced with the long-term strategic question as to whether it 
can compete in the emerging managed-care environment.'' 
</TEXT>
</DOC>