<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981207.0419 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
More than two years of uproar and investigation _ into White House 
coffees and endless advertising, mysterious gardeners and munificent 
nuns, Indonesian bankers and Arkansas restaurateurs _ faded further 
into the background Monday with Attorney General Janet Reno's decision 
not to recommend an independent counsel to investigate President Clinton's 
role in 1996 campaign commercials. The decision lightens Clinton's 
load of troubles, coming as it does after Kenneth Starr dropped several 
lines of inquiry and the Paula Jones sexual misconduct suit was settled. 
The president would have cause to celebrate, if not an impending impeachment 
vote over the Lewinsky matter. The decision also strengthens what 
is emerging as the one unbendable campaign finance rule for any presidential 
aspirant who hopes to be competitive: Almost anything goes. Clinton 
is not out of the woods. A Justice Department task force will keep 
investigating possible campaign finance abuses, and the few journalists 
who are still excavating the 1996 campaign may yet find something 
damaging to the president. Ms. Reno could still recommend an independent 
counsel into another, distantly related matter, involving Harold Ickes, 
the former deputy White House chief of staff. But even if Ms. Reno 
takes that step, it poses little threat to Clinton. After Starr got 
permission to expand his investigation from real estate deals to presidential 
affairs, future independent counsels are likely to be kept on a tighter 
leash. Ms. Reno had already effectively dismissed most of the accusations 
of shady dealings on the part of President Clinton in financing his 
re-election campaign. Three months ago, however, she ordered a review 
of whether Clinton violated campaign finance rules in promoting his 
re-election in 1996 with commercials paid for by the Democratic National 
Committee. Clinton had a strong defense: He had listened to his lawyers 
every step of the way. But, more important, he did not need a strong 
defense, because of the profound weakness of the campaign finance 
rules he was accused of violating. As long as the commercials did 
not expressly advocate the election or defeat of a candidate, Clinton 
was advised, they did not have to be paid for with federally regulated 
campaign money, which is given in limited amounts. Instead, they could 
be paid for by the party, with the unrestricted donations known as 
soft money. ``We realized we could run these ads through the Democratic 
Party, which meant we could raise money in $20,000 and $50,000 and 
$100,000 wads,'' Clinton boasted to a group of donors two years ago. 
It was to snatch up such wads that the Democrats engaged in the questionable 
practices that produced the biggest scandal of his presidency, until 
the next scandal came along. The commercials, which began to be broadcast 
as early as August 1995, never explicitly urged a vote for the president. 
But they were not subtle. ``Dole-Gingrich vote no _ no to America's 
families,'' intoned one advertisement, fusing Sen. Bob Dole, then 
the front-runner for the Republican nomination, to Newt Gingrich, 
the unpopular House speaker. For their part, the Republicans paid 
for commercials providing a stirring biography of Dole. They said 
that such advertising did not call for anyone's election. Despite 
the Republican cries of outrage Monday, the political market has long 
since discounted the decision. That is, politicians who have lambasted 
Clinton for his practices have also studied them closely and have 
been following his example without fear of possible prosecution. In 
the 1998 campaign, the Republicans used soft money to pay for commercials 
assailing Clinton over his affair with Monica Lewinsky. Presidential 
hopefuls have already begun raising soft money to pay for advertising. 
Monday's decision suggests that such candidates may have less reason 
to fear the kind of aggressive investigation that could lead to a 
tightening of campaign finance laws. But Rep. Christopher Shays, R-Conn., 
who is pushing one such measure, said that he did not ``see it playing 
one way or other.'' ``The system is broken and needs to be fixed,'' 
he said. ``Soft money is the loophole that ate the law.'' Reno's decision 
and the impending impeachment vote share a deep historic connection, 
and they may in the end result in significant changes. Modern campaign 
finance laws and independent counsels both arose from the reforms 
put in place after the last bout with impeachment, during Watergate. 
Rahm Emanuel, a former Clinton fund-raiser and top aide, predicted 
that Congress would soon begin rethinking those reforms, partly because 
of the campaign finance and Lewinsky investigations. ``This is the 
last gasp of the independent counsel statute and the Watergate reforms,'' 
he said, ``and these institutions will begin to be changed in the 
next five years.'' 
</TEXT>
</DOC>