<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981207.0425 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
James P. Hoffa came out swinging Monday in his first news conference 
since being elected president of the Teamsters, promising to create 
a bigger, more militant union and calling for an end to federal supervision 
of the Teamsters. Hoffa, son of the Teamsters' most famous leader, 
presented an aggressive set of goals, among them uniting the badly 
divided union, redoubling organizing efforts and building the nation's 
largest political action committee. Asserting that the International 
Brotherhood of Teamsters had gone far to root out criminal elements, 
Hoffa said it was time to shrink and ultimately phase out federal 
supervision _ a decade-long effort to clean up a union notorious for 
corruption even before his father ran it. Hoffa complained that the 
federal oversight has cost the union more than $80 million since 1989, 
when the Teamsters agreed to the supervision to settle a federal racketeering 
lawsuit that charged the union with having entered into a ``devil's 
pact'' with the mob. ``We should start talking about a diminished 
role for the government,'' Hoffa said in an appearance at the National 
Press Club. ``It's been 10 years. Is the government going to be here 
in the year 2050? In the year 3000? It's something we should talk 
about because of the tremendous burden on the members.'' As a result 
of federal oversight, more than 200 corrupt officials have been ousted 
from a union in which three presidents, including Hoffa's father, 
Jimmy, went to prison and Hoffa's predecessor, Ron Carey, was expelled. 
The oversight effort is elaborate, involving a federal judge, a court-appointed 
review board, several investigators, a federal election monitor as 
well as judicial hearings, expulsions and appeals. ``There's been 
tremendous progress made,'' said Hoffa. ``They've eliminated certain 
pockets of corruption. I think it's time for us to move on.'' Hoffa 
said he wanted to meet with Justice Department officials to discuss 
how to shrink and ultimately end the supervision, saying he would 
move at the same time to strengthen the union's internal watchdog 
mechanism by, for instance, hiring former FBI agents to do investigations. 
. ``The union is as free of organized crime as any institution of 
its size,'' he said. ``But we have to be ever-vigilant.'' Federal 
officials indicated that they were in no rush to end their oversight 
of the union. Mary Jo White, the U.S. Attorney in Manhattan, who oversees 
Teamster investigations for the Justice Department, said she looked 
forward to meeting with the union's new leadership to insure that 
progress under the consent decree continues. ``The consent decree 
has been and remains a powerful tool in ridding the IBT of the influence 
of organized crime and corruption,'' Ms. White said. Several officials 
said they would consider ending oversight only when more corruption 
has been rooted out and union officials demonstrated over a period 
of time that they were indeed cleaning their own house. ``I don't 
think any outside observer would say now is the time to do this.'' 
said Michael Cherkasky, the federal election monitor. ``We just had 
a election in 1996 which had to be overturned because of the misuse 
of union funds. The key here is not only for the union to be free 
of criminal elements, but to make sure these reforms have caught on. 
We're not at that stage yet.'' Hoffa lost to Carey in 1996, but that 
election was overturned and Carey was expelled after federal monitors 
found that three of his aides had siphoned union money into the Carey 
campaign. Also in the 1996 campaign, federal monitors fined Hoffa's 
campaign $167,675 after finding that he had filed false reports about 
the source of some donations. With nearly all of the more than 400,000 
ballots counted Monday, Hoffa had 55 percent of the vote, Tom Leedham, 
his main opponent, 39 percent and John Metz, a St. Louis Teamster, 
had 6 percent. Hoffa's father was president of the Teamsters from 
1957 to 1971 and built it into the nation's biggest and strongest 
union, helping double members' wages and establishing the first nationwide 
contract for long-haul truck drivers. But Jimmy Hoffa was linked repeatedly 
to mobsters who plundered the union and, he served time in prison 
after being convicted for mail fraud and jury tampering. Asked what 
his father would say about his victory, Hoffa said, ``I think he'd 
be excited by it. He'd say, `The membership has spoken.' And he always 
said, `Trust the membership.' '' Hoffa, a 57-year-old labor lawyer 
from Detroit, had a strong message to employers, insisting that he 
would deliver at the bargaining table for the union's 1.4 million 
members _ the nation's second largest union after the National Education 
Association. ``There's going to be a new militancy among the Teamsters,'' 
he said. Hoffa recalled that the Teamsters once had the nation's largest 
political action committee, but it has declined to sixth or seventh. 
He said he would try to make it the largest once again, noting that 
money gets members of Congress to pay attention. In order to increase 
the union's size, Hoffa said he would stress organizing, saying the 
Teamsters should unionize not just nonunion truck drivers, but also 
increase the numbers of public employees, hospital workers and nursing 
homes in their ranks. Hoffa vowed to balance the union's budget, attacking 
Carey for letting the union's assets slip to near zero from $162 million 
when he took over. He said he would eliminate staff and earn the union 
some money from commissions by having companies issue Teamster credit 
cards and insurance policies. Ken Paff, national coordinator of Teamsters 
for a Democratic Union, an anti-corruption group that backed Leedham, 
said Hoffa evidently wanted to end supervision because the court-appointed 
review board has repeatedly embarrassed him by bringing charges against 
members of his slate. This week, the review board charged that a New 
York Teamster official elected as a vice president on the Hoffa slate 
had lied in a campaign finance report by hiding that a convicted felon 
was working for the Hoffa campaign. He could face expulsion from the 
union. Paff said it was important to have a court-appointed monitor 
oversee the Teamsters election in three years. ``A court-appointed 
monitor provides Teamsters with a measure of protection in elections,'' 
Paff said. ``Many of the power brokers behind Hoffa have a long history 
of rigging elections and committing violence against members, so without 
a monitor, having a fair election would be highly problematic.'' 
</TEXT>
</DOC>