<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981207.0472 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Mike Tyson has come to the desert to reconstruct his boxing career 
he shattered a year and a half ago when he bit Evander Holyfield's 
ears during a championship bout and subsequently had his license revoked 
in Nevada. Tyson is preparing for a Jan. 16 bout against the South 
African Francois Botha _ his first fight since his June 18, 1997, 
nightmare with Holyfield. Tyson has a new boxing adviser and a new 
trainer as he works to end his 16-month layoff, his longest since 
he served three and a half years in an Indiana prison for a 1991 rape 
conviction. His legal troubles have continued even as he has been 
preparing for this fight. Last week Tyson pleaded no contest to two 
charges of misdemeanor assault against two men in Maryland, stemming 
from an Aug. 31 auto accident after which he punched one man and kicked 
another. Tyson's lawyers had already reached an agreement with the 
men to avoid civil action. Tyson is concentrating now on his fights 
in the ring. He is still a powerful puncher, as he demonstrated when 
he buckled a sparring partner Monday afternoon with a short uppercut. 
His hand speed is still there, and he was working his jab effectively 
and putting punches together the way his new trainer, Tommy Brooks, 
wants him to. The final verdict will come when Tyson, who is 45-3, 
faces the 30-year-old Botha in Las Vegas, Nev. Tyson said he had not 
followed the heavyweight division since he had been out of boxing 
and said he had watched few bouts in any division, though he liked 
the featherweight Prince Naseem Hamed. He said he did not know what 
his presence would mean for the sport. But he knows that he needs 
this fight. ``I want to get my life stabilized,'' Tyson said in an 
hourlong interview, his first since his boxing license was reinstated. 
``I've been a real jerk. I don't know how my wife has been able to 
stay married to me. She's such a dignified woman, who isn't used to 
the kind of stuff I've put her through. Maybe she's been too embarrassed 
to leave me. Maybe she loves me too much to leave me. I don't know. 
``But I feel like I need to do something to justify myself and to 
apologize in some way. To me, justification means giving her security. 
I can do that by fighting.'' Yet Tyson cannot escape his troubled 
past. He had to register with the local police as a sex offender to 
comply with state law. That is one result of his rape conviction. 
And Tyson's plea in the Maryland case could result in an Indiana judge's 
revoking his probation in the rape case. But, after discussions with 
his lawyers, Tyson said he was not worried about the prospect of having 
to go back to prison. Instead, Tyson is immersed in preparations for 
Botha. In his corner now are Shelly Finkel, his boxing adviser, who 
once managed Holyfield, and Brooks, who was Holyfield's co-trainer 
until he moved here a month ago to work with Tyson. Brooks, a mild-mannered 
trainer, has been hired to reshape Tyson, who is 32 and has not won 
a fight in more than two years. Brooks has schooled under trainers 
like George Benton and Lou Duva and, besides Holyfield, has worked 
with Pernell Whitaker and the up-and-coming heavyweight Michael Grant. 
Brooks said there was enough raw material to make Tyson a champion 
again. Tyson got this opportunity when the Nevada State Athletic Commission 
voted on Oct. 19 to restore his license. His first comeback fight, 
with Botha will be formally announced Tuesday in Los Angeles. He is 
already at work here in a Scottsdale gym. ``We're working on basic 
fundamentals, getting back to where he used to be,'' Brooks said before 
Tyson went through his afternoon workout Monday. ``He wasn't putting 
his punches together. He was depending upon his power way too much.'' 
A family portrait of Tyson, his wife, Monica Turner, and their three 
children _ 1-year-old Amir, 2-year-old Rayna and 9-year-old Gena _ 
is one of the few personal touches that Tyson has in the spacious 
living room of his rented home in North Scottsdale, which looks out 
on a golf course. He does have other trappings of his life as an athlete 
who has made millions of dollars _ there are Harley-Davidson motorcycles, 
a Mercedes, a Land Rover and a Ferrari in the garage. ``I like it 
here, because I can start brand new,'' Tyson said as he rode in his 
black Mercedes to a workout. Finkel and Brooks are part of the new 
team. Tyson has sued his former promoter, Don King, and his former 
managers, Rory Holloway and John Horne, claiming breach of contract. 
He alleges that they skimmed 50 percent or more of the $130 million 
in purses he earned in six fights that he had after he left prison 
in 1995. He said in the interview that he did not particularly want 
or need much money but just wanted ``some security for my family.'' 
Yet his lawyers have said that Tyson is financially troubled because 
the Internal Revenue Service has placed a $13 million lien against 
his three homes, so a fight would greatly benefit him. Tyson acknowledged 
contradictions in himself. ``We are all creatures of contradiction,'' 
he said. ``Everybody wants to be loved. It's just that we all have 
different definitions of love. My definition is more of a responsibility 
to the people that I care for.'' He also said, ``People get the wrong 
perception of me,'' and added: ``People judge me with their eyes. 
If they had the chance to get to know me, to touch me, maybe they 
would think differently about me.'' Perceptions of him were intensified 
in October when the Nevada commission released a series of psychological 
evaluations of Tyson conducted by six psychologists and psychiatrists 
at Massachusetts General Hospital in Boston. The Nevada commission 
had requested the evaluations as a condition of his being considered 
for reinstatement. The report concluded that although Tyson suffered 
from depression and anger, he was mentally fit to fight. One doctor 
said he could not predict whether Tyson would lose control in the 
boxing ring again _ that he was susceptible but could manage and control 
his anger with continued therapy. Last week the former heavyweight 
champion Larry Holmes questioned Tyson's heart. ``As far as I know,'' 
Tyson said, ``he's never been known as an insightful mind reader. 
I love the sport. The sport just doesn't love me.'' 
</TEXT>
</DOC>