<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981207.0431 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
The Israelis called it Big Monday. Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu 
was almost toppled. In what was seen as the most critical day yet 
for his faltering government, Israeli lawmakers postponed a vote, 
at the last minute, to take the first step toward dissolving parliament 
and calling new elections. At the same time, in almost every West 
Bank city, Palestinian protests escalated into violent confrontations 
both with Israeli soldiers and with the Palestinian police. Together 
with the political chaos in Israel, the unrest on the Palestinian 
street created an uneasy backdrop for President Clinton's three-day 
visit to the region, scheduled to begin on Saturday. All day, legislators 
marched in and out of Netanyahu's office in parliament as the prime 
minister struggled to avert what appeared to be the strong likelihood 
of a humiliating defeat. At the last minute, just before a 9 p.m. 
vote was to be taken, Netanyahu succeeded in delaying his destiny. 
He persuaded a rigorously Orthodox party, United Torah Judaism, to 
attach a motion of no confidence in his government to the bill calling 
for early elections. For procedural reasons, that postponed the vote 
and bought Netanyahu about two weeks to bargain his way out of a political 
dead end. ``The faith in this guy is gone,'' Haim Ramon, a leader 
of the opposition Labor Party, said on Monday night. If, in two weeks' 
time, Netanyahu loses the no-confidence vote, elections for a new 
Israeli parliament would be held within the next 60 days. Troubles 
in Israel _ between the Israelis and the Palestinians, and within 
Palestinian society _ have come to a boil, just days before Clinton's 
trip. At the same time, still more Israeli political leaders added 
their voices on Monday to opposition to the visit, which many see 
as an endorsement of Palestinian sovereignty. Joining a majority of 
members of the prime minister's Cabinet who have already opposed the 
visit, Dan Tichon, the speaker of parliament, said he would refuse 
to take part in any ceremonies with Clinton. Netanyahu's troubles 
began when he signed a land-for-security agreement in October promising 
to turn over a sizable chunk of the West Bank to the Palestinians. 
This fractured his right-wing coalition, forcing him to rely on the 
Labor Party to get the peace deal approved by parliament. As his coalition 
grew steadily more dysfunctional, he sought to realign it, most significantly 
by inviting his former foreign minister, David Levy, back into the 
Government. Negotiations with Levy and his five-member Gesher Party 
broke down on Sunday. The Labor Party, while backing the movement 
for peace, sensed an opportunity to shift the balance of power back 
to its side. It called a vote on dissolving the government, which 
under the parliamentary system, would have required three readings 
to be passed. With Levy's faction, Labor counted a majority in favor 
of removing the prime minister. Judging by the insults flying from 
every corner on Monday, Netanyahu could count on few friends willing 
to endorse him publicly. If there was a theme to the insults linking 
right and left, it turned on a perception that he is not to be trusted. 
``The prime minister cheats all of the time, but not all of us are 
willing to be cheated,'' said Uzi Landau, a hard-line member of Netanyahu's 
Likud Party. Legislators shuffled in and out of the prime minister's 
office. The first to come and go were members of the right-wing Land 
of Israel front, a small coalition vehemently opposed to any Israeli 
withdrawal from the West Bank. They were told that the peace agreement 
would be frozen. Then Netanyahu sent out a written message to Israeli 
Arab legislators, saying any freeze would be temporary and would be 
lifted after Clinton's visit. ``They asked for a two-week extension, 
after which they would promote the peace, but we would not agree to 
that,'' said Abdul Wahab Darawshe, leader of the United Arab List. 
Notes were compared, and National Religious Party members went racing 
in to ask for a clarification. They apparently left unclarified. One 
member, Zvi Hendel, said, ``There comes a point where they're spitting 
at us, and it's not rain.'' In one of the clearest signs of his desperation, 
Netanyahu offered the hard-right party Moledet a seat in his Cabinet. 
It turned him down. Standing in the hallway, observing the scurrying, 
Ramon, of the Labor Party, smirked and called it a ``disgrace.'' ``All 
this for another day or two, another week or two,'' he said. In the 
end, by buying himself time, Netanyahu took a gamble that the sooner 
new elections were held, the better he would fare. The requirement 
for elections within 60 days if he loses the no-confidence vote would 
bring elections sooner than would occur under the original opposition 
bill, in which elections would have been three months off. It has 
been the reigning political wisdom here that the sooner, the better 
for Netanyahu. He is not expected to broaden his appeal over time. 
And he would fare better in a scenario in which he himself would be 
initiating the vote. Addressing parliament on Monday night, the prime 
minister criticized both the Palestinians and the Israeli opposition, 
almost in the same breath. Lashing out at Labor, he accused it of 
``cynically using the right wing's pain.'' And he tried to distance 
himself from the peace agreement, allying himself instead with his 
old stance as defender of the Greater Land of Israel. ``All of you 
who incite against me, who use name-calling _ you I'm not even going 
to address,'' he said. ``I want today to turn to the members of the 
national camp, the members of the coalition, those who are really 
interested in preserving the land, those who are really interested 
in preserving Jerusalem, those who are really interested in preserving 
Jewish life.'' In discussions on Monday, Netanyahu made it clear that 
he would trade on the events of the next two weeks. If the peace effort 
seems to be moving forward during and after Clinton's visit, he could 
sell himself as the hard-liner who won peace by talking tough to the 
Palestinians. Or if Palestinian unrest seems to justify a freeze in 
carrying out the agreement, he could try to win back the right wing. 
The violence in the West Bank continued to feed Israeli anxieties 
on Monday. For weeks, there have been Palestinian protests and marches 
seeking the release of political prisoners from Israeli jails. Many 
of the protests have led to confrontations with Israeli soldiers _ 
volleys of stone-throwing met by the shooting of rubber-encased metal 
bullets. In every Palestinian city, the relatives of the prisoners 
have set up tents, where they are camping and fasting. In Bethlehem 
on Monday, the relatives marched from the tent to Rachel's Tomb, where 
they were joined by youths who hurled stones at Israeli soldiers as 
if it were sport. The Israeli soldiers near the tomb responded with 
shooting, wounding about 10 Palestinians before using tear gas to 
disperse the crowd. At the same time, in Nablus, Palestinian police 
forces intervened to prevent hundreds of protesters from clashing 
with Israeli soldiers guarding Joseph's Tomb. They used wooden clubs, 
beating the protesters, and ended up in a shooting match with members 
of Al Fatah, the party of the Palestinian leader, Yasser Arafat. After 
the police headquarters were besieged, the Palestinian authorities 
shot and wounded 19 rioters. In Abu Dis, a West Bank town, the Palestinian 
police stood back and allowed the clashes to go on, as they did most 
everywhere else. A 20-year-old student, Nasser Erekat, was hit in 
the head by a rubber bullet and was listed in critical condition at 
a hospital on Monday night. Israeli officials said four Israeli police 
officers and two civilians were wounded in the violence on Monday. 
One man, a Jewish settler, was shot while driving between the settlement 
of Kadim and the Palestinian town of Jenin in the northern West Bank. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>