<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981207.0216 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
For the last decade, Susan, a Long Island businesswoman who recently 
turned 50, has been plagued by an annoying and potentially humiliating 
problem: She has to empty her bladder a dozen or more times a day 
and several times a night, or risk an embarrassing accident. When 
she has to go, she has to go, and soon. Fortunately, Susan is not 
shy about seeking out lavatories wherever she may be. But for more 
than 17 million Americans who share her problem of an overactive bladder, 
opportunities to urinate at a moment's notice are often limited, forcing 
them to restrict their activities, including their employment, to 
places and circumstances where lavatories are immediately available. 
Some become homebound, going out only when they can be certain of 
quick access to a bathroom. Many are forced to wear adult diapers, 
dressing in loose clothes to hide the bulge and tell-tale signs of 
an occasional accident. Sleep is often disturbed by the need to urinate 
often during the night, resulting in daytime fatigue that can impair 
work and social activities. Sexual activity may be avoided for fear 
of an embarrassing loss of bladder control. The problem is far more 
challenging than the more common condition of stress incontinence, 
where a small amount of urine can escape when a sneeze, cough, hearty 
laugh or vigorous exercise puts pressure on the bladder. When a person 
with an overactive bladder loses control, the entire bladder is likely 
to empty at once. And while stress incontinence is primarily a problem 
for women, especially as they age, overactive bladder afflicts men 
and women in nearly equal numbers, and can occur at any age. Although 
an overactive bladder is hardly rare and often has costly emotional, 
social and occupational consequences, most people with the condition 
accept it as a normal part of aging, which it is not, and sometimes 
are too embarrassed to tell even their doctors about it. Others remain 
silent because they believe _ or have been told _ that nothing can 
be done to control the problem. And yet, treatments, including a recently 
approved drug with relatively few side effects, are available that 
can significantly reduce if not eliminate the distress, discomfort 
and inconvenience associated with an overactive bladder. The bladder 
has an elastic wall containing a smooth muscle, the detrusor muscle, 
which in adults can tolerate a large increase in urine before a signal 
is sent to the brain that the bladder is about three-fourths full 
and needs to be emptied. Until that time, signals from the brain suppress 
contractions of the detrusor muscle, and thus inhibit emptying of 
the bladder. People with normal bladder function usually register 
a need to void at a bladder volume of about 250 milliliters, or about 
8 ounces, of urine. If voiding is not convenient at that point, it 
can usually be delayed through voluntary control until the volume 
of urine is about double that amount. However, an overactive bladder 
in an adult behaves somewhat like the normal bladder of babies and 
young children, whose brains cannot yet control the time and place 
of voiding. In those with an overactive bladder, a sense of urgency 
typically occurs at a urine volume of about 150 milliliters. Inhibitory 
signals from the brain fail to suppress the overactive detrusor muscle 
and it contracts inappropriately during the bladder-filling phase, 
causing involuntary voiding. People with overactive bladders experience 
at least two of three major symptoms: a need to empty the bladder 
more than eight times in 24 hours, sometimes soon after they have 
done so; sudden sensations of urgency, and urge incontinence _ a leakage 
of urine or total bladder emptying if the urge is very strong or the 
person cannot reach the toilet quickly. In most cases, the underlying 
cause is unknown. However, overactive bladder sometimes results from 
certain neurological disorders, including multiple sclerosis, stroke, 
Parkinson's disease, spina bifida and spinal cord damage. Most important 
in arriving at a correct diagnosis of an overactive bladder is obtaining 
a thorough history of urinary symptoms and eliminating other possible 
causes. The most common is a urinary tract infection, typically determined 
by a urine culture and often by the presence of blood in the urine. 
The doctor should also perform an abdominal and pelvic examination, 
looking for such anomalies as tumors, an enlarged prostate gland, 
a dropped uterus or other abnormal sources of pressure on the bladder 
or urinary tract. A doctor may also ask the patient to keep a daily 
chart of urinary output to determine whether the bladder empties fully 
during voiding since there may be an obstruction or inadequacy of 
the detrusor muscle resulting in poor bladder emptying. Sometimes 
a doctor will need to directly record bladder pressure during filling 
and voiding, a measurement known as cystometry. In an overactive bladder, 
peaks of increased pressure by the detrusor muscle are recorded during 
the filling phase, indicating periods of involuntary muscle contraction 
at a time when a normal muscle remains relaxed. There are two main 
approaches to treatment: bladder training and drug therapy. Bladder 
training aims to restore bladder control by increasing the capacity 
of the bladder before it registers the urge to void. The patient keeps 
a record of the frequency and volume of output, gradually increasing 
the time between voidings by 15 minutes until an interval of two to 
four hours is reached without leakage. A doctor may also ask a patient 
to keep a record of fluid intake, in case excessive fluids are contributing 
to the problem. However, most patients with overactive bladders have 
already cut back on the amount of fluids they consume, and some actually 
become seriously dehydrated. Bladder training is very demanding and 
must be maintained indefinitely to remain effective. For those reason, 
patients much prefer drug treatment. However, until this year, the 
available drugs brought side effects like dry mouth, constipation, 
blurred vision, confusion and urinary retention that prompted most 
patients to stop taking them. Drugs that are effective against overactive 
bladder are known as antimuscarinic agents because they hook up with 
muscarine receptors in the bladder and other organs throughout the 
body. The newest such drug, tolterodine, has a stronger attraction 
for the receptors in the bladder than those in other organs. Thus, 
bothersome side effects are much reduced and patients are more likely 
to continue therapy. Bettye Roussos, a 57-year-old saleswoman from 
Ormand Beach, Fla., says the drug, under the trade name Detrol, has 
given her back her life. She once had a voiding accident while on 
a podium to receive an award. She regularly soaked through large protective 
pads. She feared going anywhere that was more than an hour's drive, 
and she began emptying her bladder hourly in the hope of avoiding 
accidents. The urge to void awakened her four or five times a night, 
leaving her exhausted every morning. With Detrol, taken twice a day, 
her bathroom visits have been cut in half and she can now control 
urges without having to worry about accidents. Although results with 
the drug are not always so dramatic, studies show the majority of 
patients benefit significantly. A second new drug, Ditropan XL, taken 
once a day reduced urge incontinence by 83 percent and eliminated 
it entirely in 43 percent of patients, according to a study of 256 
patients reported in June to the American Urological Association. 
The manufacturer, Alza Corp., which developed the drug for Crescendo 
Pharmaceutical Corp., is awaiting marketing approval. Consumers seeking 
more information about overactive bladder can call 1-877-OVERACT (683-7228), 
a recorded hot line run by the Bladder Health Council of the American 
Foundation for Urologic Disease. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>