<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981207.0391 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
As Rep. Tom DeLay, R-Texas, the third-ranking House Republican, whips 
and wheedles his colleagues toward impeaching President Clinton, he 
seems to be filling the space between the departure of Speaker Newt 
Gingrich and the arrival of Speaker-to-be Robert Livingston. But as 
crucial votes approach, it is increasingly clear that DeLay is filling 
not so much a leadership vacuum as a need of the new speaker. Livingston 
is more than happy to let DeLay take the lead on impeachment, and 
to pressure undecided moderate Republicans by denying them a vote 
on a censure alternative. While DeLay's power has grown, not diminished, 
since the disastrous midterm elections that cost Gingrich his job, 
House Republicans say it is inconceivable that Livingston of Louisiana 
would let DeLay of Texas maintain such a high public profile if he 
did not approve of the Texan's tactics. ``DeLay's role gives Livingston 
the chance to be a statesman,'' said Rep. Zach Wamp, R-Tenn., who 
is a close Livingston ally. In recent days, Livingston has been busy 
courting conservatives wary of his tendency to cut deals with Democrats. 
He is strengthening ties with his leadership lieutenants, like DeLay, 
the chief Republican vote counter. And he is opening a long-closed 
door to conservative Democrats, beckoning them to join Republicans 
on addressing issues from Social Security to tax cuts. What Livingston 
does not want, in the weeks leading up to his formal assumption of 
the speaker's job next month, is to be remembered as the man who let 
Bill Clinton off. Nor, with an eye on a future when Clinton may still 
be president, does he want to be known as a fanatic for impeachment. 
For those reasons, he gives DeLay lots of running room _ for now. 
``There's a strategy, a psychology, for someone in a leadership position 
to take a leadership point of view,'' said Rep. Joe Knollenberg, R-Mich., 
a Livingston supporter. DeLay's frontal assault spares Livingston 
the messy infighting with House Democrats and the White House _ at 
least until the House Judiciary Committee sends articles of impeachment 
to the House floor later this week _ and postpones Livingston's crucial 
decision on whether to allow a censure vote if impeachment fails. 
While publicly pooh-poohing his influence, DeLay acknowledged as much 
on Sunday. ``Gingrich is referring and deferring to Bob Livingston, 
and Bob is waiting for the report to come from the committee before 
he decides,'' DeLay said. DeLay's Capitol Hill office is humming with 
the buzz of impeachment. Squadrons of young aides are readying their 
speed-dialers to summon lawmakers back to vote on one or more articles 
of impeachment the week of Dec. 14. Staff members are clearing their 
desks to give dozens of Republican lawmakers who are retiring or lost 
their elections _ and lost their offices _ a place to pen notes and 
call colleagues. With Livingston lying low, Gingrich all but gone 
and Rep. Dick Armey, R-Texas, the majority leader, still licking his 
wounds from a bruising fight to keep his leadership job, DeLay has 
filled the breach, using his vaunted whip operation to lead the impeachment 
charge against Clinton. The very fact that DeLay, a pugnacious, steely-eyed 
son of an oil driller, is virtually alone among his fellow House Republican 
bosses on the impeachment stage, is tilting the way the drama is playing 
out. ``When you combine his leadership role and ability to count votes, 
and his personal feelings on this issue, it'd be hard for him not 
to be a central player,'' said Rep. Howard McKeon, R-Calif., one of 
DeLay's assistant whips. A hard-core conservative with close ties 
to the Christian right, DeLay painted a bull's-eye on Bill Clinton 
soon after the scandal involving Monica Lewinsky broke in January. 
He was one of the first Republicans to call on Clinton to resign, 
and in August, when other Republicans were shying away from challenging 
Clinton, DeLay brought his whip staff back from vacation to go on 
the attack. His office acted as a congressional scandal clearinghouse, 
sending Republicans a thick binder of newspaper clippings, political 
history and Clinton's remarks from 1974 on Richard Nixon's impeachment 
inquiry, even before Kenneth Starr, the independent counsel, sent 
his report to Congress. ``For me,'' DeLay told radio listeners recently, 
``it's already been established that anybody who lies to the grand 
jury ought to be impeached.'' With Gingrich retiring, House Democrats 
and the White House are trying to paint DeLay as their new bogeyman 
_ the Republican that Democrats love to hate. DeLay, a 51-year-old 
former pest exterminator from Sugar Land, Texas, is practically itching 
for a fight. ``They tried to demonize Henry Hyde, they tried to demonize 
Linda Tripp, they tried to demonize Newt Gingrich, so I guess I'm 
the next candidate,'' said DeLay, whose nickname is the Hammer. ``I'm 
ready for it.'' What has turned DeLay from just another sharp-edged 
critic of the president to the man who may deal Clinton his most stunning 
defeat is the Texan's close ties to Livingston. A deft politician, 
DeLay was one of the earliest backers of Livingston's campaign to 
succeed Gingrich, bringing with him the 65 whips in his vote-counting 
organization. The alliance sealed the speakership for Livingston. 
As a reward, Livingston implicitly agreed to increase DeLay's budget 
and staff, and to give DeLay more say over the scheduling of legislation. 
DeLay also captured his most coveted empire-building prize: liaison 
to business groups, conservative groups and trade associations. DeLay 
insists he is not formally keeping tabs on Republicans' impeachment 
votes. Both he and Livingston say any vote to impeach the president 
would be a vote of conscience for each member. But moderate Republicans 
like Rep. Peter King of New York say that DeLay's views, combined 
with many Republicans' annoyance at the tone of Clinton's replies 
to 81 questions from the Judiciary Committee, have swung the momentum 
toward impeachment. In three separate conference calls last Wednesday 
with his whips, DeLay took the temperature of House Republicans. This 
is what he heard: an up or down vote on impeachment this year, and 
no censure. Armed with that information, DeLay is tightening the screws 
on undecided Republicans. ``His clout derives from his consistency,'' 
Wamp said. ``He's a bulldog on the positions he takes. He's tough. 
His staff is tough. They take no prisoners.'' If DeLay's skills lie 
in his powers of persuasion, it is instructive to note that on impeachment 
he has a hard sell and a soft sell that seem to be at odds. First, 
the hard sell. DeLay insists his crusade against Clinton is guided 
not by politics but by the Constitution, a pocket-sized copy of which 
he carries with him. ``It would be a travesty to the Constitution 
for us to lower the standards for breaking the law by not voting for 
impeachment,'' DeLay said last month. DeLay's softer pitch plays down 
the significance of what would be a historic House vote. ``All impeachment 
is, it's like a grand jury that looks at the evidence, and the House 
decides whether the evidence warrants sending it to the Senate for 
trial,'' DeLay said on Sunday. ``That's all it is.'' 
</TEXT>
</DOC>