<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981207.0487 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
The New York Times said in an editorial Tuesday, Dec. 8: Between them, 
the White House and the House Judiciary Committee seem determined 
to have a constitutional collision. An act of leadership by the Republicans' 
designated speaker, Robert Livingston, could avoid the impending crisis, 
but Livingston does not appear to have the stuff for it. The other 
way to avoid it would be for President Clinton to start behaving like 
a president instead of a criminal defendant. Over the next two days 
we will see whether Clinton has the stuff for that. We are not full 
of hope. Clinton's apparent plan for presenting his defense is to 
have his lawyers drape his shabby conduct and cover-up lies in the 
same threadbare legalisms we have seen before. At least 14 witnesses 
and the White House lawyers to whom Clinton has delegated the shaping 
of his legacy will argue that his misdemeanors are too low and common 
to warrant impeachment. They will also argue that his lying under 
oath fails to rise to the level of perjury. It is just regular lying 
that happened to take place after Clinton gave his solemn oath. Perhaps 
we should not be surprised. This president, after all, quibbled with 
the committee's assertion that he is the nation's chief law enforcement 
officer. But even if he will not admit to that, why would he prefer 
the indignity of impeachment to a censure deal that would salvage 
for him the small measure of honor inherent in an unhedged admission 
of wrongdoing? The president's failure to take the lead in seeking 
a censure deal can be excused but not satisfactorily explained by 
his fear of a perjury indictment. The Democratic leadership and a 
handful of Republican moderates have repeatedly signaled a willingness 
to search for a way to limit Clinton's legal exposure in return for 
a public admission that he lied under oath. But we have a White House 
legal team that in the absence of strong presidential leadership is 
conducting a shifting, situational defense that plays into the impeachment 
machinations of Tom DeLay, the Republican whip. It is possible to 
believe, as we do, that the evidence so far does not warrant impeachment 
and still see Clinton's approach as making the worst of a bad situation. 
The charges from Kenneth Starr, the independent counsel, are not going 
away. The written answers that Clinton filed to the Judiciary Committee's 
81 questions inflamed the hard-liners and alienated the Republican 
moderates Clinton will need to defeat an impeachment vote in the full 
House. The public interest still demands a forceful entry in the historic 
record censuring Clinton and recording his admission of failing in 
his constitutional duty to the rule of law. So far the leadership 
that would get the nation to that goal is missing both in Congress 
and in a White House where the president seems committed to the tactics 
of delay while his reputation is shredded to the last scraps. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>