<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981207.0218 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
A traveler out of the past, the Iceman, whose mummified body was discovered 
in the Tyrolean Alps in Northern Italy in 1991, has given archeologists 
and other scientists a lifelike picture of what people wore and ate 
and carried with them on treks into the Alps 5,300 years ago, at the 
end of the Stone Age and beginning of the Copper Age in Europe. An 
anthropologist reported last week that the Iceman was also providing 
a rare glimpse of prehistoric medicine, including his apparent use 
of a natural laxative and antibiotic. Among the Iceman's possessions 
were two walnut-size lumps with a consistency somewhere between cork 
and leather. Each lump was pierced and tied to a leather thong, perhaps 
so it could be fastened to some part of his clothing or belt. At first, 
the material was mistakenly described as tinder for starting fires. 
But Austrian microbiologists have identified the lumps as the fruit 
of the birch fungus, Piptoporus betulinus, which is common in alpine 
and other cold environments. If the fungus is ingested, it can bring 
on short bouts of diarrhea. It also contains oils that are toxic to 
certain parasitic bacteria, thus acting as a form of nature's own 
antibiotics. Scientists have not yet been able to determine the cause 
of the Iceman's death, but studies of his body have yielded a picture 
of a man stiff with arthritis who had not eaten in his last eight 
hours and may have died of exhaustion in a sudden snowstorm. An autopsy 
of the well-preserved body has at least revealed the apparent reason 
the fungus was among the Iceman's remedies of the road. British scientists 
found in the man's colon the eggs of a parasitic whipworm, Trichuris 
trichiura. This infestation causes diarrhea and acute stomach pains. 
It can also bring on anemia, which might explain the evidence of low 
iron content in some of the mummy's muscles. In the current issue 
of the British medical journal Lancet, Dr. Luigi Capasso, an anthropologist 
at the National Archeological Museum in Chieti, Italy, reviewed the 
evidence and concluded, ``The discovery of the fungus suggests that 
the Iceman was aware of his intestinal parasites and fought them with 
measured doses of Piptoporus betulinus.'' As Capasso pointed out, 
the birch fungus contains toxic resins that attack parasites like 
whipworm and another compound, agaric acid, which is a powerful laxative. 
The combined properties of the fungus could have brought at least 
temporary relief by purging the Iceman's intestines of nearly all 
of the worms and their eggs. The birch fungus, Capasso wrote, was 
probably the only such remedy available in Europe before introduction 
of the far more toxic chenopod oil from the Americas. The chenopod 
is a low shrub found in arid environments of South America. The efficacy 
of chenopod oil as a medicine was increased by adding a strong laxative 
that expelled the worms and their eggs. In ``The Man in the Ice,'' 
published in 1994 (Harmony Books, $25), Dr. Konrad Spindler, an archeologist 
at the University of Innsbruck in Austria who led the early investigation 
of the mummy, noted the first evidence suggesting that the Iceman 
might have been carrying some natural medicines. ``All folk medicine 
has its origins in prehistory,'' Spindler wrote. ``Over hundreds and 
thousands of years remedies were passed on from generation to generation. 
The modern pharmaceutical industry has frequently analyzed the active 
constituents of traditional medicines and makes use of them to this 
day, where synthetic forms cannot be produced. Seen in this light, 
the Iceman with his modest but no doubt effective traveling medicine 
kit, is not all that remote from ourselves.'' Dr. John F. Leslie, 
a fungal geneticist at Kansas State University who is editor of the 
journal Applied and Environmental Microbiology, called the reported 
link between the fungus and the Iceman's intestinal parasites ``an 
interesting and exciting finding.'' He said the toxins effective as 
medicine were produced by the fungi to protect themselves and their 
food source in the tree. Dr. Michael G. Rinaldi, a clinical mycologist 
at the University of Texas Health Science Center in San Antonio, said 
he would like to see more evidence supporting the inference that the 
Iceman was consciously treating the parasites with the fungus. If 
that proves to be the case, he said, ``It just shows that from earliest 
time, people when they were sick would try whatever they could to 
make it go away, even if they never had a clue as to why it made them 
feel better.'' 
</TEXT>
</DOC>