<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981207.0339 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
If you want to know what sets fashionable women's hearts aflutter, 
just look at their feet. More even than clothes, shoes are the not-so-obscure 
objects of desire that cause many women to throw logic to the wind 
and succumb happily to temptation. A case in point: On a recent afternoon 
at Bergdorf Goodman, a chicly dressed woman trying on a pair of Manolo 
Blahnik stilettos wondered out loud if she would be able to walk in 
them. A woman sitting opposite trying on even steeper heels said, 
``If you love them, you'll learn to walk in them.'' And so it goes. 
Shoes have become an obsession with women who care about fashion and 
can afford to indulge themselves. The besotted will happily admit 
to owning so many pairs that they forget what's in their closet. Some 
will even buy an outfit to go with shoes they just couldn't resist. 
When alligator pumps can cost as much as a designer jacket, this is 
not a cheap compulsion. But people involved in fashion have always 
believed that shoes can make or break an outfit and that wearing expensive 
shoes and handbags can make up for wearing inexpensive clothes (as 
long as the style is right, of course). So at a time when sales staffs 
in fashion boutiques are standing around chatting, shoe sales staffs 
are juggling shoppers and shoe boxes. ``If you compare the price of 
gold jewelry or a coat to the price of shoes, you can afford to indulge 
yourself,'' said Rise Gerber, fashion director for accessories at 
Bergdorf Goodman. ``I think everybody is a closet Imelda Marcos.'' 
Well, maybe not everybody, but certainly enough women in a city like 
New York to attract more and more shoe designers and manufacturers 
to open stores. Some blocks on Madison Avenue are lined with shoe 
stores. Recent months have seen new boutiques from Jimmy Choo, a London 
designer made famous by Diana, the princess of Wales; Sergio Rossi, 
an Italian company with a 30-year history, and Warren Edwards, soloing 
without Susan Bennis. They are poised to compete for women's feet 
with the stiletto king, Manolo Blahnik, whose dominant position in 
high-fashion footwear made possible a move in August from a tiny space 
on West 55th Street into a five-story town house at 31 West 54th St. 
``New York is becoming a shoe town,'' said Judy Gilliard, a senior 
vice president of Barneys New York. ``Business in Europe is not good. 
So someone like Sergio Rossi, who wants to be big, is trying to build 
his business here.'' She added: ``Warren Edwards is trying to get 
his business back. He did well when he was on 55th Street and when 
he moved to Park Avenue, the neighborhoods where his customers were. 
But when he moved to West 57th Street, his customer wasn't there. 
Now he's back on Park Avenue, where his customer is.'' Edwards, of 
the Susan Bennis-Warren Edwards team that ruled the sexy footwear 
market in the 1970s and '80s, is on his own at 473 Park Ave. (58th 
Street). His embroidered loafers and glamorous pumps are priced from 
$325 to $595, with exotic skins going for as much as $1,800. When 
the Bennis-Edwards star faded in the mid-'90s, Manolo Blahnik stepped 
in with his own interpretation of ultrafeminine, sexy shoes, which 
eschewed passing trends. Blahnik designed the interior of his new 
shop himself, with beige carpeting, walls and upholstered sofas, complemented 
by wooden African stools. There, shoppers can see scores of his shoes 
and boots in every height of heel and a wide range of colors and materials, 
including calf and suede, silk, pony skin and alligator. ``When Manolo 
comes here, he hates seeing all these shoes on the shelves, instead 
of just one or two displayed like art objects,'' said George Malkemus, 
who, with Anthony Yurgaitis, has held the license to sell Blahnik 
shoes in the United States since 1983. The only other Blahnik store 
is in London, where the designer's headquarters are (though his wares, 
like all high-quality shoes, are made in Italy). The shoes are also 
sold in Barneys New York, Bergdorf Goodman, Neiman Marcus, some Saks 
Fifth Avenue stores outside New York and upscale boutiques. Prices 
range from $295 for ballet flats to $1,700 for alligator, with most 
shoes around $500. Blahnik has never designed platforms or wide square 
toes because he believes shoes should flatter women's feet and legs. 
So whether his heels are flat, medium or high, and whether shoes are 
unadorned or decorated with pearls and crystals, the toes are always 
tapered, the straps delicate. Manolo Blahnik is the best-selling shoe 
brand at the Neiman Marcus store in Los Angeles, said Sandra Wilson, 
the store's fashion director for accessories. ``We don't sell Jimmy 
Choo, though personally I like it,'' she said. ``It's trendy. But 
Manolo Blahnik's quality is the best. The shoes are refined. Christian 
Louboutin is another strong shoe line, with a different, distinct 
look that's more ladylike, with quirky details and unusual heel shapes.'' 
Louboutin, who is based in Paris, is planning to open a boutique on 
Madison Avenue next fall, heating up the competition even more. ``But 
Manolo Blahnik is the master,'' said Ms. Gerber of Bergdorf's. ``He's 
in a class by himself. His shoes are whimsical and beautiful and opened 
the door to new people. We do very well with Blahnik and with Jimmy 
Choo, who's developed a nice following. People now come in and ask 
for Jimmy Choo.'' The three-level Jimmy Choo store in the Olympic 
Tower, 645 Fifth Ave., with an entrance on East 51st Street, is furnished 
with comfortable chairs upholstered in aubergine to contrast with 
beige carpeting and walls. (A smaller store opened last week on North 
Cannon Drive in Beverly Hills, Calif.) Choo's design philosophy adheres 
closely to Blahnik's (sometimes too closely, critics say), with narrow 
toes, slender high heels and decorative trimmings. Prices range from 
about $225 for a sandal to $865 for a mink-trimmed boot, with most 
day shoes about $400. However, Choo himself is concentrating on custom 
shoemaking in his London salon, allowing much of the ready-to-wear 
to be designed by Sandra Choi, his niece, and Tamara Yeardye, his 
business partner, who was an accessories editor at British Vogue. 
The Sergio Rossi store, which opened in mid-September at 835 Madison 
Ave. (69th Street), replacing a franchised operation at the same address, 
is part of a United States expansion that includes Bal Harbour, Fla., 
and Beverly Hills and is heading to Chicago and Houston. There are 
also 35 stores in Europe and Asia. The decor of all the stores is 
similar, with off-white floors, walls and leather sofas. While Rossi 
was always known for glamorous, pretty shoes in the Blahnik-Choo tradition, 
he has broadened his scope along with his retail empire. There are 
now trendy styles like square-toe pumps with thick heels, platforms, 
wedgies, ripple soles and sport shoes, as well as classic pointy-toe 
pumps with curved heels. Prices range from $200 to $795, with the 
best-selling shoe a pony-skin pump with a Sabrina heel at $345. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>