<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981207.0327 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Even as his legal team heads to Capitol Hill to present his defense 
against impeachment, President Clinton will open a two-day conference 
on Tuesday morning with an appeal for bipartisanship in shoring up 
Social Security, a goal that would be a stretch in the most tranquil 
of political climates. That this of all weeks is the one bringing 
together Republicans and Democrats to deal with so highly charged 
an issue is just one of the complications facing the effort to strengthen 
Social Security, which will otherwise run short of money as the baby 
boom generation retires in coming decades. Democrats are fighting 
with Democrats over whether they would be repudiating their most deeply 
held values if they supported a revamped system under which individuals 
would save and invest for their own retirement. Clinton, who is hinting 
that he might support individual-account plans, has to keep an eye 
both on his own political survival and on how the outcome of the Social 
Security debate could affect Vice President Al Gore's presidential 
ambitions. Then there is the deeply ingrained and well-justified fear 
among Republicans, nearly all of whom favor individual accounts, that 
Democrats will find a way to bludgeon them with the issue, as they 
have so often in the past. The administration was advised over the 
past year by House Speaker Newt Gingrich not to make a specific proposal, 
saying that to do so would draw so much partisan fire that the effort 
to find a compromise would founder. But with Gingrich stepping down, 
Republican leaders are ratcheting up the pressure on Clinton to put 
forward his own detailed plan, saying it is up to him to lead on an 
issue that will almost certainly require politically painful benefit 
cuts and tax increases. ``He's going to have to show some courage,'' 
Senate Majority Leader Trent Lott, R-Miss., said Sunday on NBC's ``Meet 
the Press.'' Clinton has managed to reach compromises with the Republican-controlled 
Congress on big ideological issues like balancing the budget. In this 
case, though, his own party could be a problem. Some prominent Democrats 
are bucking their party's orthodoxy to argue that individual accounts 
would allow even low-income workers the opportunity to build wealth 
in the financial markets. ``There is no more Democratic idea than 
building a generation of wealthy Americans who participate in our 
economy rather than feeling isolated from it,'' said Sen. Bob Kerrey 
of Nebraska, one of the Democrats supporting private accounts. In 
a speech last week, though, Kerrey warned that those who advocated 
changing the current system would draw considerable fire from the 
left. Two days later, the Rev. Jesse Jackson, one of many liberal 
leaders who have banded together to oppose individual accounts, suggested 
that he would mobilize against fellow Democrats as quickly as he would 
take on Republicans over the issue. Some Democrats ``argue that we 
must dare to privatize Social Security, that it takes courage to choose 
moneyed interests over the common good,'' Jackson said. ``There are 
adjectives for that choice, but courage is not one of them.'' For 
Clinton, Social Security is probably a last chance to leave a lasting 
legacy on domestic policy. Yet Democrats think they can recapture 
the House in 2000, and some liberals would like to keep Social Security 
alive as an issue to use against the Republicans. Many of the groups 
that helped Clinton and the Democrats in this year's congressional 
elections, including organized labor and liberal black groups, are 
dead set against private accounts. Should Clinton endorse private 
accounts _ and Republicans say he must if he hopes to get legislation 
through Congress _ then he might hand Rep. Dick Gephardt of Missouri, 
the House Democratic leader, an ideal opportunity to rally support 
from the left to challenge Gore for the presidential nomination. Republicans 
have their own reasons for wanting to get a deal done. They would 
like to neutralize the issue before the 2000 election, and to move 
on to their tax-cutting agenda, which Clinton has thwarted for the 
last year by declaring a need to preserve projected federal budget 
surpluses until Social Security's problems are addressed. But Republicans 
have yet to agree among themselves on the best way to finance individual 
accounts. Some of them argue that painful steps can be avoided through 
use of the budget surplus, but others say tax increases and benefit 
cuts will be necessary to keep the system solvent in the long run. 
Both sides understand the limits of bipartisanship. ``I want to see 
this happen,'' Rep. Bill Archer, R-Texas, chairman of the Ways and 
Means Committee, told a news conference Monday, repeating his desire 
to work closely with Clinton as both of their careers in elected office 
draw to a close. ``This is my last two years in Congress; it is his 
last two years as president. I would like both of us to be able to 
leave Washington having saved Social Security.'' A reporter quickly 
asked Archer if that meant Clinton should not be impeached until Social 
Security is saved. ``That,'' Archer said, ``is another issue.'' 
</TEXT>
</DOC>