<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981207.0299 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
After a long investigation of the Andy Warhol Foundation for the Visual 
Arts in response to allegations of waste and mismanagement, Attorney 
General Dennis Vacco announced Monday that the foundation would have 
to comply with strict new financial controls. The foundation will 
form an audit committee, hire a new chief financial officer and introduce 
tighter accounting and bookkeeping procedures. The foundation must 
also open its books to the attorney general's office for review four 
times a year rather than annually. Matt Sansverie, chief of the attorney 
general's charities bureau, said he had found no legal wrongdoing 
by the foundation, which was created after the artist's death in 1987 
to promote the visual arts. He declined to specify what led his office 
to impose the financial monitoring. Archibald Gillies, the foundation's 
president and chief executive, said he was relieved that the investigation 
was behind him. ``It's finished and the changes we've agreed to are 
things we've had in place,'' Gillies said. ``There have been discussions 
with the attorney general's office for four years now. These changes 
are a way for the public to better understand what we do.'' Among 
the issues looked into by the attorney general's office were the salaries 
of the foundation's employees, which Sansverie said were not out of 
line with salaries at comparable foundations. Gillies said his salary 
was $215,000 and his contract, which was supposed to expire on Feb. 
28, 2000, had been extended to June 30, 2001. Vacco's office also 
looked into the foundation's art program, which included fees paid 
to Vincent Freemont, who has had the exclusive right to sell art for 
the foundation for a commission of 10 percent. Freemont's fees had 
already been reduced last year. The foundation's new chief financial 
officer, K.C. Maurer, who has worked for NASA, started her job in 
November, Gillies said. Ms. Maurer will report to both Gillies and 
the foundation's board through the new audit committee, which will 
consist of three members of the board. Practically since its inception, 
the foundation has been the subject of criticism by people in the 
art world who complained to the attorney general's office. When Warhol 
died he left the foundation real estate, cash and an outstanding collection 
of art worth somewhere between $100 million and $800 million. At his 
death his estate included some 700 paintings, 9,000 drawings, 19,000 
prints and 66,000 photographs, all of which went to the foundation, 
which was the sole beneficiary of his will. While the foundation was 
rich in art, for years it spent millions of dollars on administrative 
costs while giving far smaller amounts to charity. Such costs are 
typically 11 cents for every dollar donated. It also sold art to make 
ends meet. The foundation's explanation for its expenses was that 
it needed money for the labor-intensive job of cataloging the collection, 
safely storing it and selling it. (Gillies said the foundation had 
about $40 million in cash assets and about $81 million worth of art, 
conservatively estimated. In its last fiscal year it made grants of 
about $9.5 million. Administrative expenses that year were $5.3 million, 
of which $3.2 million was spent on the artworks.) The foundation's 
assets were greatly eroded over the years by legal fees incurred in 
a highly publicized suit filed in 1992 against the artist's estate 
by Edward Hayes, a former assistant district attorney who was the 
estate's lawyer. The suit alleged that the estate's holdings were 
worth more than $600 million in art, not $100 million as the estate 
contended. In calculating his fee, which was to be 2 percent of the 
value of the estate, Hayes said he was owed $12 million. In 1995 a 
Manhattan judge ruled that Hayes and Francis Harvey, a lawyer working 
with him, were to be paid $7.2 million for their work. That ruling 
was overturned 10 months later when the appellate division of the 
state Supreme Court decided that Hayes was entitled to only $3.5 million 
for his work as a lawyer. Hayes subsequently complained about the 
behavior of the appellate judge, Francis Murphy, who resigned without 
answering Hayes' complaint. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>