<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981207.0412 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Joseph Stanley Faulder, a 61-year-old Canadian national who has already 
had eight dates with the Texas executioner during more than two decades 
on Death Row, now finds himself at the center of an international 
tussle over whether his ninth date, this Thursday, will be his last. 
The Canadian government, which outlawed the death penalty in 1976, 
wants Faulder's sentence commuted. Secretary of State Madeleine Albright 
wants Texas to delay the execution until an argument over his rights 
under an international treaty can be settled. And a disparate coalition 
of human rights advocates and death penalty opponents has converged 
on Texas this week to trumpet his cause. Among them was a Canadian 
delegation led by Rubin (Hurricane) Carter, an American boxer who 
moved to Toronto after spending 19 years in prison for three killings 
that he did not commit. Faulder's case has risen to the attention 
of foreign ministers because, at the time of his arrest and questioning, 
he was never informed that he had the right _ under Article 36 of 
the Vienna Convention on Consular Relations, which the United States 
signed in 1969 _ to contact the Canadian consulate and ask for help. 
This right, which the United States demands for its citizens arrested 
abroad, has been routinely denied over the years to foreigners arrested 
in this country, human rights advocates contend. Amnesty International 
said it knows of 73 foreign nationals from 24 countries being held 
on death rows in the United States, but has found only three cases 
in which the condemned were properly informed of their consular rights. 
``Until very recently, consular notification was the rare exception,'' 
said Mark Warren, U.S. coordinator for Amnesty International in Canada. 
``Until last year, we found that virtually no one in the U.S. knew 
of the treaty, even though the State Department sent out periodic 
bulletins to local law enforcement officials. Even now, it's a slow 
sell.'' The largest number of foreign nationals on death row are Mexicans 
imprisoned in Texas and California. In the Faulder case, Foreign Minister 
Lloyd Axworthy of Canada contacted Albright and Gov. George Bush of 
Texas last month to ask that the lethal injection scheduled for 6 
p.m. Thursday at the Texas death house in Huntsville be delayed until 
it can be determined whether Faulder's failure to get consular help 
did indeed contribute to the sentence of death. ``We're not talking 
here about freeing someone; we're talking about reducing a death sentence,'' 
said Richard Dieter, director of the Death Penalty Information Center 
in Washington. ``If he had been advised about consular notification 
and gotten some legal help from Canada, it might have made the difference 
in what sentence he received.'' Albright agreed to to ask Bush to 
grant a 30-day reprieve, as much as the governor is empowered to do 
under Texas law. She pointed out that there are 12,500 American citizens 
in foreign jails, including some 300 Texans, who are afforded this 
most basic consular protection. ``Our ability to provide such assistance 
is heavily dependent, however, on the extent to which foreign governments 
honor their consular notification obligations to us,'' she wrote. 
Bush says he will accede to whatever recommendation he receives later 
this week from the Texas Board of Paroles and Pardons, a body that 
has not shown itself inclined toward clemency in death penalty cases. 
In the meantime, lawyers for Faulder have asked the U.S. Supreme Court 
to delay the execution and reconsider the case. They have three days 
to decide. There is little dispute about the basic facts of the crime: 
Faulder, a drifter with a prison record, met a woman in an East Texas 
pool hall in 1975 and hatched a plan to rob an elderly oil widow. 
It went badly. The safe in the widow's house was empty, the two women 
began to struggle over a gun and Faulder first bashed in the widow's 
head with a blackjack and then buried a kitchen knife in her chest. 
Arresting officers said that they didn't know that Faulder was a Canadian 
citizen because he was carrying a Texas driver's license. It was not 
until he was on Death Row for 15 years that a new attorney thought 
to contact his family and alerted Canadian authorities, who said they 
would have provided legal assistance to Faulder if only they had known. 
Lawyers for Faulder are asking the Supreme Court to delay the execution, 
both on these grounds and because, his lawyers contend, prosecutors 
withheld important evidence during his second trial. It would not 
be the first time that the court has considered the issue of consular 
notification. Angel Breard, a Paraguayan national, was executed in 
Virginia earlier this year after the Supreme Court ruled that it was 
too late for him to make a request for clemency on such grounds. He 
had already petitioned the court on other grounds, the court held, 
and he had not brought up the consular issue before the state courts. 
The court went on to say that Breard had also failed to make the case 
that the denial of consular rights had had any significant effect 
on the outcome of his case, said Dieter of the Death Penalty Information 
Center. Faulder's case is different, said Sandra Babcock, his chief 
lawyer, because he did bring up the consular issue before Texas state 
courts and because there is reason to believe that the Canadian government 
would have provided legal help if it had been contacted. Such help 
might have saved Faulder from the death penalty, she said. The State 
Department has routinely in recent years made ``lackluster appeals'' 
for clemency at the urging of foreign governments, Warren, the Amnesty 
International coordinator, said, as it did in the case of Breard. 
Jose Villafuerte, a Honduran national, was executed in Arizona in 
April for a 1983 murder, despite protests from the Honduran government 
and the State Department that he had not been advised of his consular 
rights. In Illinois, lawyers are trying to win a new trial for Gregory 
Madej, a Polish national convicted of a 1981 Chicago murder, by arguing 
that he, too, had not been advised of his consular rights. Human rights 
activists estimate that there are 50 cases being argued in U.S. courts 
on a variety of charges that are based, in part, on a failure to provide 
proper consular notification. ``There is a golden rule,'' Warren said. 
``If the United States expects the rights of its citizens to be protected 
abroad, it must provide those rights to foreigners in the United States. 
This is not rocket science. And the U.S. State Department is painfully 
aware, I think, that they are on very thin ice.'' But the case involving 
Faulder differs from Breard's, he said, because for the first time 
Albright argued in her letter to Bush that ``the consular notification 
issues in this case are sufficiently troublesome that they may provide 
sufficient grounds for according discretionary clemency relief.'' 
A State Department spokesman said on Monday night that consular notification 
would probably not have resulted in a dismissal of the case against 
Faulder, but might be reason enough to grant special clemency to commute 
the death sentence. All Albright wants is for Bush to seriously consider 
the Canadian request for a 30-day reprieve to consider such clemency, 
said the spokesman, who would not comment on charges that previous 
State Department responses in such cases were ``lackluster.'' Bush 
returned from an overseas trip last week and told reporters that he 
would make no final decision on Faulder's execution until he received 
a recommendation from the Texas Board of Paroles and Pardons, and 
saw no need for giving the board more time to ponder the issue. ``In 
general, I will uphold the laws of the state of Texas, regardless 
of the nationality of the person involved,'' Bush said. ``People can't 
just come into our state and cold-blood murder somebody. That's unacceptable 
behavior.'' Bush, a strong supporter of the death penalty, has generally 
acceded to the recommendations of his parole board. Victor Rodriguez, 
chairman of the Texas parole board, said its recommendation on Faulder's 
case would be given to the governor ``in a timely manner,'' but Faulder's 
supporters said they had little hope that the board would recommend 
clemency. Even if the Supreme Court decided not to take up Faulder's 
case, Ms. Babcock said there is still one avenue for his supporters 
to pursue. Last week, a Texas judge ruled in a class action suit brought 
on behalf of all death row inmates that the parole board had acted 
with improver secrecy over the years. Ms. Babcock said she will file 
an appeal in Texas courts arguing that Faulder's execution should 
be delayed until this issue is resolved, too. Officials in Canada 
said they were still hoping for the best in Texas. ``We are still 
looking at all of the possible avenues,'' said Sophie Legendre, a 
spokeswoman for the Canadian Foreign Ministry. ``The case has attracted 
quite a lot of attention in Canada, especially in recent days. We 
have received a lot of calls from people asking what they can do to 
help. Generally, you know, there is not a lot of support in Canada 
for the death penalty.'' 
</TEXT>
</DOC>