<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981207.0520 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
A group of City Council members rebelled against the unusually tight 
security at City Hall on Monday by holding a news conference on the 
building's steps, but Mayor Rudolph Giuliani only smiled and shook 
his head as he walked past. The police also did nothing to stop the 
protest, even though security regulations have banned news conferences 
and demonstrations from the steps of City Hall since August and the 
city has strictly enforced the ban. About a dozen plainclothes officers 
stood quietly in the background while 15 Council members, many of 
them frequent critics of the mayor, inveighed against the newly limited 
access to the building, calling it unnecessary. Even though Giuliani 
has insisted that it was the Police Department's decision to block 
access to City Hall, the Council members directed their wrath at him. 
Thronged by more than two dozen reporters, photographers and camera 
operators, they took turns criticizing the Republican mayor for what 
they called his attempts to quash participatory government. ``People 
come to this beautiful building to raise their concerns and express 
their opinions,'' said Councilwoman Ronnie Eldridge, a Manhattan Democrat 
who organized the news conference. ``We're here today to say that 
City Hall belongs to the people, and we want it back.'' The police 
began blocking access to City Hall after the United States launched 
missiles at suspected terrorist targets last summer, saying they needed 
to protect the building from possible retaliatory attacks. Only those 
who can prove that they have business in the building are allowed 
past the concrete barricades. The controversy over the security crackdown 
intensified last week after a federal appeals court ruled that an 
AIDS service agency could hold a rally in front of City Hall. The 
group, Housing Works, held the rally last Tuesday, but the police 
directed the 200 demonstrators into metal pens, a move that riled 
civil libertarians and many elected officials. Giuliani defended the 
security measures at the rally, saying that Housing Works was a suspect 
organization and that the police had expected a much larger crowd. 
He has repeatedly insisted that City Hall needs extra protection these 
days, and that the police should be allowed to take whatever security 
measures they deem necessary. The police presence at the Housing Works 
protest angered Council Speaker Peter Vallone, who complained to the 
mayor the next day. But Vallone stayed away from the protest Monday. 
His spokesman, Michael Clendenin, said the speaker preferred to negotiate 
directly with Giuliani. The police ordered camera crews arriving for 
the morning news conference to stand to the side of the steps and 
face the street, so that City Hall would not be the backdrop. But 
when the Council members appeared and planted themselves firmly on 
the steps, the police allowed the camera crews to change position. 
As the Council members waxed dramatic, comparing City Hall Plaza to 
Tiananmen Square in Beijing, Giuliani quietly walked down the steps 
to the van that carries him around the city. Half the television cameras 
that had been recording the news conference followed him, causing 
Council members to shout more forcefully and the mayor to grin. Although 
Giuliani did not confront the Council members as he strode past, he 
later chastised them for ``blabbering'' about the security measures 
and flouting the law. ``I would think these Council members would 
be better advised to support the police rather than trying to make 
their job more difficult,'' Giuliani said during an afternoon news 
conference in Brooklyn. ``We deal with very, very dangerous situations 
in New York.'' The mayor stressed that it had been the Police Department's 
decision to allow the news conference on the steps, saying, ``If the 
police feel that was no danger to security, then that's the right 
judgment.'' Deputy Police Commissioner Marilyn Mode said the police 
ignored the event because they saw it as a political stunt that did 
not deserve their attention. ``We just are not going to be drawn into 
any manufactured incidents by members of the City Council,'' she said. 
Asked whether he had reason to believe that the building was a target 
for terrorists, Giuliani said, ``All you need is a certain degree 
of common sense to figure out the answer to that.'' Emboldened by 
their success, Ms. Eldridge and other Council members vowed to continue 
holding news conferences on the steps, saying it would help return 
City Hall to the public. But Giuliani warned that the next time, the 
police might not be so accommodating. ``I think trying to provoke 
the police into arresting you is a very juvenile thing to do,'' he 
said. ``We should be teaching our children how to respect the police, 
not creating unnecessary situations where arrests have to take place 
for symbolic purposes.'' 
</TEXT>
</DOC>