<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981207.0473 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Once again, it's the time of year when New Yorkers find themselves 
pushed into the gutter by hordes of tourists filling the sidewalks 
of mid-Manhattan. You are probably now expecting a long rant on how 
they should all go home and let us walk our streets in peace. Sorry 
to disappoint. No, this holiday season comes with a smile button and 
an ``If you can't beat 'em, join 'em'' attitude. Last weekend, it 
meant riding around with lots of nice out-of-towners on several of 
the red double-decker tour buses that you see all over. Many New Yorkers 
hate those buses, considering them intrusive, traffic-snarling polluters. 
Maybe they are. But you should try riding on top of a double-decker, 
face in the breeze, especially in the weirdly warm weather of late. 
There are few more pleasant ways to get acquainted with New York's 
kaleidoscope of neighborhoods and hear their virtues acclaimed. Don't 
believe all the terrible things about the subways, said a guide for 
New York Apple Tours, the biggest and most visible of the city's double-decker 
services. It was music to a New Yorker's ears. ``I assure you,'' he 
said, that the subways are safe (true, true) and clean (not so true, 
but lovely to hear). ``And it is the oldest subway system in the world,'' 
he told the folks from the hinterland. Say what? Even a fellow who 
increasingly has trouble remembering what he had for breakfast knew 
off the bat that this one could not be right. Didn't London's system 
open in 1863, 41 years before New York's? In the United States, didn't 
Boston's come first, in 1897? It was time to pay closer attention. 
On that ride, and others taken with both New York Apple and Gray Line 
tours, one learned many things, including these: The 1993 terrorist 
bombing at the World Trade Center killed 65 people. Frank Sinatra 
came from Jersey City. Fay Wray never made a movie after King Kong 
set her down atop the Empire State Building in 1933. George Washington 
went to Fraunces Tavern in 1789 to celebrate the end of the Revolutionary 
War. The cheapest rent in Manhattan is $2,000 a month. Jerry Seinfeld 
spent nearly $10 million for his apartment on the Upper West Side. 
Also, Brooklyn has 3 million residents. Henry Hudson sailed up the 
river named for him in the 16th century. Nelson Rockefeller was New 
York's governor in the 1940s. The Brooklyn Bridge opened in 1893. 
And 40 percent of New Yorkers work in New Jersey. Fascinating details, 
except for one thing. Not one is remotely true. Don't misunderstand. 
Most of the information in the guides' endless chatter was correct. 
And no one expects infallibility anywhere. But the sheer volume of 
error became somewhat oppressive in the hours spent on the buses. 
That was particularly true of New York Apple, outshone by Gray Line 
when it came to accuracy and to a sense of the city as something more 
than just a place where Donald Trump, Bruce Willis, Demi Moore and 
other celebrities romp. (The only thing a New York Apple guide could 
find to say about Marble Collegiate Church was that Ivana and the 
Donald ``tied the knot'' there.) Hayim Grant, New York Apple's president, 
said his guides must pass a test given by the city, and they receive 
an 80-to-90-page script written by his company and updated regularly. 
``All that having been said,'' he acknowledged, ``it's physically 
impossible to control everything that they say. We try to make sure 
that everything they say is accurate, but it's difficult.'' Indeed. 
No one can accuse the guides of lacking enthusiasm. They were friendly, 
and often entertaining. But where did they come up with a cockamamie 
``fact'' like 65 people being killed at the World Trade Center? (The 
death toll was six.) Or that 40 percent of New Yorkers work in New 
Jersey (when the U.S. Bureau of Labor Statistics says that 92 percent 
work in the city)? For the record, Fay Wray made dozens of movies 
after ``King Kong.'' The Revolutionary War ended in 1783, when Washington 
went to Fraunces Tavern to bid farewell to his troops. Manhattan apartments 
can be found for well under $2,000 a month, though they are getting 
scarcer. Jerry Seinfeld reportedly paid $4.35 million for his apartment. 
The Brooklyn Bridge opened in 1883, and Brooklyn's population is put 
at 2.5 million. Rockefeller was first elected governor in 1958, and 
Hudson did not find his river until the early 17th century. As for 
Frank Sinatra's coming from Jersey City, that by coincidence is the 
name of the interim business administrator of that city's school district. 
But a dozen hats will be bought and eaten if the guide meant him and 
not you-know-who from Hoboken. Let's see, what else? Tony Randall 
lives eight blocks south of where one guide put him. The Frick Collection 
is in the former mansion of Henry Clay Frick, not William Frick. Herald 
Square is not named after the founder of The New York Herald Tribune; 
there was no Mr. Herald. The number of eighth-graders who took the 
admissions test for Stuyvesant High School in the last academic year 
was 11,397, not 6,000, and 850 were admitted, not 200. Harlem has 
5 percent of the city's nearly 2 million African-Americans, not 15 
percent. No matter what one tour guide might think, the British had 
no tanks in Battery Park. ``Cats'' opened in 1982, not 1983 (OK, that's 
a quibble). It is more than a slight exaggeration to point to the 
Plaza Hotel and say, ``They have some rooms going for $17,000 a night.'' 
While the Presidential Suite does go for $15,000 a night, that is 
it. Plaza officials say nothing else is more expensive than a $2,200 
three-bedroom suite. Surely, that is high enough. But one aim of the 
tours seems to be to shock visitors into believing that everything 
in New York is outsized and that, as the Jersey City school administrator 
might say, if you can make it there, you'll make it anywhere. It will 
be left to others to debate whether Greenwich Village is ``the culinary 
capital of New York,'' and whether the best seafood restaurants are 
at the South Street Seaport, and whether the best shopping is on Fifth 
Avenue or in SoHo (with no mention of Madison Avenue). Smith &AMP; 
Wollensky may or not be the city's best steakhouse, as claimed, but 
are we really to believe that ``it's where the celebrities and the 
diplomats who stay at the Waldorf usually have dinner''? Then again, 
the errors and hyperbole bounced off the out-of-towners without their 
seeming to notice, like Spaldeens off a stoop. A woman from southern 
Illinois was typical. All she cared about were the sights, she said, 
not the factoids. She had a point. The idea was to enjoy the ride. 
Maybe next time, the tour guide can be persuaded to stop by Gracie 
Mansion. Always did want to see where she and George Burns lived. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>