<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981207.0405 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Attorney General Janet Reno announced Monday that she had no reasonable 
grounds to seek the appointment of an independent counsel to investigate 
President Clinton's role in a multimillion-dollar Democratic advertising 
campaign for the 1996 election. Her decision swept away a lingering 
campaign finance issue that had haunted the White House for months. 
On the final day of a 90-day review period provided under the independent 
counsel law, Reno concluded that no further criminal investigation 
of Clinton was warranted because there was ``clear and convincing 
evidence that the president and vice president lacked the criminal 
intent to violate the law.'' The conclusion was based on Reno's finding 
that their decisions had been guided by legal advice that the advertisements 
were lawful. Reno did not reach any judgment on the legality of the 
advertisements' financing itself. But she said the laws that regulated 
them were ambiguous, noting that members of the Federal Election Commission 
just last week described the standards as ``fuzzy'' and ``hardly clear.'' 
The commission is expected to consider at meetings later this week 
whether the 1996 advertising campaigns of both the Democratic and 
Republican Parties amounted to civil violations of election law. The 
$46 million television campaign at issue in Reno's decision Monday 
was financed by the Democratic National Committee and, under the law, 
was permitted to convey only broad party messages. Instead, federal 
election auditors have found, it communicated specific electioneering 
messages that directly benefited the Clinton-Gore re-election candidacy. 
It was as a result of that finding, three months ago, that Reno set 
out to determine whether an independent prosecutor should investigate 
Clinton or his aides on the ground that they might have knowingly 
evaded the law in directing the advertising drive. During the course 
of the subsequent inquiry, in which Clinton himself was interviewed 
by the Justice Department, the president's lawyers argued that his 
reliance on legal advice insulated him from a charge of wrongdoing, 
since, they said, it showed that he had had no intention of violating 
the law. On Monday, in her filing with the special federal court that 
oversees independent-counsel matters, Reno acknowledged that Clinton 
and Gore had been intimately involved in the advertising campaign, 
raising money, formulating the advertising strategy, and reviewing 
and commenting on specific campaign messages. But she found that their 
lawyers had also been deeply involved, so much so that ``media consultants 
periodically complained about the constraints the lawyers were placing 
on them.'' At the White House, officials expressed their pleasure 
with the Attorney General's move. ``As we've said all along, the president 
and the Clinton-Gore campaign complied with the spirit and letter 
of the law,'' said Joe Lockhart, the White House press secretary. 
``We are gratified by the decision.'' At the same time, Reno disappointed 
Republicans, who had hoped that the investigation into the so-called 
issue ads might finally force her to seek an independent prosecutor 
into campaign finance, an appointment they had sought for nearly two 
years through the course of inquiries into several aspects of fund-raising 
irregularities. Of all those inquiries, this one was surely among 
the most significant, because an independent counsel would have focused 
directly on Clinton's activities and cut to the core of the Democrats' 
fund-raising operations for the 1996 election. Republicans complained 
Monday that Reno had compartmentalized the campaign finance investigations, 
effectively diluting any accusations. ``Janet Reno has sliced this 
broad scandal into narrower issues so that common threads, patterns 
and facts are not considered when weighing each decision whether to 
seek an independent counsel,'' said Sen. Orrin Hatch of Utah, who 
is chairman of the Judiciary Committee. Sen. Fred Thompson, a Tennessee 
Republican and chairman of the governmental Affairs Committee, which 
held extensive campaign finance hearings last year, found the outcome 
predictable. ``Everyone knew this was coming and it's another banner 
day for the lawyers,'' Thompson said. ``Lawyers advised the president 
that what he was doing was OK. Lawyers at the Justice Department advised 
Reno that the independent counsel law didn't apply. She relied on 
every lawyer around except the ones responsible for the investigation 
_ FBI Director Louis Freeh and the head of the Justice Department's 
campaign finance task force, Charles La Bella.'' Thompson was referring 
to confidential memorandums by Freeh and La Bella who recommended 
an independent prosecutor. Reno's independent counsel decision was 
her third on fund-raising cases in the last two weeks. In an earlier 
inquiry, Reno cleared away a potentially serious obstacle from Vice 
President Al Gore's presidential path. In that case, Reno found on 
Nov. 24 that there was insufficient evidence for an outside prosecutor 
to investigate whether Gore lied about his White House fund-raising 
efforts in 1996. Taken as a whole, Reno's independent counsel decisions 
represent what campaign finance lawyers said was probably the last 
chance for her to allow an outside prosecutor to examine the actions 
of senior White House officials in financing Clinton's reelection. 
In effect, her decision Monday meant that no such inquiry is likely 
to ever take place. As a result, in two years of episodic inquiries, 
Reno has issued a string of decisions that have effectively absolved 
the White House of wrongdoing related to a panopoly of activities 
like presidential and vice presidential phone calls seeking campaign 
donations, intimate White House coffees for large donors and special 
plums such as overnight stays at the executive mansion. The action 
on Monday, however, did not bring an end investigations into campaign 
finance. On Nov. 30, Reno obtained a 60-day extension of her inquiry 
into whether Harold Ickes, formerly Clinton's deputy chief of staff, 
lied to a Senate panel about his activities in behalf of the Teamsters 
union in a labor dispute at a California walnut processing plant. 
An audit report released last week showed that the presidential campaigns 
of both Clinton and Bob Dole had illegally benefited from issue advertising 
paid for by their parties. The staff recommended that the Clinton 
campaign committee be forced to repay the government $7 million and 
the Dole campaign $17.7 million. But election officials said that 
the full six-member commission would almost certainly reject the staff 
recommendation, given that the members, three Republicans and three 
Democrats, are beholden to their parties. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>