<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981207.0422 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
His credentials to coach women's professional basketball were unassailable, 
though Van Chancellor admits his original intentions were not altogether 
pure. It was during the mid-1960s when Chancellor, teaching math and 
coaching boys' basketball in Horn Lake, Miss., went to the principal 
one day and said he needed a study hall break. ``There weren't too 
many math teachers in Mississippi in those days,'' the coach of the 
Houston Comets drawled recently on the phone. ``They told me they 
also needed a coach for the girls' team. If I took it over, I'd be 
able to get out of two classes a day.'' Chancellor never did get out 
of women's basketball after that, though he admits he was ``devastated'' 
when, as the University of Mississippi women's coach, he was passed 
over for the men's job in 1985. Now he says ``thank God I was,'' for 
he got to coach his daughter, Renee, at Ole Miss and win the Southeastern 
Conference title against Pat Summitt and go on to the first two championships 
in the Women's National Basketball Association with Cynthia Cooper 
and Sheryl Swoopes. He coached women for $4,800 a year, back when 
the rules said three offensive and defensive players couldn't cross 
midcourt. He is, at 54, a committed lifer, and proud of it. The same, 
unfortunately, can't yet be said for every WNBA male coach, the number 
of which will reach five (out of 12) when the Liberty, as expected, 
announces Richie Adubato as Nancy Darsch's successor Wednesday in 
New York. The last four league vacancies, in fact, have gone to men, 
as have a couple (K.C. Jones and Jim Cleamons) in the rival American 
Basketball League. Only Brian Agler, lifted by the WNBA's new Minnesota 
franchise from the two-time champion Columbus Quest of the ABL, would 
qualify in the way Chancellor did. If it is premature to scream Old 
Boy Network, it is not too soon to point out that the WNBA teams are 
owned, overseen and in some cases operated by men. Under the stress 
of turning a profit, sports people tend to make the safe hire, usually 
someone they know, or best relate to. ``What's happening is that our 
teams are still trying to determine what the ideal profile for a women's 
pro coach really is,'' said Val Ackerman, the WNBA president. To be 
fair, the WNBA began with 9 of 10 female coaches, has several women 
as general managers and, as Ackerman said, ``Last time I checked, 
I was a woman.'' The biggest names in the college game, female or 
male, have not wanted to surrender tenured positions for the less 
prestigious pros. The pool of known coaching talent is not Olympic-size. 
That said, when Scott Layden hired his father, Frank, to rescue the 
slumping Utah Starzz last summer, no one pronounced the hire a triumph 
of the women's movement. Nancy Lieberman-Cline, who once hoisted a 
few jazzy jumpers in one of Layden's summer camps, took her Detroit 
team into Utah shortly thereafter. Half joking, half raising a most 
salient issue, she asked Layden, ``So am I going to see you out scouting 
the women's college games?'' Layden cleared his throat, then assured 
her the Starzz were looking for another coach, presumably a woman, 
one not yet found. Next came Orlando Woolridge, the former NBA no-conscience 
gunner who spent last season as an assistant in Los Angeles, where 
he was eventually elevated to the Sparks' head position. Agler's hire 
in Minnesota was an obvious strike against the enemy. Now, in all 
likelihood, comes Adubato, a respected product of the Hubie Brown 
stable, though three times dismissed from NBA head-coaching jobs. 
``With all due respect to Frank, Orlando and Richie, women only have 
one shot,'' Lieberman-Cline said. ``Guys, it seems now, can get fired 
in the men's game, go to the women's game and make a couple of hundred 
thousand. And when it comes to choosing a women's coach, if you're 
not a female g.m., how would you even know who the qualified ones 
are?'' In the Liberty's case, General Manager Carol Blazejowski presumably 
did, and has apparently chosen a man. Swoopes, in town last week for 
the March of Dimes luncheon, likewise said she did not believe that 
women's leagues have a mandate to just hire women. ``But what I would 
also like to see are some opportunities for women in the men's game,'' 
she said. The best Lieberman-Cline could do on that score was a rumor 
she picked up somewhere that George Karl might be interested in Cheryl 
Miller, the Phoenix Mercury coach, as an assistant in Milwaukee. As 
that would be a first, an old math teacher might advise Swoopes and 
the others to not hold their breath, waiting for this equation to 
balance out soon. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>