<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981207.0343 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Pity the poor tourism officials who work for this vest-pocket Portuguese 
colony on the southeast coast of China. One year before it is handed 
over to China, Macau is eager to present itself as a destination for 
the discriminating traveler: a Mediterranean port on the South China 
Sea. But with gangs waging a bloody war over its lucrative gambling 
business, Macau seems less a charming fusion of East and West than 
a lethal mix of East and Wild West. Tourism officials acknowledge 
ruefully that the crime wave has scared away many visitors, most of 
whom come to Macau to gamble in its somewhat down-at-the-heel casinos. 
``Obviously, the incidents affect tourism,'' said Winnie Pau, the 
Hong Kong representative of the Macau government tourist office. ``But 
if people are enjoying the tranquillity of Macau, they won't go out 
on the streets in the middle of the night, when these incidents occur.'' 
Ms. Pau said no tourists had been affected by the violence. That did 
not stop Taiwan's foreign ministry from issuing an advisory urging 
its citizens to exercise caution when visiting Macau. Taiwan put out 
the warning last September, after 15 people were injured in bomb blasts 
in central Macau that were aimed at police and news organizations. 
The gang wars have subsided a bit since, though a Hong Kong businessman 
was recently kidnapped and held in the colony. The mayhem in Macau 
threatens to overshadow its impending handover to China, which is 
set for Dec. 19, 1999. But while Macau's change of sovereignty is 
not likely to draw the same worldwide attention as Hong Kong's last 
year, in some ways it will be a more historic milestone: When Portugal 
relinquishes this territory of 502,000 people, it will be the last 
European colonial power to decamp from Asia. Portuguese seafarers 
established Macau in 1557 _ 285 years before Britain signed the lease 
for Hong Kong. And unlike Hong Kong, Macau has preserved its European 
ambiance. From the Largo do Senado, its magnificent oblong-shaped 
town square, to Sao Paulo, a church that burned down in 1831, leaving 
only a richly detailed facade, Macau is laden with architectural treasures. 
The Portuguese administration has restored many of these sites to 
their original splendor, and it recently opened a remarkably accessible 
museum chronicling the colony's history. ``People throughout Macau 
are desperately looking for ways to perpetuate our uniqueness,'' said 
Fok Kai Cheong, a professor at the University of Macau, who spoke 
at a recent architecture symposium. Sadly, Macau owes its Old World 
atmosphere mostly to the fact that the modern world left it behind. 
After thriving as a trading post during the 18th and 19th centuries, 
Macau began to lose ground to Hong Kong, which was blossoming into 
the commercial and financial hub of East Asia. By the 20th century, 
Macau had become a backwater. But in the last 30 years, it has refashioned 
itself as a mecca for gamblers _ a sort of Atlantic City for weekend 
wagerers from Hong Kong. Today, Macau's most popular landmarks are 
its casinos, which have little of the over-the-top attraction of Atlantic 
City or Las Vegas, but draw crowds of gimlet-eyed gamblers. Gambling 
generates 68 percent of Macau's tourism revenue, with the rest coming 
from sightseers. The casinos have become the prizes in a ferocious 
tug-of-war between gangs from Hong Kong, Taiwan and China. Law-enforcement 
officials say the gangsters are trying to stake claims to the casinos 
before the Chinese government takes control. Although the gangsters 
tend to restrict their attacks to each other or to the Portuguese 
authorities, their mere presence casts a shadow. At the Hotel Lisboa, 
a gaudy wedding-cake edifice that is Macau's flagship casino, police 
officers patrol outside the entrance with automatic weapons. Portuguese 
officials say they are making headway in the battle against the gangs. 
They point out that in the first 10 months of 1998, Macau actually 
had fewer homicides than in the same period last year: 22 vs. 25. 
In May, police arrested Wan Kuak-Koi, a 43-year-old Chinese who is 
reputed to be Macau's most powerful gang leader. Wan, also known as 
Broken Tooth Koi, is awaiting trial in an isolated prison cell on 
a tiny island off Macau. As the handover nears, the Chinese government 
has become more assertive in helping Macau combat crime. Beijing recently 
announced that it would station soldiers in the colony after the reversion 
_ a move that has left the departing Portuguese authorities distinctly 
uneasy. Meanwhile, Macau is forging ahead with plans for the change 
in government. It is building a cultural center on the waterfront, 
which will be the site of the ceremony. Unlike Hong Kong, which mounted 
a dazzling fireworks and laser show, Macau is keeping things small, 
with a single day of festivities. ``We want to have a cozy, cultural 
event,'' Ms. Pau said, ``rather than a glamorous, magnificent event 
that costs millions of dollars.'' 
</TEXT>
</DOC>