<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981207.0358 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
A year ago, the stock of U.S. Office Products was a star. The company 
had just reported surging sales and earnings for the quarter. The 
shares had more than quadrupled since going public two-and-a-half 
years ago. It was a magnificent performance from a company selling 
the mundane: paper clips, note pads and swivel chairs. U.S. Office 
Products had wanted to be the leader in its field, so it had followed 
the lead of much bigger companies in industries as varied as retailing, 
banks or health care. It bought the competition. To acclaim from investors, 
U.S. Office Products acquired hundreds of mom-and-pop office-supply 
stores, and in one year its sales rocketed to $2.8 billion from $702 
million. But bigness has lost its luster at U.S. Office Products. 
Sales growth has slowed, and the company has just announced a quarterly 
loss of 11 cents a share. Its stock has tumbled to nearly half its 
offering price. In a month already dominated by mergers of already 
enormous banking and oil companies, not to mention the America Online-Netscape 
Communications liaison, the story of U.S. Office Products is a small 
but cautionary one. For even as the executives of Exxon and Mobil 
and Deutsche Bank and Bankers Trust contend that their marriages will 
create a best of breed, the history of mergers is often not pretty 
for shareholders. Although the stocks of some acquirers may rise on 
the news of a combination, a variety of studies show that over the 
longer term _ one year or more _ most mergers result in stocks that 
lag behind those of other companies in their industry. And many mergers 
result in actual losses for their shareholders. Furthermore, the odds 
of shares underperforming in current mergers are almost certain to 
increase going forward, given today's sky-high stock prices. When 
the price of premiums to the acquired company's shareholders and the 
costs of integrating two companies are added, such lofty prices make 
it almost impossible for these deals to perform. ``In some individual 
mergers, it could be that size is helpful in meeting world market 
demand,'' said Richard Sylla, professor of economics and financial 
history at New York University's Stern School of Business. ``But a 
lot of history shows us that bigger isn't necessarily better.'' The 
merger wave is particularly risky to shareholders because many deals 
are not only about what they can deliver to the customers or the shareholders 
but also about what they provide, directly and indirectly, to top 
management. That's because the deals often help executives keep their 
companies' stock prices high _ at least early on _ by increasing revenues, 
essentially making the companies grow faster than they could ever 
have done internally, some analysts and academics contend. And among 
more aggressive managements, acquisitions allow them to perform accounting 
that helps make their financial statements appear sounder than they 
actually are. That does not mean, of course, that a number of mergers 
are not driven by necessity. In a world awash with $10-a-barrel oil, 
for example, combining Exxon and Mobil to cut costs is seen as perhaps 
the only way an integrated oil company can thrive. Outside the oil 
patch, many of today's corporate combinations are necessitated by 
too much competition. Too many goods produced by nations around the 
world that are embracing capitalism for the first time means that 
more and more U.S. companies are finding it hard to increase their 
sales or profit margins. The solution has been to get bigger, even 
if it means joining forces with a company that used to be a competitor. 
To the degree that mergers reduce excess capacity, they do provide 
a benefit. But since these combinations also usually involve huge 
layoffs, these benefits do not come cheaply. These forces have made 
1998 a banner year for mergers. So far this year, 23,926 deals have 
been announced or completed worldwide for a total value of $2.31 trillion, 
breaking last year's previous record of $1.6 trillion worth of deals. 
In 1994, there were 19,166 deals with a value of $560.3 billion, according 
to Securities Data Co. Much of this growing appetite has been whetted 
by the stock market. Chief executives' obsessions with ever-rising 
stock prices, and the rewards those stock prices deliver, play an 
increasingly large role in merger mania today, some academics say. 
Indeed, today's high-priced stocks make mergers easier than ever. 
For chief executives faced with slowing internal sales growth, an 
easy solution is to jump-start revenues by buying another company. 
And so, 70 percent of the value of mergers and acquisitions today 
is made with stock, according to Mark Sirower, professor of mergers 
and acquisitions at New York University's Stern School of Business. 
Ten years ago, 90 percent were all-cash deals. Proof that higher stock 
prices drive merger activity can also be seen in the value of deals 
done during September, when the stock market was falling. Then, a 
mere $51 billion in deals was done, down from about $200 billion a 
month in the spring. As merger decisions become driven in part by 
higher stock prices, it is almost certain that more combinations will 
fail. For shareholders, that is bad news, given that most mergers 
of the recent past are already producing dismal returns. In a study 
of 100 large deals completed between 1994 and 1997, Sirower found 
that two-thirds resulted in immediate and outright losses to shareholders 
and wound up underperforming their industry peers over the long haul. 
The trend is almost identical with one found in a similar study Sirower 
did in the 1980s. Even during a bull market, mergers can undermine 
stock values. A recent study by Mitchell Madison, a consulting firm, 
found that between 1995 and 1998, a period of great gains for the 
market over all, stocks of merged banks underperformed their peers 
82 percent of the time. Such rates of failure are likely to increase 
in the future. Why? Expensive stocks make it even more difficult for 
executives running the huge combinations to succeed in their marriages. 
``Today, acquisitions require more discipline than ever before because 
of the overall market value of the firms,'' Sirower said. ``We're 
looking at companies now that are so highly valued on their own that 
they already have to run very hard just to stay in place.'' Indeed, 
with price-earnings ratios on many big-capitalization stocks at dizzying 
heights, investors are clearly expecting great improvements from these 
companies in the future. Add a takeover premium to these prices and 
you get expectations that even the most brilliant manager could not 
hope to meet. History also gives ominous news to shareholders in today's 
megamergers. In the past, the larger the target was, the lower the 
return to the buyer generally was. ``If you overpay for a company 
that is equal to 1 percent of your overall revenues, whether you overpaid 
is not going to have a big impact on shareholders,'' said Eli Ofek, 
professor of finance at NYU's Stern School. ``But if you overpay in 
an Exxon-Mobil case, it will have a huge impact.'' Indeed, most acquisitions 
fail, academics say, because the postmerger company's business cannot 
support the price paid to forge the combination. Consider two cases 
from 1994. One was Novell's $1.4 billion purchase of rival software 
producer WordPerfect. Less than two years later, Novell sold the company 
for $200 million to another software maker. Also in 1994, Quaker Oats 
bought Snapple, a beverage manufacturer, for $1.7 billion. Three years 
later, Quaker sold its acquisition for $300 million. One reason that 
stocks of the acquirer may underperform is that investors realize 
sheer size by no means translates into higher profits. Take the drug 
industry, one that the United States dominates. Three of the biggest 
drug sellers _ Merck, Bristol-Myers Squibb and Johnson &AMP; Johnson 
_ have generated earnings below the 16 percent average growth for 
the group. The two hottest players at the moment are smaller: Schering-Plough, 
with earnings growth of 22 percent so far this year, and Warner-Lambert, 
with 41 percent growth. Bigness also has a habit of thwarting innovation. 
Consider the great innovation that has transformed the telecommunications 
industry since the breakup of AT&AMP;T in 1982. Despite the potential 
burdens of pricey acquisitions, they do, at first, provide another 
way for executives to keep their stock prices high _ through aggressive 
accounting tactics that make their financial statements appear to 
be stronger than they actually are. ``Mergers give companies an opportunity 
to take very sizable write-offs, creating a camouflage to clean up 
a lot of things on the balance sheet,'' said Howard Schilit, president 
of the Center for Financial Research and Analysis in Rockville, Md. 
``Does that drive the acquisition? Probably not, but it doesn't hurt.'' 
Taking sizable write-offs today can make earnings look rosier tomorrow. 
And some companies use huge restructuring charges that typically accompany 
mergers as a place to dump regular business expenses, increasing earnings 
in the process. Since earnings drive stock prices, big write-offs 
and expense-reduction tricks can be mighty valuable in the short term. 
Companies sometimes use acquisitions to pick up a new source of revenue. 
For instance, FPA Medical Management Inc., once the United States' 
third-largest physician-management company, agreed in July 1996 to 
buy some operations of Foundation Health Corp. for $220 million. As 
part of the deal, Foundation Health agreed to pay FPA $26 million 
a year in so-called guaranteed access payments. ``Rather than adjusting 
the purchase price, FPA picks it up as a source of revenue,'' Schilit 
said. ``Those are the kind of interesting tricks that can happen when 
companies bundle things with an acquisition. Mergers make it easier 
for companies to create these smoke screens. As a result, it's more 
difficult for investors to see write-offs or one-time infusions to 
revenue.'' The tactic used by FPA Medical helped the company for only 
so long. The company filed for Chapter 11 bankruptcy protection in 
July. Acquisition of another company's revenues can bolster a stock 
another way, at least temporarily. The bigger a company's market value 
is _ the stock price multiplied by the number of shares outstanding 
_ the more likely that it will attract institutional investors. The 
huge and growing pools of capital _ pension funds, mutual funds and 
hedge funds _ need places they can go to generate returns. If a company 
has billions of dollars in market value, it means getting in and out 
of the investment is relatively easy for large investors. And ease 
of entry and exit is increasingly crucial to these investors. So the 
influx of money gives the stock a boost. But big institutional investors 
can be fickle and such money can flee the merged company when earnings 
growth appears to slow. For the executives in a company being acquired, 
a merger can mean enormous, instant wealth. For example, Lucio Noto, 
the chairman of Mobil, stands to collect at least $6 million just 
by leaving if a sale to Exxon goes through and the board approves 
his ``golden parachute'' pay package. A company spokesman has said 
that Noto's deal to sell Mobil to Exxon was ``in the best interests 
of the company.'' But chief executives of the merged companies can 
also reap a rich reward from an acquisition, because their compensation 
is typically tied to earnings or revenue growth or the performance 
of the stock. And a study of 152 companies in 1995, James Seward, 
now a professor at Dartmouth, and James Walsh, a professor at the 
University of Michigan, found that a company was much more likely 
to be acquired if the chief executive of the concern held a big stock-option 
package. Graef Crystal, an executive-compensation expert, notes that 
the chiefs of companies being acquired get a nice premium on the shares 
they hold; also all their stock options and restricted shares automatically 
vest and become free to trade. Frosting on the cake: A bonus is typically 
given that may be the highest ever. ``In the old days, you had hostile 
takeovers with CEOs fighting them,'' Crystal said. ``Now CEOs are 
walking around in front of their buildings with sandwich boards that 
read: `Company for sale. Inquire within.''' 
</TEXT>
</DOC>