<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981207.0394 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
By many people's calculation, John D. Hawke Jr. looked like the perfect 
candidate to be the nation's top banking regulator and Monday he became 
just that _ sort of. Brilliant and affable, Hawke appeared to be a 
shoo-in for the job of comptroller of the currency. Just look at his 
resume: He was considered the dean of American bank lawyers for more 
than three decades. Court cases that he argued have paved the way 
for a vast expansion of banks into new and different businesses. Many 
of the biggest and boldest bank mergers were his cases. He held top 
positions at the Federal Reserve and Treasury and a generation of 
bank lawyers studied under him in courses he taught as a visiting 
law school lecturer. But, in the last few weeks, Hawke's appointment 
stalled. Over the objections of some members of the Senate Banking 
Committee, the Clinton administration Monday gave Hawke a temporary 
or one-year ``recess'' appointment. Behind that action is a tale in 
how Hawke, who no one thought would have a problem, became hung up 
in the crosscurrents of politics, policies and personalities. Under 
the recess appointment, Hawke will not be allowed to serve out his 
entire five-year term, until approved by the Senate. Oddly enough, 
the objections to Hawke's appointment came from the Democratic side 
of the Senate Banking Committee and at the 11th hour _ after Hawke's 
late October confirmation hearing before the committee. Senators led 
by Paul Sarbanes of Maryland put a hold on Hawke's confirmation, delaying 
it until the next Congress. The Clinton administration, which nominated 
Hawke in July, finally intervened with the recess appointment, breaking 
the logjam. The appointment became hung up for a number of reasons. 
Some Democratic senators objected to the positions he took on consumer 
banking issues that the Democrats felt were made only to placate Republicans. 
Other lawmakers were still smarting over Hawke's aggressive behind-the-scenes 
lobbying that helped scuttle legislation to overhaul the nation's 
banking laws this year. ``Jerry Hawke knows his banking law,'' Sarbanes 
said. ``But the question is to what purpose will he put that knowledge 
to work?'' So the 65-year-old Hawke, who, many say, has wanted all 
his life to be comptroller, found himself in bureaucratic no-man's 
land. Even his detractors acknowledge that on the basis of his brains 
and experience alone, Hawke deserves the job of overseeing more than 
2,700 national banks with $2.5 trillion in assets. Perhaps more than 
any other single lawyer, Hawke has shaped the nation's banking system 
with his free-market attitudes and legal work on behalf of bank clients 
that broke down regulatory barriers in court while Congress dithered 
on the issue. In doing so, his views made him many friends _ and some 
influential foes. ``Jerry Hawke is enormously able, talented and one 
of the pre-eminent banking lawyers in the world,'' said Kenneth Guenther, 
executive director of the Independent Bankers Association of America. 
``But he is philosophically at odds with many members of Congress, 
and they have gotten royally mad at him.'' Hawke, who has been undersecretary 
for domestic finance in the Treasury Department since 1995, would 
not comment Monday. Still, it is apparent that he sprang some congressional 
tripwires. Sarbanes has been particularly upset at the Treasury's 
slow response and Hawke's lackluster answers to his concerns about 
a new federal program to transfer electronically all government checks 
to recipients. The senator contended that the program was ripe for 
consumer abuse, and held up an advertisement for a Baltimore liquor 
store that said government checks could be sent there electronically 
for cashing. Hawke ``was not fully forthcoming in his responses'' 
on this issue, Sarbanes said. Sen. Christopher Dodd, D-Conn., was 
troubled by Hawke's vigorous defense of the comptroller's hand in 
overseeing the insurance industry, at the expense of state regulators. 
And many Democrats said Hawke did not embrace strongly enough one 
of their favorite pieces of legislation, the Community Reinvestment 
Act, which requires banks to provide services to low- and moderate-income 
neighborhoods. Indeed, the Democrats said Hawke leaned over backward 
to placate Republicans who want the act abolished _ including writing 
a apology to Sen. Richard Shelby, R-Ala., who is one of its staunchest 
critics. ``When Hawke apologized to Senator Shelby that was galling, 
that really stuck in people's throats,'' said one Democratic staff 
member of the banking committee. ``No one has it in for Hawke,'' Sarbanes 
said. ``There is no personal antagonism towards him. But these are 
very important issues and there wasn't time to get them worked out 
before the end of session. If we can get these items resolved that 
would place his nomination in a different light.'' Hawke joined the 
Arnold &AMP; Porter law firm in New York in 1962 after graduating 
from Yale University. He served in the Air Force and received a law 
degree from Columbia Law School. One of his first cases challenged 
the government's banking laws and required him to take the deposition 
of the comptroller at the time, James Saxon. He won the case. For 
the next three decades, except for three years in the late 1970s when 
he was the Federal Reserve's general counsel, Hawke spent his career 
largely suing the government. With regulators and Congress often reluctant 
to deregulate banking, aggressive financial institutions relied on 
lawyers like Hawke to outfox the law. Banking law, once a sleepy practice, 
became hot. As Arnold &AMP; Porter's banking practice swelled, Hawke 
rose in the firm, becoming chairman in 1987. Hawke helped break down 
laws prohibiting regional bank mergers, was an early engineer of interstate 
banking and won victories that reduced the Fed's authority to challenge 
bank mergers. His most famous case resulted in an 8-to-0 Supreme Court 
decision in 1986 that created ``nonbank banks,'' or commercial companies 
that provide financial services, further blurring the line between 
banks and other financial institutions. He followed up his courtroom 
victories by helping to put together complex bank purchases in Florida, 
Pennsylvania, Virginia and New England. He was also a founding member 
of the Shadow Financial Regulatory Committee, a group of academics, 
lawyers and bankers who joined to keep tabs on the regulators, and 
he headed a Chicago Mercantile Exchange study into the 1987 stock 
market crash. ``Jerry has a free-market and pro-competitive point 
of view,'' said William Isaac, former chairman of the Federal Deposit 
Insurance Corp. and a banking partner at Arnold &AMP; Porter. ``He 
also believes that regulators have to make sure banks are behaving 
in a safe and sound fashion.'' Hawke has repeatedly favored sweeping 
away Depression-era laws that separate banks, brokerage firms and 
insurance companies. But when the chance to do just that came up in 
Congress this year, Hawke backed away. Instead of supporting deregulation, 
he ended up opposing the bill when it created a corporate banking 
structure for new financial services activities that would have weakened 
the oversight authority of the Treasury Department, which regulates 
banks, and strengthened that of the Federal Reserve, which regulates 
bank holding companies. Hawke became a strong backroom player on behalf 
of the Treasury Department in the resulting turf battle. The showdown 
pitted Fed Chairman Alan Greenspan against Hawke's boss, Treasury 
Secretary Robert Rubin, who threatened a presidential veto if Greenspan 
got the upper hand. The question was whether new financial activities 
would be carried out in subsidiaries of banks or in affiliates of 
bank holding companies. Many lobbyists say Hawke made this a personal 
battle that frustrated a fragile industry coalition that had, for 
the first time in decades, banded behind the bill. Moreover, lobbyists 
describe a mud fight led by Hawke who, they say, telephoned them after 
the near-collapse of Long-Term Capital Management, the giant hedge 
fund, to rail against the Fed, which helped orchestrate a rescue of 
the fund by banks and brokerage firms. ``A lot of people were frustrated 
by the hard-line position taken on the regulatory issue,'' said Sam 
Baptista, a lobbyist for the Financial Services Council, which represents 
banks and Wall Street. ``A lot of banks were happy with the Federal 
Reserve and didn't care. Jerry played a real behind-the-scenes role 
and he made it clear where he was on this issue. It got down to Treasury 
saying one thing and the Fed saying another. And when it comes to 
who carries the most weight in Congress, it is Alan Greenspan, even 
though Jerry is a forceful advocate in making his case.'' Just how 
tough Hawke will be as comptroller is unclear. Banks are now allowed 
to have operating subsidiaries with broad powers, but their reach 
remains undefined. It is up to the banks to propose what these new 
powers will be, whether they are underwriting revenue bonds, engaging 
in real estate development or starting leasing businesses. They must 
then apply to the comptroller to see whether he will allow them. In 
many ways, Hawke's misfortune is an object lesson in the vicissitudes 
of Washington. H. Rodgin Cohen, a banking lawyer at Sullivan &AMP; 
Cromwell in New York, said, ``I think he will try to innovate and 
expand bank powers. But in Washington, you can only go so far before 
you blow yourself up with Congress and the administration. He will 
have to have a pretty good sense of where that is.'' 
</TEXT>
</DOC>