<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981207.0325 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
After a sordid campaign overshadowed by the killing last month of 
a leading liberal politician, the citizens of St. Petersburg, Russia's 
second largest city, voted in record numbers on Sunday, and the preliminary 
results released Monday indicated that they had improved the fortunes 
of the city's embattled democratic alliance. The assassination on 
Nov. 20 of Galina Starovoitova, a national democratic politician with 
a strong following in her native St. Petersburg, drew special attention 
to these city council elections. They had already been widely seen 
as a crude attempt by murky criminal and commercial forces to stake 
out more turf in city politics. Apparently spurred by outrage over 
the killing, more than 40 percent of the city's voters cast ballots 
in a first round of voting, compared with 14 percent in the last local 
election. The turnout and the results sent a signal that St. Petersburg, 
once capital of the Russian empire, is not ready to relinquish its 
claim as a bastion of progressive politics. The elections were to 
fill the 50 city council seats, and only candidates with 50 percent 
or more of the vote won a seat outright in this round. In districts 
with no winner, the top two vote-getters will compete in a runoff 
on Dec. 20. The biggest winner on Sunday was Yabloko, a liberal party 
led by a presidential aspirant, Grigory Yavlinsky, whose candidates 
in 24 districts scored well enough to move to the final round. Of 
the six outright winners, all incumbents, one was a Yabloko candidate, 
and two belonged to smaller democratic parties. Yavlinsky, in an interview 
in Moscow Monday, said the results were proof that Russian voters 
had not given up on liberal democratic ideals, even at a time of economic 
distress and political uncertainty. ``First, people are ready to vote 
for democracy still,'' Yavlinsky said. ``Second, people are ready 
to come to vote. But my third main point is that we can win speaking 
about human rights, open society, private property, competition, freedom 
_ we can win. This is a very good conclusion during this crisis.'' 
St. Petersburg, with a population of 5 million, is not representative 
of all Russia. But for all its graceful 18th- and 19th-century architecture 
and its proud past, it is in fact a working-class city, with local 
industry deeply imbedded in the old Soviet military-industrial complex. 
The elections here were closely watched as a test of competing political 
forces after the devastating financial crisis in August and the political 
convulsions that followed. The elections included some of the dirtiest 
campaign tactics yet seen in Russia, directed mainly against democratic 
and liberal candidates. Some of those candidates found themselves 
confronted with opponents bearing the same names, fielded with the 
obvious intention of confounding the voters. In one case, the ``twin'' 
admitted publicly that he had been paid $900 to run. Yabloko, which 
has long considered St. Petersburg its stronghold, was even opposed 
by a party that called itself Yabloko-St. Petersburg. These tricks 
_ some of them traced to a campaign consultant with links to the local 
governor _ were seen as tied to the violence that has infected public 
life in the city, bringing attacks not only on Mrs. Starovoitova but 
also on several other public figures in recent months. Politicians 
of all persuasions hailed the results as proof that voters were wiser 
than the tricksters. Yuri Boldyrev, a former ally of Yavlinsky whose 
own party placed 18 candidates on the second-round ballots, said a 
majority had voted for ``political forces that, as a minimum, had 
declared the necessity of putting power under the control and returning 
responsibility to the citizens.'' According to preliminary figures 
from the city electoral commission, about 50 democrats from various 
parties _ including five independents _ will advance to the second 
round, and the democratic parties have agreed to join forces. This 
means that voters in most districts will have a real choice in the 
runoff. According to the preliminary report, only 15 Communists qualified 
for the runoff, confirming the Communist Party's traditionally low 
standing in the city. The electoral commission said that results from 
early voting at one polling place, the equivalent of absentee balloting, 
had been annulled after some voters were found to have voted twice. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>