<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981207.0281 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Esoteric and highly technical, scientific journals have never been 
viewed as a hot publication market. In recent years, however, scientific 
journals have become big business, with large commercial publishers 
entering a scene once dominated by nonprofit scientific societies 
whose only goal was to disseminate scientific information. It is a 
change that many academics say has sent prices skyrocketing _ with 
some journals now costing libraries more than $15,000 a year. But 
scientists, whose universities are often unable to afford the very 
journals to which they are giving their research findings, are now 
teaming with irate librarians to fight back. They are creating their 
own journals to compete with expensive commercial publications, and 
offering them at one-half to one-twentieth the price. Fomenting this 
revolution is Sparc, the Scholarly Publishing and Academic Resources 
Coalition, a group of more than 100 major research libraries helping 
these rebel journals get established by committing to buy them. Many 
of the new journals are coming out of scientific societies, but the 
poster child of the movement is Evolutionary Ecology Research, created 
by a professor who was so fed up with commercial publishers' raising 
the price of a journal that was his brainchild that he abandoned it, 
starting a new journal with his own money and the editorial assistance 
of his wife. ``The original deal was that the journal would be available 
as inexpensively as possible,'' said Dr. Michael Rosenzweig, a professor 
at the University of Arizona whose entire board of editors defected 
along with him. ``This has got to stop.'' Although the battle is being 
fought over subscription prices, what is really at stake, researchers 
say, is the scientific process itself, which depends so heavily on 
the ready exchange of scientific information. ``These prices have 
been a complete disaster,'' said Ken Frazier, director of the general 
library system at the University of Wisconsin and chairman of Sparc's 
steering committee. With many journal prices increasing 20 percent 
to 30 percent a year, Frazier said his libraries were forced to drop 
half their physics journals in the last decade. ``How can you repeatedly 
increase prices and not understand that you're damaging scholarly 
communications?'' he asked. ``What must they be thinking?'' Commercial 
publishers insist, however, that their publications are high quality 
and remain a good value. ``The goal of any business is to make money,'' 
said Dr. Peter Sheperd, managing director of Elsevier Science in Switzerland, 
a division of Reed Elsevier, one of the biggest commercial publishers 
of scientific journals. ``I don't see that as incompatible with serving 
the needs of scientific communication.'' The real problem, many say, 
is that commercial publishers have discovered they can raise prices 
with impunity, since universities must buy the most important journals, 
no matter what the cost. And scientists will continue to publish their 
best work, even in journals neither they nor their libraries can afford, 
because prestigious publications are crucial to getting grants, promotion 
and tenure. ``Commercial publishers began to realize the gold mine 
that they had and that everything was working to their advantage,'' 
said Mary Case, director of the Office of Scholarly Communications 
at the Association of Research Libraries in Washington. In fact, researchers 
say, academia is a paradise for publishers. First the public pays 
for most scientific research through, for example, the National Science 
Foundation. Then universities pay the salaries of scientists who do 
virtually all the writing, reviewing and editing. Universities sometimes 
even provide free office space to journals. Finally, authors typically 
sign over their copyright to publishers, who can sometimes bring in 
many millions of dollars a year in subscriptions for a single high-priced 
journal _ subscriptions paid by university libraries supported by 
tax dollars and tuition. Commenting on the profits being made by commercial 
publishers, Dr. Mark McCabe, an economist at the Georgia Institute 
of Technology who is one of the few researchers studying this unusual 
market, said, ``It is clearly dramatic.'' Librarians say that what 
happened with Rosenzweig's journal was typical. Twelve years ago, 
Rosenzweig, a professor at the University of Arizona, came up with 
the idea for the journal Evolutionary Ecology and began publishing 
it with Chapman &AMP; Hall. Then Chapman &AMP; Hall was bought by 
International Thomson Corp. and the journal was then sold to Wolters 
Kluwer, an international publishing company based in Amsterdam, the 
Netherlands. At each turn, Rosenzweig said, despite his objections, 
the price went up and the number of scientists to whom it was available 
went down. When Rosenzweig quit, to found Evolutionary Ecology Research, 
his entire board of editors, came with him. With their backing, Rosenzweig, 
who has called the new movement a ``slave revolt,'' said authors had 
been supportive of his new journal, submitting high-quality manuscripts. 
Rosenzweig, who spent Thanksgiving weekend working on the first issue 
of his new journal with his wife, Carole, said the new journal would 
cost libraries about one-third of the cost of the Kluwer journal, 
which is about to go up to $777 a year. Peter Katz, a lawyer for Kluwer 
Academic Publishers, declined to discuss the journals, saying he did 
not want to jeopardize discussions being held between himself and 
Rosenzweig's lawyers. Sparc's other efforts include three new journals 
from the American Chemical Society and an electronic journal _ a cheaper, 
quicker form of publication which some say may be Sparc's best hope 
_ from the Royal Society of Chemistry called PhysChemComm. Selling 
to libraries for $353, PhysChemComm is intended to compete with Elsevier's 
Chemical Physics Letters, which costs more than $8,000. In explaining 
their higher prices, commercial publishers say they have additional 
costs that scientific societies do not have, including supporting 
an international network of offices. They also note that societies 
receive additional income from members' dues. Publishers are also 
quick to point out that there can be other reasons for increased prices 
than merely increasing profits, like increases in the quality or quantity 
of articles. But McCabe said that quite often there was no such explanation. 
From 1992 to 1996, McCabe said, there was no increase in the quality 
or quantity of articles in the journal Brain Research, a publication 
infamous among librarians for its high cost _ more than $15,000 year 
_ yet the price of the journal nearly doubled. ``How do you explain 
the price increase, except as taking advantage of the situation?'' 
McCabe asked. And while publishers have suggested that currency exchange 
rates might explain the rising dollar prices for foreign-produced 
journals like Brain Research, McCabe said that fluctuating exchange 
rates simply did not explain such spiraling prices. McCabe said that 
publishing mergers, however, did result in journal price increases, 
as did decreasing circulation. That is, when libraries drop high-priced 
journals, publishers often raise the prices of their other journals 
even higher in an effort to recover the same revenue from fewer subscribers. 
At the moment, there is no sign of prices flagging, and similar pricing 
practices have already begun showing up in the social sciences and 
humanities. In the meantime, Frazier said Sparc would press on, urging 
libraries and scientists to support the new journals. ``If we can 
demonstrate that we can help the good guys,'' he said, ``then there 
is hope.'' 
</TEXT>
</DOC>