<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981207.0420 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
President Clinton will head the delegation of Cabinet members, lawmakers 
and other prominent politicians at a memorial service on Tuesday for 
Albert Gore Sr., the father of the vice president. Gore, who died 
on Saturday at his home in Carthage, Tenn., three weeks before his 
91st birthday, was a maverick progressive Democrat from Tennessee 
who was at the forefront of the national debate over civil rights 
and international affairs in seven terms in the House of Representatives 
and three terms in the Senate. Twice, in 1956 and 1960, he was close 
to becoming the Democratic nominee for vice president himself. One 
of the most memorable images of the 1992 Democratic National Convention 
was of Gore, 82, standing with his 9-year-old grandson, Albert III, 
in his arms, flashing a V-for-victory sign and acknowledging the cheers 
of the throngs as his son accepted the No. 2 spot on the Democratic 
ticket. ``To have been that close, it was quite understandable why 
I was so exuberant,'' he told a reporter afterward. The public memorial 
service will start at noon at the War Memorial Auditorium in Nashville. 
The main eulogies will be delivered by Benjamin L. Hooks, the Memphis 
minister, lawyer and judge who was executive director of the National 
Association for the Advancement of Colored People, and Bishop Jane 
Holmes Dixon, the Episcopal suffragan of Washington. Both are said 
to be family friends. The vice president, who was born when his father 
was in Congress, declined on Monday to be interviewed, but the story 
has often been told about how from the time he was a child, Al Gore 
was groomed by his father for high office. Albert Gore Sr. _ no one 
called him Al _ was a mainstay of Washington politics from the time 
he was elected to the House in 1938 until he was defeated in 1970 
when he ran for a fourth term in the Senate. At a time when most successful 
Southern politicians were arch conservatives, Gore generally sided 
with the liberal wing of the Democratic Party. He was one of three 
Southern senators _ Lyndon Johnson of Texas and Estes Kefauver, also 
from Tennessee, were the others _ who did not sign the Southern manifesto 
in 1956 protesting the Supreme Court's decision two years earlier 
outlawing segregation in public schools. And in the 1960s, he was 
a staunch opponent of the war in Vietnam, which he once called ``an 
American nightmare come true.'' Those stands and others that were 
out of step with his region led to his defeat in 1970 by Bill Brock, 
a Republican, in a race that for its time was unusually vituperative. 
Brock was a standard-bearer for Richard Nixon's ``Southern strategy,'' 
the largely successful effort to turn the once solid South for the 
Democrats into a Republican stronghold. In an interview on Monday, 
former Sen. Mike Mansfield of Montana, who entered the Senate with 
Gore in 1953 and who was the Democratic leader in Gore's last term, 
remembered his colleague this way: ``Albert ran his boats along the 
lines his conscience dictated. It took a lot of guts. He had them, 
but he paid for it.'' In a statement from the White House, Clinton 
said that by standing against segregation and the war, Gore had been 
``truly a real role model for people like me in the South in the 1960s.'' 
Gore ``helped to connect the South with the rest of America,'' the 
president added. Gore attended a one-room school in Possum Hollow 
and worked his way through Middle Tennessee State Teachers College 
and night law classes at the YMCA in Nashville. At the Y, he met Pauline 
La Fon, and they married after they graduated. She survives him, as 
do the vice president's four children. The vice president's only sibling, 
Nancy Gore Hunger, died in 1984. In 1938, when Gore was 29, a place 
opened in the Tennessee congressional delegation. The seat had once 
been held by Cordell Hull, who went on to become a prominent New Deal 
senator and secretary of state and whom Gore once described as ``my 
ideal in public life.'' Gore decided to run. He defeated five opponents 
and won the seat. He was a maverick from his first days in Congress. 
In his maiden speech, he took on the Roosevelt administration and 
the Democratic leadership in the House and spoke against expanding 
the borrowing authority of the U.S. Housing Authority. The New York 
Times reported that his address ``stopped the show'' and was given 
``an ovation of proportions such as are usually reserved for elder 
statesmen.'' The speech was credited with changing a number of votes, 
and the measure was defeated. But generally in his 14 years in the 
House, Gore backed the New Deal social programs and international 
policies of Presidents Roosevelt and Truman. In 1952, Tennessee's 
83-year-old senator, Kenneth D. McKellar, had begun to slip, and Gore 
took him on in the Democratic primary. It was not a gentle challenge. 
A hillbilly band that often traveled with Gore played a theme song 
that concluded with the line, ``Albert Gore, he's only 44.'' Gore 
won the primary and the general election and entered the Senate in 
a class of freshmen that included not only Sen. Mansfield but also 
John Kennedy, Henry Jackson, Barry Goldwater and George Bush's father, 
prescott, a Republican from Connecticut. With his close-cut gray hair 
and florid style of speaking, Gore seemed immediately at home in the 
Senate. In a Harper's magazine article many years later, David Halberstam 
wrote: ``Albert is an old-style senator, a Roman senator, really. 
One can almost imagine him seated with Webster, Calhoun and Clay. 
In fact, it is hard to imagine Albert as anything but a senator.'' 
At once, he made his mark as an accomplished orator. Russell Baker, 
who covered the Senate for The New York Times, described Gore's speaking 
style: ``His accent is piney-woods Southern rather than magnolia Dixie; 
its distinctive mark is the omission of the `g' on all words with 
`ing' endings. Thus Sen. Thomas C. Hennings of Missouri is always 
`Senator Hennin's.''' But he spoke differently in the Senate from 
the way he did at home. ``On the stump,'' Baker wrote, ``he is a crowd-pleasing 
hell-raiser, but his formal Senate speeches run to Ciceronian solemnity.'' 
At a time when cigars provided the atmosphere of the Capitol and bourbon 
and martinis the lubrication, Gore neither smoked nor drank. He tended 
toward stuffiness even by Senate standards, and he often irritated 
his colleagues with his strait-laced demeanor and refusal to bend. 
``When I see something that needs to be done,'' he once explained, 
``I want to do something about it. I'm slower to compromise.'' But 
he was blessed with an outgoing, gregarious wife who had quick political 
instincts and the ability to smooth out wrinkles Gore had caused. 
They lived in a hotel on Massachusetts Avenue, and that is where the 
vice president was raised. Their daughter, Nancy, once described her 
parents this way: ``He just doesn't know how to gossip, how to make 
small talk. He doesn't like to pull off shoes, drink beer and shoot 
the bull. Mother will talk 45 minutes to a person, where Daddy will 
talk 10.'' Mansfield recalled: ``The force behind Albert was Pauline. 
She was with him all the time, and she had a great influence on him.'' 
Gore was involved in nearly all the big issues of the middle third 
of the 20th century. He was an early proponent of Medicare. He was 
a strong advocate of nuclear power to generate electricity. He favored 
foreign aid and fought tight money. He supported higher taxes on insurance 
companies and the oil and gas industry. He opposed an antiballistic 
missile system. He was instrumental in killing Nixon's Supreme Court 
nominations of two Southerners, F. Clement Haynsworth and Harrold 
G. Carswell. He often said that his proudest accomplishment in politics 
was his sponsorship of the legislation that authorized the Interstate 
Highway System. Gore did not always take the liberal side. He called 
for using nuclear weapons in Korea. And in a stand he said he later 
regretted, he voted against the landmark Civil Rights Act of 1964, 
the law that prohibited discrimination in public accommodations, in 
a year when he was up for re-election. But long after he had left 
the Senate, it was his stands for civil rights and against the war 
in Vietnam that were most remembered. In ``The Eye of the Storm,'' 
a campaign autobiography that was published in 1970, he described 
why he had decided not to sign the Southern manifesto: ``I was placed 
in the anguishing position of either violating my legislative conscience 
by signing a thoroughly unsound document or of appearing to go `against 
the South.' I took a stand on principle, and the people of my state 
approved.'' Two years later, in 1958, he was re-elected. Gore's support 
for civil rights was not entirely a political drawback. It was one 
of the elements that made him a prime candidate for the Democratic 
vice presidential nomination in 1956. Rather than picking his running 
mate himself, the presidential nominee, Adlai E. Stevenson, left the 
selection to the convention delegates. As the convention opened, the 
three main candidates were Gore, Kefauver and Kennedy. After two ballots 
and most of a third, Gore held on. But then he withdrew in favor of 
Kefauver, who won the nomination and a place on a ticket that was 
trounced by Eisenhower and Nixon. Four years later, when Kennedy was 
looking for a Southerner to balance his ticket, Gore's name came up 
once again. But Kennedy picked Lyndon Johnson, a choice that Gore 
later acknowledged gave the Democrats the strongest possible team. 
But Gore's positions on race and war became his undoing in the 1970 
election. Busing and patriotism were the issues of the campaign. Gore 
became the No. 1 target of Vice President Spiro T. Agnew's withering 
attacks. And even when young Al, right out of Harvard, enlisted in 
the Army and made television commercials in uniform for his father, 
it was not enough. Brock won 51 percent of the vote, and Gore went 
back to Tennessee. Out of office, Gore ran a profitable cattle-breeding 
farm in Tennessee and served on corporate boards, including those 
of the Occidental Petroleum Co. and the Island Creek Coal Co. He and 
his wife were clearly influential in their son's political campaigns, 
but they normally stayed out of the spotlight. Fifteen years ago, 
when his son was still in the House of Representatives and pondering 
higher offices, Albert Gore Sr. told a reporter: ``I'm hopeful for 
him, but I recognize that the flux of events, times and issues makes 
for a hazardous journey.'' This cautious view of politics and life, 
his friends say, Gore maintained until his dying day. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>