<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981207.0293 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Hitachi Ltd., Japan's largest electronics maker, and Nissan Motor 
Co. announced Monday that they planned to collaborate on developing 
advanced technology for cars. It was the second time in a week that 
large corporations here have united to finance research projects, 
a tacit acknowledgment that Japanese companies no longer have the 
financial muscle or unquestioned access to capital they once enjoyed. 
The cost of developing new technology is immense, one reason for the 
consolidation taking place in the global auto industry. Hitachi said 
it would most likely make an equity investment in Unisia Jecs Corp., 
a struggling auto parts manufacturer whose main backer is Nissan, 
Japan's second-largest and most visibly troubled automaker. A capital 
injection from Hitachi would give Unisia Jecs much-needed financial 
support for research and development of intelligent transport systems, 
or ``smart cars,'' at a time when Nissan is unable to finance such 
activities for itself, let alone for its affiliates. It would also 
be a big boon to Nissan, which has lagged behind its global competitors 
in developing technology that could one day create a car that could 
drive its owner home after an evening out on the town without human 
assistance. Hitachi would gain access to automotive know-how that 
could help position it as a leader in the young market for intelligent 
transport. Last week, Toshiba Corp. and Fujitsu Ltd., two of Hitachi's 
competitors, joined forces to finance development of technology to 
build the next generation of computer memory chips. Should such alliances 
become a trend, they could lead to merger activity and the possibility 
of increased efficiency in Japan's bloated manufacturing industries. 
In auto parts, for example, companies are reporting some of the highest 
costs ever while production has declined to 27 percent below peak 
levels, according to a new report by Christopher Redl of Morgan Stanley 
Dean Witter in Tokyo. But Redl said any plan by Hitachi to inject 
money into Unisia Jecs, which has some of the highest costs in the 
business and declining earnings, might be an attempt to hold back 
the market forces pushing for efficiency. Hitachi, Nissan and Unisia 
Jecs are all part of the battered Fuyo group, or keiretsu, bound together 
by cross-shareholdings, interlocking directorates and crucial business 
relationships that give them a relationship regarded as familial. 
``Instead of seeing consolidation, we may be seeing another attempt 
to breathe life into a weak subsidiary that should probably be forced 
to sink or swim,'' Redl said. A Hitachi spokesman, Kenichiro Mizoguchi, 
denied that the company was moving to bail out a corporate cousin, 
noting that Hitachi, which is rich in cash, had pointedly refused 
to provide funds to Fuji Bank, the beleaguered financial institution 
at the heart of the Fuyo group. He said that it was more Hitachi's 
relationship with Nissan, which buys about 40 percent of Hitachi's 
auto-related products, and the three companies' collaboration in developing 
power-train systems that persuaded it to consider an equity investment. 
Mizoguchi said the company would conduct a feasibility study before 
determining its investment in Unisia Jecs. But he added that Hitachi 
would almost surely take a stake in the parts supplier either through 
an equity infusion or by buying shares from Nissan, which owns 29.6 
percent of Unisia Jecs. Hitachi's stake is likely to make it the second-largest 
shareholder in Unisia Jecs, which trades separately. Although a report 
Monday morning in the financial daily Nihon Keizai Shimbun said Hitachi 
would pay 3 billion to 4 billion yen _ $25 million to $34 million 
_ for 23.6 percent of Unisia Jecs, a spokesman for Nissan said that 
company intended to remain the parts supplier's largest shareholder. 
That is likely to disappoint investors. Nissan has been promising 
to take steps to mend its tattered balance sheet in advance of regulations 
requiring it to fully include the financial results of its various 
affiliates in its consolidated earnings. Right now, Nissan's consolidated 
reporting reflects only a portion of Unisia Jecs' results equal to 
its stake. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>