<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981207.0083 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
As the years pass, the number of survivors of the Japanese attack 
on Pearl Harbor dwindles. The strike, on the quiet Sunday morning 
of Dec. 7, 1941, killed 2,403 of the 65,000 people stationed at the 
base. One survivor, Henry A. Lachenmayer, of Oxon Hill, Md., recorded 
his thoughts and observations, including rumors that turned out to 
be false, in his diary the next day. Lachenmayer says he wrote his 
account on a Royal portable typewriter, long since gone, which he 
kept in his berth aboard the battleship Pennsylvania. He says he made 
the entry on pages that he stored in a typing book that zipped closed. 
Lachenmayer, who moved to the Bronx from Germany as a child, was a 
22-year-old musician second class at the time of Pearl Harbor. He 
doubled as a medic when bombs raked the Pennsylvania, but not before 
having the presence of mind to stow his trombone. Lachenmayer, now 
79, retired from the Navy in 1960 after having risen to the rank of 
band master aboard the battleship Wisconsin. Following are excerpts 
from his diary, adapted from a longer version that appeared in 1991 
in his local newspaper, The Enquirer-Gazette in Upper Marlboro, Md. 
_ IRVIN MOLOTSKY (BEGIN ITALICS HERE) The account begins on a typical 
Sunday aboard the U.S.S. Pennsylvania, which was in dry dock: (END 
ITALICS HERE) The events about to be related here are still somewhat 
vague. Perhaps due to the fact that one could and would not imagine 
them in one's most horrid and imaginative nightmares. They bespeak 
a calamity that will long be remembered by an unsuspecting people, 
half-asleep but now by the grace of God and the mailed fist, awakened. 
They speak of the Blitz on Pearl Harbor on the bright, happy and peaceful 
morning of Dec. 7, 1941. It was Sunday again, you might say just another 
Sunday, but to us in the fleet it meant more than that, it meant the 
one day of the week that granted us true relaxation, the one day apart 
from drills maneuvered and work of all sorts. A day for church, and 
a day for play. We, the band on the Pennsylvania, had a strenuous 
day on Saturday. A landing force inspection in the morning and a dance 
band contest in the evening which, incidentally, we won. We were still 
speaking of this same contest the next morning as we heard band call 
go at 10 minutes of 8 and we proceeded to the quarter deck in preparation 
for morning colors. . . . At exactly three minutes of eight, looking 
over toward the Naval Air Station on Ford Island, we could see a group 
of planes proceeding gently from a high altitude and then leveling 
off about 150 feet from the ground. To our unsuspecting eyes it was 
just another drill, though it was somewhat peculiar that they would 
pick Sunday morning for maneuvering. Not until we saw the flames shoot 
out of the large hangar at the head of the small island did we realize 
the significance of the situation. (BEGIN ITALICS HERE) Lachenmayer 
scrambled to reach his battle station, where he helped put out a fire 
ignited by an explosion in the main deck and in the case mate, the 
enclosure where anti-aircraft shells were stored: (END ITALICS HERE) 
The bandmaster marched us back on the double and the officer of the 
deck screamed for all hands to man their air defense stations. . . 
. A plane that looked half like a Stuka and half like one of our own 
dive bombers was just leveling off and I could see the bombs dropping 
out of its bottom. It was a silver-gray plane with a reddish gold 
ball or sun painted on its side. I still don't know how I got my instrument 
in my case and back to the shelf in the band room but I must have 
made Superman's speed look amateurish. By this time all hands were 
manning their battle stations and I proceeded towards mine, stopping 
on the way to get my gas mask. Arriving at my station, which incidentally 
is the second deck patrol and repair station where I am a stretcher 
bearer, I commenced the process of . . . closing all ports and hatches 
which would be highly detrimental if left open. . . . Down below once 
more, I was asked by an ensign to assist him in reaching some of the 
officers on shore leave by telephone and this was my job for the next 
half hour. I succeeded in reaching Commander Holden, who almost refused 
to believe the inevitable but once convinced, arrived on board ship 
with the greatest of speed. For the next part I returned to my station 
and found work enough; a fire had broken out on the second deck and 
had to be attended to with haste. . . . The fire was precipitated 
by the bursting of a 500-pound bomb in the case mate and the main 
deck. The havoc created by this one bomb hit can never be exaggerated. 
All our fire extinguishers were used up in no time. . . . Due to the 
cooperation of all hands concerned, the fire was eventually put out. 
. . . 
</TEXT>
</DOC>