<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981207.0084 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
As the years pass, the number of survivors of the Japanese attack 
on Pearl Harbor dwindles. The strike, on the quiet Sunday morning 
of Dec. 7, 1941, killed 2,403 of the 65,000 people stationed at the 
base. One survivor, Henry A. Lachenmayer, of Oxon Hill, Md., recorded 
his thoughts and observations, including rumors that turned out to 
be false, in his diary the next day. Lachenmayer says he wrote his 
account on a Royal portable typewriter, long since gone, which he 
kept in his berth aboard the battleship Pennsylvania. He says he made 
the entry on pages that he stored in a typing book that zipped closed. 
Lachenmayer, who moved to the Bronx from Germany as a child, was a 
22-year-old musician second class at the time of Pearl Harbor. He 
doubled as a medic when bombs raked the Pennsylvania, but not before 
having the presence of mind to stow his trombone. Lachenmayer, now 
79, retired from the Navy in 1960 after having risen to the rank of 
band master aboard the battleship Wisconsin. Following are excerpts 
from his diary, adapted from a longer version that appeared in 1991 
in his local newspaper, The Enquirer-Gazette in Upper Marlboro, Md. 
_ IRVIN MOLOTSKY (BEGIN ITALICS HERE) The account begins on a typical 
Sunday aboard the U.S.S. Pennsylvania, which was in dry dock: (END 
ITALICS HERE) The events about to be related here are still somewhat 
vague. Perhaps due to the fact that one could and would not imagine 
them in one's most horrid and imaginative nightmares. They bespeak 
a calamity that will long be remembered by an unsuspecting people, 
half-asleep but now by the grace of God and the mailed fist, awakened. 
They speak of the Blitz on Pearl Harbor on the bright, happy and peaceful 
morning of Dec. 7, 1941. It was Sunday again, you might say just another 
Sunday, but to us in the fleet it meant more than that, it meant the 
one day of the week that granted us true relaxation, the one day apart 
from drills maneuvered and work of all sorts. A day for church, and 
a day for play. We, the band on the Pennsylvania, had a strenuous 
day on Saturday. A landing force inspection in the morning and a dance 
band contest in the evening which, incidentally, we won. We were still 
speaking of this same contest the next morning as we heard band call 
go at 10 minutes of 8 and we proceeded to the quarter deck in preparation 
for morning colors. . . . At exactly three minutes of eight, looking 
over toward the Naval Air Station on Ford Island, we could see a group 
of planes proceeding gently from a high altitude and then leveling 
off about 150 feet from the ground. To our unsuspecting eyes it was 
just another drill, though it was somewhat peculiar that they would 
pick Sunday morning for maneuvering. Not until we saw the flames shoot 
out of the large hangar at the head of the small island did we realize 
the significance of the situation. (BEGIN ITALICS HERE) Lachenmayer 
scrambled to reach his battle station, where he helped put out a fire 
ignited by an explosion in the main deck and in the case mate, the 
enclosure where anti-aircraft shells were stored: (END ITALICS HERE) 
The bandmaster marched us back on the double and the officer of the 
deck screamed for all hands to man their air defense stations. . . 
. A plane that looked half like a Stuka and half like one of our own 
dive bombers was just leveling off and I could see the bombs dropping 
out of its bottom. It was a silver-gray plane with a reddish gold 
ball or sun painted on its side. I still don't know how I got my instrument 
in my case and back to the shelf in the band room but I must have 
made Superman's speed look amateurish. By this time all hands were 
manning their battle stations and I proceeded towards mine, stopping 
on the way to get my gas mask. Arriving at my station, which incidentally 
is the second deck patrol and repair station where I am a stretcher 
bearer, I commenced the process of . . . closing all ports and hatches 
which would be highly detrimental if left open. . . . Down below once 
more, I was asked by an ensign to assist him in reaching some of the 
officers on shore leave by telephone and this was my job for the next 
half hour. I succeeded in reaching Commander Holden, who almost refused 
to believe the inevitable but once convinced, arrived on board ship 
with the greatest of speed. For the next part I returned to my station 
and found work enough; a fire had broken out on the second deck and 
had to be attended to with haste. . . . The fire was precipitated 
by the bursting of a 500-pound bomb in the case mate and the main 
deck. The havoc created by this one bomb hit can never be exaggerated. 
All our fire extinguishers were used up in no time. . . . Due to the 
cooperation of all hands concerned, the fire was eventually put out. 
. . . Ahead of us in dry dock were two destroyers also under repair, 
despite their wonderful barrage and cooperation; (they fought like 
wild cats) a number of bomb hits were scored and their crews were 
forced to abandon. . . . Directly aft of us, moored at ten-ten dock, 
were the U.S.S. Oglala and the U.S.S. Helena. These two vessels, the 
former a mine layer and the latter one of our latest 10,000-ton cruisers, 
were tied or moored together. An enemy torpedo plane headed directly 
for the Oglala . . . and launched its torpedo. The old ship, severely 
injured, immediately turned on its side, and sank. On the other side 
of the harbor . . . our battleships were receiving a merciless pounding. 
The U.S.S. Arizona received two bomb hits amidship and a great number 
of torpedoes. She split in half and her forward magazines burst. Directly 
forward of her, the U.S.S. Oklahoma received many torpedo hits and 
capsized. Next to her the U.S.S. West Virginia received a tremendous 
amount of bomb hits and her whole port battery was wiped out. . . 
. The U.S.S. Tennessee stood up fairly, or rather, remarkably well 
considering the pounding she took. The U.S.S. Maryland stood as solid 
as a piece of granite and fought the enemy. She remained in one piece. 
Directly forward of the Maryland, though some distance away . . ., 
the U.S.S. California received torpedo hits and listed on her port 
side. The U.S.S. Nevada, in a daring attempt to reach the open sea 
through the channel, was torpedoed and her wary skipper grounded her 
on the right side of the harbor in order to keep the channel clear. 
One destroyer in the floating dry dock on our starboard was hit and 
went on fire, burning right at the bridge. (BEGIN ITALICS HERE)The 
human toll was horrific.(END ITALICS HERE) Now to the casualties, 
and I write this with a heavy heart. On our own ship, the one bomb 
hit pierced the boat deck abreast of No. 7 A.A. gun and tore through 
the No. 9 case mate and down to the main deck. All this area exploded 
with vigor. The Marine division suffered the severest losses. First 
Lieutenant Craig, standing near the three-inch gun, had both legs 
blown off and received other injuries; he died almost on the spot. 
Doctor Rall, a lieutenant junior grade, and a pharmacist's mate were 
mangled and killed instantly. This information I received from one 
of the musicians, Andrew Lambert, who, standing near by, saw it happen 
and was shell-shocked. His fellow stretcher bearer, Musician S.W. 
Craig, survived with minor injuries. I wandered around the dressing 
station, my eyes not believing what they saw. I gave a drink here 
and loosened an article of clothing there; there was not much else 
I could do. Many were badly burned and screamed for relief of pain; 
they had already received drug injections, and a glass of water to 
the lips was in many cases the only human assistance possible. . . 
. Later in the day I assisted in taking the dead off the ship and 
in bringing on board many rounds of ammunition. As far as other casualties 
are concerned I am in complete ignorance, though I know that they 
were severe. In the case of the capsized Oklahoma I have heard that 
there were from 500 to 1,100 men trapped inside her hull, I believe 
that the majority of them were extricated. I am proud to say that 
the U.S.S. Pennsylvania was the first in action and that we accounted 
for not less than eight enemy planes. (BEGIN ITALICS HERE) Rumors 
swirled in the aftershock of the attack: (END ITALICS HERE) Here are 
some of the rumors passing amongst us, none of us having real solid 
information. Some of the enemy planes were piloted by German fliers. 
The enemy tried to land troops at Nanakuh and Waikiki beaches, but 
were repulsed. We sank two enemy aircraft carriers some distance from 
the islands. Wake and Midway islands are in Japanese hands. Saboteurs 
land in great numbers on the island. In reference to this last fact 
I must admit that quite a large number of prisoners were taken here 
in the Navy Yard. We had two more alarms yesterday, but these proved 
to be only scares. Our men are now and forever on the alert, and woe 
to the enemy if they try it again. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>