<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981207.0400 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
The White House, in a last-ditch effort to sway some impeachment votes 
in the House, will present a detailed defense over the next two days 
against some of the accusations in the impeachment report of Kenneth 
Starr. The president's case will be made by two White House lawyers, 
and will be buttressed by 14 friendly witnesses who will address the 
law and history of impeachment in a two-day seminar beginning Tuesday. 
They will argue that the president's conduct in the Lewinsky affair, 
while shameful, does not meet the standard of impeachment. ``Our time 
has come,'' declared White House spokesman Joe Lockhart. The overall 
message of the White House lawyers and scholars, former Watergate 
prosecutors and former members of Congress will be that the president's 
conduct does not warrant the grave constitutional remedy of impeachment, 
according to the standards set by the authors of the Constitution 
or previous Congresses, White House officials said. ``We will discuss 
what our view of both the facts and the law are, at great length,'' 
Lockhart said. Despite rising calls from Congress for the president 
to publicly justify his actions, there are no plans now for Clinton 
to speak to the committee or to the nation about the Lewinsky matter 
or the impeachment inquiry, Lockhart said. ``The president is second 
to none in recognizing what was wrong in his behavior and apologizing 
to those who he's affected and hurt,'' Lockhart said Monday afternoon, 
seeking to dampen speculation about a dramatic presidential appearance 
or written defense. ``He has spoken, I think, on many occasions to 
that and that view has not changed.'' The White House will make its 
case over two days, opening with a statement by Gregory B. Craig, 
the White House special counsel for impeachment matters, and closing 
with a summation by Charles F.C. Ruff, the White House counsel and 
former Watergate prosecutor. The two will carry the burden of presenting 
a defense against the charges of perjury, obstruction of justice and 
abuse of power contained in Starr's 445-page impeachment referral. 
Between the lawyers' statements, scholars, prosecutors and prominent 
defense attorneys will argue that the framers of the Constitution 
did not design impeachment to punish personal misbehavior. They will 
also testify that the case against Clinton was unfairly brought and 
that the evidence against the president on perjury and obstruction 
of justice is not sufficient to justify trial and conviction, the 
White House said. The House Judiciary Committee chamber will echo 
with the voices of numerous veterans of the last impeachment debate, 
which concluded in 1974 with a committee vote to approve three articles 
of impeachment against President Richard M. Nixon. Nixon resigned 
in August 1974 rather than face an impeachment vote of the full House. 
The White House presentation is designed in large measure to remind 
the Congress _ and through them, the public _ of the solemnity of 
the impeachment process and to contrast the serious constitutional 
offenses of Nixon against the admitted personal misconduct of Clinton. 
``Now we're moving into a different phase,'' Lockhart said, ``which, 
given the serious nature of it, given the fact that the House of Representatives 
is discussing removing the president, removing him from office, overturning 
the will of the people, it's important that this be done in a serious 
way.'' In a letter to the Judiciary Committee on Monday afternoon, 
the White House said it would present four panels of witnesses to 
argue against impeachment over two days. The White House had asked 
for four days to make the president's case, but Rep. Henry Hyde, R-Ill., 
chairman of the Judiciary Committee, said on Sunday he would allow 
no more than 30 hours of testimony over two days. The three former 
members of Congress who will appear on Clinton's behalf _ Elizabeth 
Holtzman of New York, the Rev. Robert F. Drinan of Massachusetts and 
Wayne Owens of Utah _ all sat on the Judiciary Committee in 1974 and 
voted in favor of the impeachment articles against Nixon. Under the 
schedule submitted to the panel by the White House on Monday, the 
former members will speak Tuesday afternoon about abuse of power, 
one of the three charges against Nixon and one of three potential 
accusations against Clinton being considered by the current committee. 
The White House said the three former members would compare Nixon's 
actions to those of Clinton and argue that Clinton's behavior, while 
personally objectionable, does not constitute an impeachable abuse 
of his office. Also speaking on Clinton's behalf will be Richard Ben-Veniste, 
chief of the task force in the Watergate special prosecutor's office 
from 1973 to 1975, and James Hamilton, who was assistant chief counsel 
on the Senate Watergate Committee. They plan to tell the committee 
that Starr did not follow precedents established by the Watergate 
prosecutors and presented a biased and incomplete case to the Judiciary 
Committee. Hamilton, a Washington lawyer, has written a book on congressional 
investigations and has informally advised Clinton on how to control 
the damage from scandal inquiries. Among his points of advice: Say 
as little as possible, provide few documents to the press and public, 
and invoke attorney-client and executive privileges when applicable. 
The first panel to be presented Tuesday by the White House includes 
Nicholas deB. Katzenbach, former attorney general under President 
Lyndon B. Johnson; Bruce Ackerman, professor of law at Yale University; 
Sean Wilentz, professor of history at Princeton University; and Samuel 
H. Beer, professor of government emeritus at Harvard University. They 
will address the historical precedents of impeachment and the standards 
that should be met before articles of impeachment are approved. On 
Wednesday morning, the White House defense will be presented by five 
former federal prosecutors: Thomas P. Sullivan, Richard J. Davis, 
Edward S.G. Dennis Jr., William W. Taylor III and Ronald Noble. The 
main point of their presentation, according to the White House, is 
that few prosecutors would bring criminal charges based on Starr's 
chief accusations against Clinton _ perjury, obstruction of justice 
and witness tampering. They will also raise questions about the conduct 
of Starr's investigation, the White House said. While Clinton does 
not plan to address Congress in person or in writing on impeachment, 
the president and Hillary Rodham Clinton will entertain more than 
1,000 members of Congress, spouses and aides on Monday night at an 
annual holiday ball at the White House. Officials would not rule out 
a little gentle anti-impeachment lobbying by the Clintons. ``I can't 
preclude the fact that the subject doesn't come up,'' Lockhart said. 
``It certainly is a topic of great conversation in this town.'' 
</TEXT>
</DOC>