<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981207.0335 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
The Supreme Court on Monday entered a long-running tax dispute between 
two federal district judges and an Alabama county that has tried for 
10 years to impose its occupational license tax on the salaries of 
federal judges in Birmingham. The federal appeals court in Atlanta 
has ruled twice in the last three years that Jefferson County, Ala., 
which includes Birmingham, cannot constitutionally apply the tax to 
the income of federal judges. The appeals court held that the tax, 
which applies to hundreds of thousands of private- and public-sector 
workers in the Alabama county, in effect amounts to a direct state 
tax on the federal government, in violation of a legal doctrine that 
makes the government immune from state and local taxation. On Monday 
the Supreme Court agreed to hear the county's appeal. Federal judges, 
along with other federal employees, pay state and local as well as 
federal income tax, under a 1939 law in which Congress expressly consented 
to state and local income taxes as long as there was no discrimination 
against the federal workers. But the 11th U.S. Circuit Court of Appeals, 
in Atlanta, viewed the Jefferson County tax not as an ordinary income 
tax but rather, in this case, as an impermissible fee for the privilege 
of serving as a federal judge. The tax amounts to about $700 a year 
for the judges, who earn $136,700. The two judges who have refused 
to pay are William Acker Jr. and U.W. Clemon. The other federal judges 
who work in the Hugo L. Black Federal Courthouse in Birmingham are 
not parties to the case, having simply paid the tax or paid it under 
protest. In its Supreme Court appeal, Jefferson County vs. Acker, 
No. 98-10, the county is arguing that the tax is simply an income 
tax under a different name and that, as such, it raises no constitutional 
problem. Alabama counties are barred by state law from imposing income 
taxes, and so several have come up with occupational taxes that have 
the same effect. The Jefferson County tax is levied at the rate of 
0.5 percent of an individual's gross earnings within the county. Only 
people who operate businesses under a state license are exempt. The 
federal government has taken the county's side in this dispute. When 
the county's appeal was before the Supreme Court last year, before 
the justices ordered the appeals court to consider a separate, jurisdictional 
issue, the government told the court that the appeals court had made 
a mistake ``in looking to the label, rather than the substance, of 
the challenged tax.'' In granting the appeal Monday, the justices 
were evidently not satisfied with the appeals court's handling of 
the jurisdictional issue, and ordered the two sides to address it 
again. That question is whether a federal law, the Tax Injunction 
Act, which generally prohibits the federal courts from interfering 
with a state's effort to assess or collect taxes, should keep this 
case out of federal court. The county originally sued the two judges 
in the local small claims court, but the judges successfully requested 
a transfer to federal court. If there turns out to be no federal court 
jurisdiction, the lawsuit will proceed in the Alabama state courts. 
These were among the other developments at the court Monday: _ Military 
death sentence: Without comment, the court refused to hear an appeal 
by an Army private, now on the military's death row, from his conviction 
of murdering two taxi drivers in 1988. The case of the soldier, Pvt. 
Dwight Loving, first reached the Supreme Court in 1996, when he challenged 
the constitutionality of the death penalty provisions of the Uniform 
Code of Military Justice. The justices upheld the military death penalty 
by a vote of 9-0. In the latest case, Loving vs. Hart, No. 98-251, 
Loving challenged particular aspects of his sentencing, including 
whether members of the court-martial had received proper instructions. 
The U.S. Court of Appeals for the Armed Forces, which previously upheld 
the sentence, rejected the latest challenge earlier this year. There 
has not been an execution in the military since 1961. _ Federal authority: 
Also acting without comment, the court sidestepped a debate over federal 
vs. state authority, refusing to hear a Maryland county's appeal from 
a ruling that it was required under federal labor law to pay overtime 
to emergency medical technicians. Anne Arundel County, backed by briefs 
from 20 states, the National League of Cities and other state and 
local government organizations, had framed the case as a vehicle to 
persuade the court to re-examine a disputed 1985 ruling that upheld 
the constitutionality of the Fair Labor Standards Act as applied to 
state and local employers. The 4th U.S. Circuit Court of Appeals, 
in Richmond, Va., ruled against the county on the ground that the 
1985 decision was binding. The case Monday was Anne Arundel County 
vs. West, No. 98-266. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>