<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981207.0489 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Following are excerpts from Attorney General Janet Reno's notification 
to the U.S. Court of Appeals for the District of Columbia Circuit 
on Monday that she would not ask the court to appoint an independent 
counsel to investigate the campaign finance actions of President Clinton: 
On Sept. 8, 1998, I notified the special division of the initiation 
of a preliminary investigation involving President of the United States 
William Jefferson Clinton and others. The preliminary investigation 
has now been concluded, and I have determined there are no reasonable 
grounds to believe that further investigation is warranted of allegations 
that the President or any other covered person violated Federal criminal 
law in connection with D.N.C.-financed political advertisements during 
the 1996 election cycle. I find by clear and convincing evidence a 
lack of the knowing and willful criminal intent required for criminal 
prosecution of the statutes involved here, and conclude that established 
departmental policy requires the Department of Justice to defer to 
the Federal Election Commission (F.E.C.) under the circumstances of 
this case. Therefore, no independent counsel need be appointed.... 
Whether these advertising expenditures were attributable to the campaign 
committees such that they violated the F.E.C.A., P.P.M.P.A.A., or 
P.E.C.F.A., [the Federal Election Campaign Act, the Presidential Primary 
Matching Payment Account Act and the Presidential Election Campaign 
Fund Act) turns in the circumstances of this case on whether the advertisements 
referred to a clearly identified candidate and contained an electioneering 
message. The audit division found, among other things, that the advertisements 
met these tests and accordingly constituted contributions to and expenditures 
by the campaign committees in violation of the referenced statutes. 
The department's preliminary investigation has focused on two issues: 
(1) determining whether the President and Vice President were sufficiently 
involved in or exercised sufficient control over the D.N.C. issue 
advertising campaign as to be potentially criminally responsible for 
the violations found by the audit division; and (2) if so, determining 
whether the President and Vice President acted with the requisite 
``knowing and willful'' mental state.... As the head of the national 
party, the President, and to a lesser extent the Vice President, had 
the ultimate authority to sanction the issue advertisement campaign. 
They both were actively involved in the ongoing campaign, including 
raising the money to finance it, formulating the political strategy 
the advertisements were intended to advance, and reviewing and commenting 
on the advertisements themselves. Based on these investigative results, 
I conclude that these facts sufficiently established the involvement 
of the President and Vice President in the issue advertisement campaign 
as to make them potentially liable, were there criminal violations 
of the applicable statutes involved here.... With respect to my consideration 
of the intent element of a potential criminal offense under the Independent 
Counsel Act, I may conclude that no further investigation is warranted 
based on a finding that the subject lacked criminal intent only if 
there is ``clear and convincing evidence'' that the covered persons 
lacked the state of mind required for the violation of criminal law 
involved. In reaching my conclusions here, I have considered the evidence 
of intent under this high standard. The potential criminal violations 
under consideration here all require a ``knowing and willful'' mental 
state. This means that a violation amounts to a potential crime only 
if there is an intentional violation of a known legal duty. As a result, 
the preliminary investigation has focused generally on the President's 
and Vice President's knowledge of the law and specifically on any 
legal advice they received as to the legality of the D.N.C. issue 
advertisements. I have concluded, based on the uncontradicted statements 
of the principal participants in the advertising campaign, together 
with substantial corroborating documentary evidence, that the President 
and Vice President were advised that the issue advertising campaign 
was lawful and that lawyers were reviewing every advertisement to 
insure full compliance with the law. In addition, there is no affirmative 
evidence suggesting in any way that either the President or the Vice 
President ever harbored a subjective belief that they were violating 
the law or that the legal review undertaken by D.N.C. and Clinton/Gore 
counsel was insufficient. I conclude that these facts establish clearly 
and convincingly that the President and Vice President lacked the 
requisite specific intent to violate the law. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>