<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981207.0418 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
In an effort both to broaden support for its Java programming language 
and to nurture innovation, Sun Microsystems plans to announce on Tuesday 
that it will move a step closer to the ``open source'' model for freely 
sharing the work of programmers. The planned announcement is both 
an acknowledgment of the growing force of the open source philosophy 
_ which embodies free programs like the Linux operating system _ and 
an effort by Sun to attract the expertise of companies across a wide 
spectrum of manufacturing and services in developing Java to meet 
the needs of their own industries. In announcing Java 2.0, at an industry 
trade conference in New York, Sun will also announce that the original 
programmers' instructions, or source code, will be freely available 
in the future. However, unlike traditional open source licensing plans, 
companies that license Java will still be required to pay a royalty 
when shipping a usable program based on the source code. Their products 
must also pass a Java compatibility test before they can be shipped. 
However, Sun said it planned to retain PricewaterhouseCoopers to audit 
the process of who determines which new functions can be added to 
the language. While industry analysts and developers welcomed the 
opening of the platform, they noted that it would still fall short 
of the open source movement's goal of doing away with limits on the 
exchange of software. ``It sounds very elegant, but it's very tricky,'' 
said Esther Dyson, publisher of Release 2.0, an industry newsletter. 
``You have to define what you're getting royalties for, and you have 
to wonder what Sun's real motivation is.'' However, programmers who 
value the ability to get their hands on the inner working of the tools 
they use to write their programs generally welcomed the change. ``It 
gives you a little more trust in the product, because you can go in 
and fix something if you need to,'' said Howard Katz, a Canadian Java 
software developer. Sun executives said they were hoping to generate 
new interest in Java by lowering the cost of developing the language 
and by encouraging more vibrant development though freely shared ideas. 
``The reason we are making this change is, on the one hand, we've 
seen some of the success that the open source community has had in 
driving innovation,'' said Alan Baratz, president of Sun's Javasoft 
division. Sun might also be acting to defuse any plans to clone its 
technology, a fear that stems in part from its court victory last 
month in its lawsuit accusing Microsoft Corp. of violating its Java 
licensing agreement by making unapproved changes to it. Last month, 
Judge Ronald Whyte of U.S. District Court in San Jose, Calif., ruled 
that Microsoft must stop shipping the incompatible version of its 
program within 90 days. Microsoft later said it was considering various 
options, including dropping its Java support. A more likely possibility, 
many analysts say, is that Microsoft might consider cloning Java, 
an approach already taken by a consumer products division of Hewlett-Packard. 
By changing its licensing terms, Baratz said, Sun was also opening 
up the process by which other corporations and software developers 
will be able to contribute to the way the language evolves. In the 
past, he said, Sun held that control unilaterally, and only its partners 
were able to offer ideas for new functions and standards. A number 
of companies intend to endorse the new Sun licensing plan, including 
some corporations that had been thinking about cloning Java, but Hewlett-Packard 
will not be one of them, Baratz said. ``Frankly, Hewlett-Packard provided 
good input, and we developed a model that achieved many if not all 
of the things that were important to them,'' he said. ``I think there 
are other political reasons that H-P is choosing not to participate.'' 
There were also indications Monday that Microsoft planned to continue 
to participate in the Java market. The company said it was releasing 
a new version of its Java that offered better performance than Sun's 
current version. Microsoft also added support for Jini, Sun's distributed 
Java technology that had been a source of divisiveness between the 
companies. Baratz said Monday that it had not yet been possible to 
compare performance of Microsoft's and Sun's new versions of Java, 
because neither company had yet received copies of the other's product. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>