<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981207.0302 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
When Richard Wattenmaker, director of the Smithsonian Institution's 
Archives of American Art, started making phone calls from his Washington 
office on Sept. 23, he could hardly have imagined the uproar he would 
soon create. He was about to close the Boston and Detroit offices 
of the archives, whose more than 13 million documents record the history 
of visual art in the United States, and to shrink operations in New 
York. Six employees, including two regional directors, would lose 
their jobs. From now on, material would be collected from Washington. 
The news ricocheted around the American art world, and so did the 
complaints. But they were not enough to stop Wattenmaker's plans, 
which went into effect on Nov. 23. Though the archives constitute 
a tiny agency, all but unnoticed by the public, its cache is crucial. 
Some 3,000 scholars, curators and writers use it each year. ``It has 
enormous implications for how art history is written,'' said Francis 
O'Connor, an art historian best known for editing the catalog raisonne 
of Jackson Pollock's work. Little wonder, then, that Wattenmaker and 
much of the American art establishment are engaged in a battle over 
the archives' future. Critics have begun to protest not only the cutbacks 
but also the archives' past retrenchments, its sometimes fitful collecting, 
its often tardy processing of material and Wattenmaker's pronouncement 
of the reorganization as a fait accompli. And he has lashed back in 
a way rarely heard in the art world or in the government. Theodore 
Stebbins and Jonathan Fairbanks, curators at the Museum of Fine Arts 
in Boston and members of the archives' Boston advisory committee, 
wrote a letter to Wattenmaker on Oct. 8 that said in part, ``If your 
plans to `reorganize' proceed, you will succeed in destroying the 
very foundation upon which the archives was established.'' They sent 
copies to I. Michael Heyman, secretary of the Smithsonian, and J. 
Dennis O'Connor, its provost. From Detroit, Mado Lie, president of 
the archives' local support group, called Wattenmaker's news ``a bombshell'' 
and in an Oct. 5 letter to him went on to say, ``Everybody understands 
bottom line concerns, but your furtive blitz was unconscionable.'' 
A few people are even grumbling that the archives might be better 
off as a private institution, as it was before seeking federal aid 
in 1969-70. Wattenmaker, who flew to Detroit in mid-November to listen 
to the dissenters, and O'Connor, who made a similar trip to Boston 
in late October, insist that there will be no change in plans. ``We're 
reorganizing, we're not cutting back,'' O'Connor said in a recent 
interview. And he dismissed contentions that the archives might be 
better off in private hands: ``I don't know how anyone with two neurons 
would say that we are not concerned with the archives at the Smithsonian.'' 
Wattenmaker, who has held his post since 1990, responded with a broadside 
that sniped not only at his critics but at Vice President Al Gore's 
six-year-old effort to ``reinvent'' government, and even at the archives' 
trustees. ``It's wonderful to have people tell you how to run your 
business,'' Wattenmaker fumed. ``Ted Stebbins hasn't been to an advisory 
committee meeting in years. In my time he has never done any serious 
fund raising. Since 1970 we have raised no serious money in Boston. 
When the Museum of Fine Arts put up that ugly shopping mall wing, 
did I call them up and say, `Why are you putting all this trash in 
the museum?''' ``I think they ought to understand how up-the-creek 
the finances here were,'' Wattenmaker added. ``How about they run 
their business, and the Smithsonian runs its business?'' Responding 
to his critics' statement that the Boston office cost a mere $150,000 
a year, Wattenmaker said: ``I don't have the $150,000. With the mandate 
by your vice president and all of his playmates, we have to reduce.'' 
All told, the Smithsonian allocates $1.5 million of its annual budget 
of more than $550 million to the archives. The archives add to that 
by raising another $500,000 a year privately. But even there, it has 
had trouble meeting needs. ``Part of the trustees' duty is to give 
money, and they were falling short of expectations,'' Wattenmaker 
said. In the 1980s, when a management consultant suggested that the 
annual donation expected from trustees be doubled to $10,000, Wattenmaker 
said, ``the trustees declined to raise it.'' And two years ago, the 
Brown Foundation gave the archives a $500,000 challenge grant to guarantee 
the publication of its quarterly journal, but so far the archives 
have managed to match only $160,000. Trivial as those budget numbers 
sound, they are no measure of the archives' value. They collect, process, 
microfilm and store letters, notebooks, photographs, diaries, sketchbooks, 
business records and other items from hundreds of artists, museums, 
dealers, collectors, scholars and critics, as well as audio and video 
interviews. The personal papers of such artists as Pollock, Thomas 
Cole, Stuart Davis, Louise Nevelson and Ben Shahn are among the archives' 
treasures. So are those of art critics like Clement Greenberg and 
art patrons like Isabella Stewart Gardner. The records of the legendary 
1913 Armory Show, which introduced modern art in the United States, 
are in the archives. Patricia Hill, an art historian at Boston University, 
said the archives' primary research material had ``allowed art historians 
to rethink art history. You don't have to follow the road of the antiquarians.'' 
She is writing a book about Jacob Lawrence, who she said was shunted 
aside by the experts in the 1930s and 40s. ``You can do better art 
history'' because of the archives, she said. Its catalog lists 47 
files that mention Lawrence, including his personal papers, and interviews 
with him in 1968 and 1982. When the archives were founded by three 
Detroit art lovers in 1954 in the kitchen of Lawrence Fleischman, 
a dealer who died in 1997, there was no institution for the study 
of American art, the archives literature says. Today, they are the 
largest single source of historical material about visual art in the 
country. In years past, the archives had offices in several cities, 
including San Francisco and Chicago, that collected documents and 
housed microfilmed copies of the original material, which is stored 
in Washington. But the regional system proved too expensive, Wattenmaker 
said. The archives, which employed 46 people in 1990, began 1998 with 
36 people spread around its Washington headquarters, a dusty office 
on the third-floor balcony of the National Museum of American Art, 
and offices in Detroit, New York, Boston and San Marino, Calif. Most 
of the holdings are stored in Smithsonian quarters north of the Capitol. 
Under Wattenmaker's new plan, the number is 30. Detroit is closed, 
its microfilm records transferred to Washington. Boston is closed, 
though microfilms are still available at the Boston Public Library, 
where they were moved in 1993. The Manhattan office, in the Equitable 
Center, remains open as a research center but not a collecting point, 
and a new employee will be hired to raise money and develop membership. 
The shrinkage means that scholars not situated on either coast must 
depend on intra-library loans, which take four to six weeks and may 
take longer now, archives staff members have told users. But art experts 
say the bigger worry is collecting. A large part of the job of the 
former regional directors, Robert Brown in Boston and Stephen Polcari 
in New York, was ``rainmaking'': initiating relationships with artists, 
dealers, scholars, curators and collectors and persuading them to 
donate their papers. Brown and Polcari each cite many examples of 
their successes, but Wattenmaker said they often simply picked up 
things that would have been donated anyway. Brown's backers in Boston 
testify to his effectiveness. Polcari's in New York are less enthusiastic; 
they credit him with being a better scholar than schmoozer. Polcari 
disagreed: ``My track record stands for itself. I am a nationally 
recognized scholar, and that's useful in collecting. But my personality 
works well with people.'' In any case, nearly everybody contacted, 
except Wattenmaker and O'Connor, said it made no sense to close down 
collecting from New York and Boston. They said that knowledgeable 
people constantly on the scene must do the collecting, or the process 
atrophies. Brown said that in dealing with his bosses in Washington 
over the past few years, ``I got no feeling that they wanted collecting 
to continue. They want some big names, of course, but not the whole 
thing. But you never know what a third-rank artist might have that 
mirrors a whole era.'' And if collecting has to be concentrated in 
one office, why Washington? Historically at least, most American art 
was produced in and around New York and New England. ``The collecting 
office should be in New York,'' said Gail Levin, an art professor 
at the Graduate School of the City University of New York and the 
author of a dozen art books. Wattenmaker argues that much of the archives' 
collecting will simply be more focused, with money raised from foundations 
for specific goals, like a current Hispanic art project based in Florida. 
``There will not be any cutback in collecting,'' he said. He also 
dismissed complaints that the archives had fallen behind in processing 
the material collected. Yet he acknowledged that only about one-third 
of the documents had been microfilmed. Everyone seems to agree that 
the archives are underfinanced, which is hampering all of its work. 
Many people blame the trustees, though they will not do so on the 
record. In addition, ``we are underendowed,'' Wattenmaker said, citing 
the total as less than $500,000, a remnant of gifts made in the 1960s 
when the archives were still private. The endowment should be at least 
$5 million, he said. His solution is to hire a fund-raiser based in 
New York to seek endowment money and operating funds. But a few people 
are starting to say the archives should be given more federal money 
or returned to private status. The art world has gotten bigger and 
richer since the archives sought federal shelter. Raising the money 
needed _a total in the low millions would probably do it _ may not 
be that difficult at a time when many museums are attracting tens 
of millions of dollars. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>