<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981207.0220 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
The blueprint for making a person is not a set of plans showing what 
a finished heart or kidney looks like and how all the different organs 
are plumbed together. It is almost certainly a program, not a description, 
a series of steps that directs a handful of embryonic cells into progressively 
more specialised tissues. Interacting with each other through a burst 
of chemical signals, the cells proliferate and slowly organize themselves 
into the program's end product, the miracle of a mewling infant. Human 
embryonic stem cells _ the cells at the beginning of this biological 
unfolding _ have now been isolated for the first time and scientists 
last week promised Congress that they would soon be able to mimic 
parts of nature's program in the laboratory, making heart, blood and 
nerve cells to replace or fortify diseased tissues. Should the technique 
work, it could well change the face of medicine by providing a universal 
spare parts kit for the human body. No longer would patients have 
to wait in line for scarce transplantable organs; their failing hearts 
would be injected with heart muscle cells grown from human embryonic 
cells. The cells would be genetically manipulated so as to avoid provoking 
the patient's immune defenses, and immortalized with a gene that enables 
cells to divide indefinitely instead of growing old after an allotted 
number of divisions. From the cornucopia of embryonic stem cells, 
biologists would also spin off nerve cells for Parkinson's disease 
patients, pancreatic islet cells for diabetics and endothelial cells 
to reline tired blood vessels, Dr. Tom Okarma told a Senate committee 
last week. Okarma is vice president for research of Geron, the company 
that funded the stem cells' development. The principle of growing 
replacement tissue cells from embryonic stem cells was also endorsed 
at the hearing by Dr. Harold Varmus, director of the National Institutes 
of Health. But a sizeable gap still yawns between theory and practice. 
The chemical messages the cells exchange as they travel down developmental 
paths to their destined cell type are almost completely unknown. Biologists 
will need to identify these signals before they acquire complete mastery 
over the cell's lineages and fate. But there is a large bank of knowledge 
to draw on, derived from studies of how simpler organisms develop, 
like sea urchins, roundworms, fruit flies, frogs and mice. ``The field 
has exploded over the last 10 years,'' said Dr. Sally A. Moody, a 
biologist at George Washington University and editor of ``Cell Lineage 
and Fate Determination'' (Academic Press). Because of similarities 
in evolution's design, an overall picture of embryonic development 
is emerging, Dr. Moody said, ``but the perception that scientists 
know how to choose any cell fate is wrong. We know a lot about particular 
cell fates but we don't have all the pieces worked out by any means.'' 
All cells in the human body have a full set of genes, but as cells 
progress down different lineages, they presumably activate the particular 
suite of genes that tells them how to operate as a hair cell or kidney 
cell or whatever is appropriate to their neighborhood. The first main 
step of development is when the all-purpose embryonic cells differentiate 
into the three tissues of the early embryo: the endoderm, mesoderm 
and ectoderm. In backboned animals, the gut, liver and lungs develop 
from the endoderm; the mesoderm gives rise to the skeleton, muscle, 
kidney, heart and blood, and the ectoderm generates two not obviously 
kindred tissues, the skin and the nerve cells. This division of labor 
is thought to be accomplished by chemical signals that cells secrete 
to influence their neighbors, along with receptors they insert in 
their outer membranes to receive these signals. ``It's a language 
of signals and receptors,'' said Dr. Roger Pedersen, a biologist at 
the University of California, San Francisco, who studies development 
in mice and humans. ``We know the semantics, but we don't understand 
them because we can't eavesdrop on the embryo very well, where this 
intimate conversation is going on.'' A few words in this code have 
been deciphered. Embryonic stem cells can be driven to develop into 
nerve cells by exposing them to the chemical known as retinoic acid. 
Certain growth factors influence the development of blood-forming 
cells. ``One could generalize to say we know that the language being 
spoken within the emrbyo as it forms these cell types is the language 
of growth factors, but we don't know how to decode the particular 
sentences of messages that the individual cell types hear,'' Pedersen 
said. A development that may provide many of the words in this vital 
language comes from research undertaken by Human Genome Sciences of 
Rockville, Md. Dr. William A. Haseltine, its chairman and chief executive 
officer, said that the company has now isolated more than 75 percent 
of all human genes in full length form. From them the company's scientists 
as of this week have identified 14,387 genes whose products are predicted 
to be proteins that are either exported from the cell as chemical 
signals or inserted into the membrane as receptors, Haseltine said. 
The identification was accomplished by setting a computer to search 
for the sequence of DNA letters that are the zip code, under the cell's 
protein sorting system, for all proteins destined to be exported or 
used as membrane receptors. These 14,000 proteins, Haseltine said, 
comprise almost the entire gene-encoded signals communication system 
between human cells. A ``big fundamental surprise,'' he said, is that 
some 12,000 of these genes have no family relationship to any genes 
found in the C. elegans roundworm, whose DNA sequence is now almost 
complete. This implies that higher animals invented a much more sophisticated 
intercellular communications system as they evolved away from the 
worm. The 14,000 signals and receptors, Haseltine said, would be expected 
to include those that are involved in embryonic development and hence, 
once identified, would supply most of the factors needed to make human 
embryonic stem cells differentiate into any desired cell type. Haseltine 
said he was discussing a collaboration with Geron. Haseltine was well 
known in the academic world before he left the Harvard Medical School 
for Human Genome Sciences. But the company has not published its findings 
in scientific journals and few if any scientists independent of the 
company have detailed knowledge of its work. Academic scientists consulted 
about the company's claims were unable to verify them. Human Genome 
Sciences has filed many patent applications on the genes it has discovered 
and so far has been granted patents on 652 genes whose function it 
has identified. The company is building a plant near its Rockville 
headquarters to manufacture three of the proteins it has discovered. 
One, vascular endothelial growth factor 2 or VEGF2, stimulates growth 
of new blood and lymph vessels. The others are keratinocyte growth 
factor 2, which stimulates growth of the skin and mucosal tissue, 
and myeloproliferation inhibitory factor 1, to be used for protecting 
the bone marrow cells in patients receiving chemotherapy. All three 
compounds are in clinical trials and have not yet been approved for 
market. Haseltine has coined the term ``regenerative medicine'' to 
describe his hope for renewing body tissues with the help of the natural 
signals that control their growth. Understanding the body's repair 
processes at the genetic level ``should permit us to maintain our 
bodies in normal function, perhaps perpetually,'' he says. Many of 
the repair signals should be found among the 14,000 signal and receptor 
proteins Human Genome Sciences has isolated, Haseltine believes. The 
set should also contain the factors that guide human embryonic stem 
cells down their various lineages to form all the tissues of the body. 
The company has developed a robotic screening system to monitor how 
cells respond to external signals, and hopes that this will pinpoint 
the signals involved in embryonic development. Dr. David Greenwood, 
Geropn's chief financial officer, confirmed the company had been in 
discussions with Haseltine. ``It's reasonable to assume that Human 
Genome Sciences has generated interesting data, given their efforts 
in the field,'' he said. The world of genes and cells that beckons 
so brightly may well prove harder to conquer than it seems. But there 
is at least a rational basis for the hopes now being expressed, whatever 
the timescale of their fulfilment. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>