<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981207.0307 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
President Boris Yeltsin came to his Kremlin office Monday just long 
enough to dismiss four top aides and proclaim that he is retaking 
control of his government's skidding tax-collection and crime-fighting 
agencies. Then he returned to a Moscow hospital, continuing a recovery 
from pneumonia that has stretched to 15 days and seemingly rendered 
him an asterisk in the Kremlin power structure _ at least until now. 
Oleg Sysuyev, a senior aide who often channels Yeltsin's view of things 
to reporters and television viewers, told the Itar-Tass news agency 
later that his boss had other moves in mind, but offered no specifics. 
Yeltsin's official spokesman, Dmitri Yakushkin, said the president 
gave his staff a blunt explanation for the reshuffling. ``Things are 
not going too well,'' he quoted Yeltsin as saying. The highest-ranking 
aide dismissed was Valentin Yumashev, head of presidential administration, 
whose job is roughly equivalent to chief of staff in the U.S. White 
House. He was replaced by Nikolai Bordyuzha, a onetime chief of the 
federal border guards who most recently was secretary of Yeltsin's 
top advisory body, the security council. Bordyuzha will keep his security 
council job, an apparent attempt to insure that the defense and security 
officials on the security council work in lock step with the rest 
of the administration. Yeltsin, 67, also said that the heads of the 
federal Justice Ministry and tax-collection agency will now report 
directly to him instead of to Prime Minister Yevgeny Primakov. Yakushkin 
said the shift was coordinated with Primakov and does not signal any 
unhappiness on Yeltsin's part with his latest second-in-command. Yeltsin 
changes underlings more often than many people change their motor 
oil, having announced three prime ministers and dismissed countless 
lesser aides since last spring. Outsiders were reluctant to attach 
any special importance to the latest dismissals, which were limited 
to Yeltsin's shrunken inner circle. The moves nevertheless addressed 
a rising perception that influence over events here _ social, political 
and economic _ is slowly slipping from the grasp of the pro-democracy 
forces that Yeltsin long represented. In response, Yeltsin appears 
to be trying to stanch the bleeding away of his political authority. 
The economy continues to work against Yeltsin. Tax revenues have been 
slipping since August, forcing the government to print more rubles. 
Officials said Monday that the central bank pumped 10.5 billion new 
rubles, or more than $525 million, into the economy last month, triple 
the rate in October. The ruble traded at 6.3 to the dollar four months 
ago but dipped below the 20-per-dollar mark Monday. Once content just 
to mock him, the president's many critics in the Communist Party and 
among nationalist movements have begun testing their own strength 
lately, to some effect. Members of both factions have refused to condemn 
attacks by one Communist in the Parliament on Russian Jews, many of 
them rich businessmen who have supported the current government. Some 
legislators have openly endorsed the attacks, drawing a rebuke from 
Yeltsin but little else. Last week the Communists stunned many Muscovites 
by proposing to restore to downtown Moscow a statue of Felix Dzerzhinsky, 
the first head of the despised Cheka secret police, which later became 
the KGB. The Cheka and its successors oversaw the arrest or execution 
of millions of innocent Russians during Stalin's purges in the 1930s. 
The secret police also created a forced-labor program that sent Russians 
to build huge dams and canals, mine gold and perform other state tasks, 
often under horrific conditions and with high mortality rates. Finally, 
the agencies created and ran the now-famous gulags in which political 
opponents and dissidents were imprisoned and forced to work. The Dzerzhinsky 
statue, which stood in Lubyanka Square outside KGB headquarters near 
Red Square, was toppled from its pedestal by celebrants after Moscow 
Mayor Yuri Luzhkov ordered it removed in 1991. A Communist legislator 
proposed restoring the statue as an anti-crime symbol, saying it memorialized 
a man with ``cold hands'' and a ``warm heart.'' The resolution eventually 
passed, and while the statue's future remains uncertain, the vote 
is widely viewed as evidence of the Yeltsin government's fading authority. 
The country's powerful criminal bands are increasingly brazen, too. 
The recent assassination of a leading advocate of democracy, Galina 
Starovoitova, a member of Parliament, has underscored the criminals' 
efforts to muscle their way into politics. Yeltsin reportedly held 
a consultation with his daughter and adviser Tatyana Dyachenko, 38, 
and with Yumashev before spending three hours at the Kremlin Monday. 
Yakushkin quoted Yeltsin as saying that his aides' conduct of the 
battle against corruption and political extremism ``undermines trust 
in presidential authority in general, and that is inadmissible.'' 
``In the present conditions,'' Yeltsin was quoted as saying, ``power 
should be concentrated in one hand.'' 
</TEXT>
</DOC>