<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981207.0278 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
New research is challenging the medical textbook view of osteoporosis 
as largely a women's disease linked to the singularly female experience 
of menopause. It now seems that osteoporosis is more prevalent in 
men than was previously thought, and that although men do not go through 
menopause, the main cause of the degenerative bone disorder is the 
same in men and women: an age-related drop in estrogen. Several recent 
studies show that men's levels of this sex hormone decline with age 
and that the decline leads to a loss of bone mass, the signature symptom 
of osteoporosis. Some of these studies were presented last week at 
a meeting of the American Society for Bone and Mineral Research and 
the International Bone and Mineral Society in San Francisco. ``This 
is surprising,'' said Dr. B. Lawrence Riggs, a professor of medical 
research at the Mayo Clinic in Rochester, Minn., who has found that 
estrogen naturally falls in men after about age 65. ``Three years 
ago, none of us would have thought that estrogen loss was a factor 
in male osteoporosis.'' Although men and women have estrogen, it is 
more abundant in women and plays a central role in female reproduction. 
The National Osteoporosis Foundation in Washington estimates that 
of the 10 million Americans who have osteoporosis, more than 1.5 million 
are men, and that half of women and one in eight men over 50 will 
have an osteoporosis-related fracture. But because osteoporosis is 
underdiagnosed in men, the numbers for men are probably higher, the 
organization's literature says. Medical textbooks describe osteoporosis 
differently for men and for women. In women it is linked mainly to 
the sharp drop in estrogen after menopause, because estrogen is known 
to slow the natural process of bone loss that occurs with age. In 
men, however, osteoporosis is said to result from abnormally low levels 
of testosterone, a sex hormone more plentiful in males. The cause 
of low testosterone is usually a rare condition called hypogonadism, 
in which the testicles are underactive. Two studies presented at last 
week's meeting indicate that estrogen plays a more central role than 
testosterone in osteoporosis in men. Researchers following residents 
of Framingham, Mass., over five decades studied 382 elderly white 
men for eight years, tracking bone density, estrogen levels and signs 
of hypogonadism. Men with the highest bone density also had the highest 
estrogen levels; the connection with hypogonadism was negligible. 
In another study, doctors in Germany measured bone density as well 
as estrogen and testosterone levels of 300 men with osteoporosis for 
five years. Forty percent of the men had low estrogen; 20 percent 
had low testosterone. ``We didn't see a pronounced effect of testosterone 
on the males' bone-mineral density,'' said Dr. Peter Kaps, an orthopedic 
surgeon and the lead author. Dr. Pamela Taxel, assistant professor 
of medicine at the University of Connecticut Health Center in Farmington, 
said: ``These are suggestive findings, but larger studies are needed 
to understand the mechanism of estrogen and testosterone on bone health 
in men.'' Dr. Taxel is studying the use of estrogen supplements to 
treat men with osteoporosis. She said research was needed to develop 
a form of estrogen that helps men without causing side effects like 
prostate disease or impotence. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>