<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981207.0079 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Most wars in Africa since the end of colonialism have been civil wars. 
Even though their borders were drawn by Victorian imperialists, African 
states have generally kept their armies inside them, no matter how 
flagrantly those long-dead European males ignored tribal affinities 
and natural landscapes. The war in Congo, the huge central African 
country formerly known as Zaire, is changing all that. Troops from 
as far south as Namibia and as far north as Chad are fighting inside 
the vast equatorial basin of the Congo River. Would-be presidents, 
waiting to step forward if Laurent Kabila is overthrown, are preening 
in hotel rooms from Cape Town to Brussels. Mining companies from South 
Africa to Canada are holding their breaths _ and checkbooks _ waiting 
to see how things turn out. In truth, Congo is a single country in 
name only. Because the interior is so impassable and the hinterlands 
so ungovernable, it has functioned for years like three _ the east 
imports and sells through Uganda and Kenya, while the south does so 
through Zambia and South Africa; only the west and the interior answer 
to the capital, Kinshasa. Now, this war is threatening to make the 
informal state of affairs into a formal division. Every force in the 
Congo fights for a different reason. Sadly, greed and hatred are the 
two strongest. In one sense, what has developed is a tribal war along 
lines that are almost biblical _ rulers from Nilotic ethnic groups 
in Rwanda, Burundi and Uganda against Bantu peoples of central and 
southern Africa in league with Arab rulers of northern Chad and Sudan. 
But the old adage ``the enemy of my enemy is my friend'' also applies. 
The Sudan is involved, for example, because it hates Uganda, which 
supports guerrillas in southern Sudan. Zimbabwe and Namibia say they 
are defending Congo's sovereignty, but they are reported to have been 
promised mining deals by Kabila. In brief, with Congo as weak as it 
is, it is simply too big, too central and too rich in resources for 
its neighbors not to encroach on. And the deeper some go in, the more 
likely their rivals are to join the fray. The war has become a continent-wide 
free-for-all. By various estimates, Kabila started with some 15,000 
effective troops, half of whom defected to the other side. He is aided 
by 6,000 Zimbabweans, perhaps 5,000 Angolans, 3,000 Sudanese and Chadians 
and 300 Namibians. The war also reflects the ethnic split between 
central Africa's Tutsi and Hutu groups. Up to 12,000 poorly organized 
Hutus, chased out of Rwanda in 1994, are said to be helping him, even 
though his own Tutsi-led forces slaughtered fellow Hutus in 1997. 
Arrayed against them are an unknown but probably larger force of rebels. 
Many of these are Banyamulenge Tutsis who were born in Congo but were 
denied citizenship both by the former dictator Mobutu Sese Seko and 
by Kabila. These Tutsi are backed by Rwandans and Ugandans fighting 
to defeat Hutu raiders based in eastern Congo. Both sides use Soviet-bloc 
weapons, but the rebels are said to have better U.S. communications 
gear. Even so, the scale of fighting must be kept in mind. The former 
Zaire is about the same size as the portion of today's United States 
that was involved in the American Civil War, and its population, 40 
million, is roughly the same as that of the Union and Confederacy 
combined. But while 2.9 million Americans on both sides were under 
arms between 1861 and 1865, the whole of Congo is being fought over 
by fewer than 70,000 men. What they are fighting is only barely a 
mechanized war. Tanks were used briefly in the far west, some Zimbabwean 
and Angolan jets have bombed rebels and the most dramatic move of 
the war was the hijacking of three cargo planes to carry rebels 1,300 
miles from the eastern border to the Atlantic for an abortive assault 
on Kinshasa. Mostly, though, it is a war of men slogging down dirt 
roads with AK-47s, sometimes helping armored cars through the mud. 
When Zimbabwe claimed recently to have bombed a ``rebel supply column,'' 
it said the column comprised 1,500 cattle. ``The forces in Congo have 
to be small _ they're living off the local population, stealing food 
and extorting money,'' said Richard Cornwell, a South African military 
historian. ``The units aren't really a coherent force, and there isn't 
really a front line. It's more like a series of dots with skirmish 
lines blocking the roads.'' Looting is endemic. Angolan troops, Cornwell 
said, agreed to fight only in return for booty, and cargo planes are 
flying home their gains, including cars and refrigerators. And even 
if a winner emerges, ruling Congo is no piece of cake. Poverty, illiteracy 
and disease are endemic. There are rich lodes of diamonds, gold, cobalt 
and copper, but millions of dollars worth of equipment and roads are 
needed to extract them. The Belgians profited here in the early part 
of the century, but they governed only through astonishing brutality; 
at one time, piles of preserved hands bore witness to the policy that 
a quota of villagers had to be killed to maintain rule by terror. 
Then, in the 1970s, '80s and '90s, Mobutu amassed an immense fortune 
but ignored his desperate people until Kabila's forces overthrew him 
last year. Now there is some pressure for peace. Zimbabwe, facing 
bankruptcy, can ill afford to stay. Angola needs its troops at home 
as its 25-year-old guerrilla war flares anew. Discontent with the 
war has been voiced in Uganda. And even if other countries, greedy 
for Congo's underground wealth, keep interfering, they cannot win 
more than a hollow victory. Mining contracts are worthless without 
a guarantee of political stability, which neither side can deliver. 
So there have been rumors of cease-fires, the latest reports of an 
impending truce having come just last week. But not once have all 
members of both sides sat down to talk. Until that happens, Congo's 
flaws will still make it as prone to fracture as its fabled gems. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>