<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981207.0322 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Amtrak is pleased with itself this fall. It considered Thanksgiving 
week, usually its heaviest travel period of the year, a success, apparently 
with a record rider total _ the figures were still being added last 
week. And on the Monday after the holiday weekend, it dedicated two 
more of its fancy new trains in the Pacific Northwest. Just before 
that, it reported that its passenger total increased by a million 
in the year that ended in September, a rise of 4.5 percent, the biggest 
jump in a decade. Revenues also topped $1 billion for the first time 
since Congress created Amtrak 27 years ago. What's going on? Quite 
a bit, according to officials at the railroad, which is struggling 
to meet its mandate of self-sufficiency by 2002. It is not there yet: 
for the coming year, Congress put $609 million into the budget to 
help Amtrak meet its deficits; this does not count a special item 
of $40 million to convert New York's General Post Office into an Amtrak 
concourse to supplement Penn Station. One cause of the increase in 
ridership is the same thing that is sending hotel occupancies and 
flights up the charts: in a better economy, people travel more. John 
Wolf, a spokesman for Amtrak, said that the railroad had not yet studied 
the demographics. So the line does not know if the graying of America, 
which is producing more people who cannot fly for health reasons or 
will not fly for psychological reasons, has had a major effect, or 
if the baby-boomers' taste for travel with their children is a factor. 
Wolf says that the increase in riders is across the board and has 
no geographic center, with the heavily traveled corridors, the long-distance 
services like the Empire Builder from Chicago to Seattle, even the 
sparser trains in the middle of the country, all showing rises. To 
be sure, some of those riders are less than thrilled. The Ralph W. 
Richardsons of Lewes, Del., represent two new but disillusioned riders. 
They took a train trip to California in September and back in October 
rather than fly. The problems, Richardson said, ranged from difficulty 
in making reservations to misinformation on bathroom locations to 
monotonous desserts. ``We doubt we will use Amtrak again for long 
trips,'' Richardson wrote to Amtrak, with a copy to The New York Times. 
It's possible that passengers making shorter trips find things easier; 
interviews in Penn Station in New York early this month found people 
reasonably satisfied with the service. Pat Lawrence of Brooklyn, who 
recently discovered club class travel, was heading for Providence 
to see her daughter. She was sitting in the first-class lounge, drinking 
coffee, and in a cheerful mood. She said an earlier club car trip 
on the Empire Service to Rochester convinced her the money was worth 
it. ``I like the leg room, and I will get breakfast and lunch as part 
of the ticket,'' she said. Another passenger, Barbara Lieberman, who 
had lined up for the Adirondack to go to Rhinecliff, N.Y., laughed 
when asked about the service. On her last trip, she said, she ordered 
her tickets by mail and the line sent someone else's ticket. This 
time, she said, they got it right the first time. ``But they were 
pleasant about it,'' she said. ``They are always pleasant.'' Two women 
from Boston, old friends who came to New York on a Saturday and were 
returning on Wednesday, said they were delighted to have the travel 
time together. ``We chatted the whole five hours,'' said one of them, 
Helene Hoffrichter. Ms. Hoffrichter and her friend, who did not want 
to give her name, said that with trips to and from airports, the air 
shuttle was not much faster, and it was certainly ``very expensive.'' 
While Amtrak fares for the rest of the country are priced by yield-management, 
meaning they fluctuate with demand, the fares in the Northeast corridor 
are predictable. In unreserved coach, Boston-New York costs $45 one 
way, except between 11 a.m. and 11 p.m. Fridays and Sundays, when 
the fare is $54. Between Washington and New York, the unreserved coach 
fare is $62 except for the Friday-Sunday periods, when it is $77. 
A one-way Metroliner club car ticket is $107. During the week, Delta 
and US Airways charge walk-up passengers $202 one way between La Guardia 
and Logan, in Boston, or Ronald Reagan Airport, in Washington; on 
weekends the fare is $90 until early Sunday afternoon. One change 
Amtrak has made is to restore daily or five-day schedules for those 
trains it has kept, instead of limiting service to, say, three days 
a week. The City of New Orleans linking Chicago and the Crescent City, 
which in 1995 indeed had the disappearing railroad blues, is now back 
in daily service. The California Zephyr, likewise squeezed, is making 
its way daily in each direction between Chicago and Emeryville, Calif., 
near San Franciso. The Mohawk between New York and Niagara Falls, 
N.Y., was restored to daily service westbound and Monday to Saturday 
eastbound, after three years of running only four days a week Daily 
service is not universal: the 60-hour trip on the Sunset Limited between 
Disneyland and Disney World _ Los Angeles and Orlando _ operates three 
days a week in each direction. And many cities have only bus links 
to trains. But Amtrak has found that if people use a train, daily 
service brings a marked increase in riders. Analysis of its markets 
and consistency are two of Amtrak's basic projects, Wolf said. A third 
is the development of faster service in the major corridors. In the 
Pacific Northwest, the new Talgo trains are going into service on 
the Cascades routes between Vancouver, British Columbia, and Eugene, 
Ore., via Seattle and Portland, Ore. The Mount Baker, the Mount Hood 
and the Mount Rainier have been bought for this project, replacing 
leased equipment. They make the Portland-Seattle run in three and 
a half hours instead of the usual four and a half. The Northeast project, 
which requires changing the power between New Haven and Boston to 
electricity from diesel, is due for completion next summer. When new 
trains go into service, the 231-mile trip between New York and Boston 
should be reduced to three hours from five, Wolf said. If the three 
hours works out, it would put the Boston-New York run on a par with 
the New York-Washington run of 226 miles, covered in three hours on 
the extra-fare Metroliner. R. Clifford Black IV, the line's director 
of public affairs, said extra-fare trains would be added east of New 
York City when the new service began. It has not been decided, he 
said, if passengers will be able to remain aboard for the whole route 
_ Union Station, Washington, to South Station, Boston. A constant 
sticking point on the New Haven-Boston route has been the grade crossings. 
Warren B. Flatau, of the Federal Railroad Administration, says there 
are 13 on the route, 12 of them in Connecticut. These require the 
trains to slow up, and there have been political struggles concerning 
railroad speed and local safety. The government, with the help of 
the Connecticut Department of Transportation and Amtrak, last summer 
installed a test gate in West Mystic, Conn. This closes off four lanes 
of traffic. In addition, there are treadles on the spot where the 
road crosses the tracks, which send signals to the engineer if there 
is something on the right of way, in which case the train slows to 
20 miles an hour. The gate cost $1 million, with the government paying 
most of the bill. There has been a steady reduction in car-train fatalities 
in the country. In 1997, there were 461 deaths at grade crossings 
nationwide; in '96 the figure was 488, and in '95, 579. In other areas 
of the Northeast, the popular Clocker trains between Philadelphia 
and New York, and the Keystone service in Pennsylvania, were not meeting 
demand, which had risen more than 10 percent; trains have now been 
added. Amtrak is also trying to stay in better touch with its potential 
riders, with training and new telephone systems. Wolf said it put 
callers to its information and reservation number, (800) 872-7245, 
on hold for an average of 41 seconds in the last fiscal year, compared 
with 55 seconds in 1997. A new phone center is in place in Riverside, 
Calif., joining one in Chicago. Another is on the way in Philadelphia. 
The people who answer phones are being trained to deal more effectively 
with callers. The line's Web site, www.amtrak.com, was overhauled, 
Wolf said, because it was ``difficult to navigate.'' October was the 
first full month of the new operation. The Web site is handling a 
lot of sales: in the year ended September 1997, 4,000 tickets were 
sold online; in the year just ended, 16,000 were sold. The food service 
has also been looked at, Wolf said. New menus were put on the Northeast 
corridor in November, and plastic cards have been placed in seat pockets 
to advertise what can be bought at the cafe car counter; four wrap 
sandwiches and a pastrami on marbleized rye bread are among the offerings. 
What else? ``We're refurbishing our equipment and stations,'' he added. 
``We want to revitalize our brand, change the way people think about 
us.'' However, the Richardsons' letter, sent Oct. 25, had not been 
answered by Dec. 7. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>