<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981207.0107 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
With allies like France, does the United States really need enemies? 
Put another way: With allies like Britain, who needs France? More 
often than they like to admit, exasperated U.S. policy-makers have 
asked themselves questions like these over the years. But as Secretary 
of State Madeleine Albright heads for Brussels and Paris this week 
for meetings with allied foreign ministers and a ceremony marking 
the 50th anniversary of the Universal Declaration on Human Rights, 
she might reflect that U.S. disagreements with Britain over the past 
half century have sometimes been as rancorous as those with the French. 
The United States and Britain clashed over a joint French and British 
attempt to grab the Suez Canal in 1956, and did not see eye to eye 
about what should be done to stop the fighting in Bosnia until 1995. 
But ever since two soul mates named Churchill and Roosevelt commiserated 
about their dealings with an individualist named de Gaulle, the strong 
underlying assumption of trust that exists between Washington and 
London has simply not been there to the same degree between Washington 
and Paris. Americans tend to think the world of the British, and the 
worst of the French. Even when France and the United States are in 
basic agreement, as they are at the moment on Iraq, there's always 
somebody like Sen. John McCain, R-Ariz., to throw a monkey wrench 
into the works. McCain, whom the French consider no friend, appeared 
to suggest on an American television news show that the reason Saddam 
Hussein had been able to avoid Anglo-American bombing last month might 
have been that France had tipped him off that the bombers were on 
the way. Never mind that the United States itself had warned Iraq 
repeatedly that it faced imminent bombing if it didn't back down and 
comply with United Nations resolutions on arms inspection. McCain 
denied accusing the French, and officials in Britain later confirmed 
that nobody had given the exact timetable to them anyway. Even when 
Britain and the United States are in basic disagreement, as they were 
during much of the war in Bosnia until 1995, American Anglophilia 
tends to rewrite history. This left the impression that it was actually 
the French who didn't want the United States to start bombing in Bosnia 
to stop Serbian aggression and halt attacks on lightly armed United 
Nations peacekeepers from Britain and France. France did indeed have 
to overcome sympathies for Serbia that date from World War I, but 
as recently published memoirs by a British commanding general of the 
U.N. peacekeepers in Bosnia, Sir Michael Rose, confirm, Britain was 
strongly opposed to heavy NATO bombing raids that the Americans kept 
wanting to launch against the Bosnian Serbs. British Prime Minister 
John Major's conservative government feared that the Serbs would retaliate 
by attacking the peacekeepers. The impasse was not broken until French 
President Jacques Chirac came to power in France in 1995 and mobilized 
British and U.S. support for a policy with more military muscle, after 
the Serbs overran the United Nations ``safe area'' in Srebrenica and 
massacred Muslim civilians. NATO did go ahead with a strategic bombing 
campaign and the Serbs, after suffering other setbacks on the ground, 
agreed to a cease-fire and a beefed-up NATO peacekeeping operation 
that finally put U.S. troops, along with others, on the ground alongside 
the French and British. British Prime Minister Tony Blair's Labor 
government has begun moving closer to French ideas for making Europe 
capable of an autonomous defense within NATO, but it has also made 
privileged British relations with the United States a declared strategic 
objective. That is much too abject a policy for France, French officials 
say. After all, Louis XVI gave the Marquis de Lafayette 6,000 troops 
to help George Washington in 1777 not because the king shared Lafayette's 
enthusiasm for the revolutionaries but to make trouble for the British, 
who were his enemy. Ever since, French-U.S. relations have been like 
a long-running marriage, frequently warmed by frictions. De Gaulle 
restored pride to a nation humiliated by defeat in World War II, often 
at U.S. expense. ``The French need to take pride in France,'' de Gaulle 
explained to his acolyte Alain Peyrefitte in 1962. ``Otherwise, they 
fall into mediocrity, fight with each other and head for the bistro.'' 
Henry Kissinger understood. ``De Gaulle was not anti-American in principle,'' 
he wrote in his book ``Diplomacy'' (Touchstone/Simon &AMP; Schuster). 
``He was willing to cooperate whenever, in his view, French and American 
interests genuinely converged. Thus during the Cuban missile crisis, 
American officials were astonished by de Gaulle's all-out support 
_ the most unconditional backing extended to them by any allied leader.'' 
De Gaulle dominated Europe, but he didn't want anyone else to _ not 
the Soviet Union, certainly, but not the United States, either. Even 
today, French leaders tend to see the United States in Steinbeckian 
terms, as a strong, friendly but unsophisticated giant whose full 
embrace might be fatal. So when the United States says that it really 
does want a united, prosperous Europe, and doesn't feel threatened 
by plans for the euro, the new common European currency that will 
used next month, the French either don't believe it or suspect that 
what the United States must really want is a Europe led by Britain. 
French Foreign Minister Hubert Vedrine also worries about a world 
in which there is only one superpower _ the United States _ overwhelming 
all other countries with its military, economic, technological and 
cultural strength. ``Their weight carries them towards hegemonism, 
and the idea they have of their mission is unilateralism,'' he told 
the daily Liberation recently. ``And that is not acceptable.'' French 
diplomats tell their U.S. friends that frank advice, not sycophantism, 
is the mark of true friendship. By that measure, France is indeed 
the most stalwart of allies. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>