<DOC>
<DOCNO> PRI19981207.2000.2913 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
It's being called the herbal, or herbal if you prefer, renaissance, 
the dramatic increase in the use of herbal or plant-based medicines. 
Over the past few years, sales of these Fydo drugs, as they're known, 
have soared. The United States is now the second largest market for 
herbal remedies in the world behind only Germany. The prestigious 
"New England Journal of Medicine" devoted much of a recent issue to 
debunking alternative medicine, calling it a reversion to irrational 
approaches to medical practice. But as THE WORLD's Margaret Evans 
reports from Berlin, such warnings have done little to discourage 
consumers. Fifty-nine-year-old Elizabeth Kaiser has a stomach ache, 
but instead of heading for the traditional medicine cabinet full of 
synthetics drugs, she's taking a herbal prescription based on an extract 
of artichoke recommended by her doctor. I had to buy normal doctor 
prescribed some synthetic medicine, and I took it at that time, but 
my consciousness has changed. I prefer now to look first for natural, 
for herbal medicines. Kaiser doesn't look like the stereotypical dabbler 
in alternative medicine. She's a former official with the European 
Union, now comfortably retired, and relatively conservative in her 
outlook. But she's an example of how herbal or plant-based medicines 
are going mainstream in Europe. Nowhere is the herbal renaissance, 
as it's being called, more evident than in Germany. Germans spend 
around $3 billion a year on plant-based or Fydo medicines. That's 
half the herbal medicine market in Europe and the largest in the world. 
Dayela Gomer is a pharmacist at one of Berlin's busiest drugstores. 
She says most of her clients these days prefer plant-based drugs. 
They are afraid about the side effects of chemical drugs. They prefer 
the herbal medicine. For example, we have laxatives plants, or we 
have St. John's anti-depression medicine, or something against cough, 
and so on. Many herbal drug products are now reimbursable under Germany's 
health insurance program. It's one factor helping legitimize Fydo 
drugs in the eyes of German consumers. Another is a company called 
Lichtver Pharma, widely considered to be the pioneer of the Fydo medicine 
market. Here at Lichtver's Berlin headquarters, five million plant-based 
pills are manufactured every day, from Gingko, advertised to enhance 
memory, to St. John's Wort for depression. That's the garlic product 
Kwai, which is our foremost biggest and oldest brand name we have. 
So this is where... Putting down the production line here are the 
little green garlic pills prescribed for heart ailments that made 
the company famous in the 1980s. Christian Fligstadt is one of Lichtver's 
vice presidents. He says it's important that herbal drugs be subjected 
to the same kind of scientific testing that synthetic drugs are if 
they're to be taken seriously. Lichtver has spent over 17 years now 
in research and development. It is a traditional pharmacy and it's 
also manufactured as traditional pharmaceuticals, but it is based 
on herbal. Many of the company's products have been huge successes, 
not only in Europe, but in the United States, where over-the-counter 
sales of St. John's Wort pills are soaring. But the Fydo drug trade 
also has its critics. Many herbal medicines are labeled dietary supplements. 
That means they don't need the rigorous testing that Lichtver is promoting, 
and there are other concerns. Conservationists warn that the global 
Fydo medicine market is growing so quickly, it could threaten some 
of the plant populations that support it. They're trading medicinal 
and aromatic drug. It's very, and it's poorly documented. Ann Vanden 
Blaug is with the Worldwide Fund for nature's trafficking unit. They 
monitor the trade in wild plants. For example, I can tell you that 
imports into Europe of this strong plant at which drugs 20,000 tons 
a year, which is enormous. Vanden Blaug says up to 200 species could 
be in danger, including, for example, pheasant's eye, a plant whose 
extracts are sometimes used to treat chronic heart problems. Still, 
she's not condemning herbal medicine, just calling for better regulation 
to cope with increasing demands. Back at the Berlin drugstore, pharmacist 
Dayela Gomer keeps racking up the sales in Fydo drugs, and she sees 
no let up in the herbal revolution in Germany. What's more, it's catching 
on in other parts of the world, especially the United States, where 
even traditional pharmaceutical companies are waking up to the potential 
of herbal medicine. Some have already bought up some smaller European 
firms to service an ever growing market back home. For THE WORLD, 
I'm Margaret Evans in Berlin. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>