<DOC>
<DOCNO> PRI19981207.2000.0378 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
In 1992, Hugo Chavez led a failed coup attempt against Venezuela's 
Democratic reelected government. Today, he's basking in his democratic 
election as the South American nation's next president. But Chavez 
today said there's no time to celebrate because, as he put it, the 
tragedy hitting the people is so big. Chavez was referring to the 
poverty that afflicts the majority of Venezuelans, most of whom voted 
for the paratrooper turned politician. But Chavez also found support 
in Venezuela's middle class. THE WORLD's Mariusa Reyes asked one such 
family in Caracas about their hopes and dreams for Hugo Chavez in 
Venezuela. Soon after his victory was announced, Hugo Chavez stood 
on a platform and addressed the huge crowd of Venezuelans that voted 
for him. In his first speech as president-elect, Chavez said the Venezuelans 
are already looking better. He warned by challenging the country's 
political establishment. For the last 40 years, Venezuela has been 
governed by two main political parties, which alternated in power 
every five years. Their policies have not brought prosperity to a 
country rich in oil resources. Over 60 percent of the population live 
in poverty. Inflation eats up most of people's salaries, and crime 
and corruption are widespread. Despite Chavez's popularity with the 
majority of Venezuelans, his fiery rhetoric and military background 
has sparked fears that once in power, he will not respect democracy. 
At a press conference, Hugo Chavez announced the first three measures 
his government will take. He promised to increase the minimum wage 
of $175 a month but didn't say by how much. He also announced that 
he will crack down tax evasions, and he's calling for a referendum 
on whether the country needs a new constitution. These were the promises 
that won the Chavez the support of most of the Venezuelan electorate. 
The Gevarez are a typical middle-class Venezuelan family. Both Elikio 
and Maria are retired civil servants. They have three children, two 
daughters already graduated and working, and Eliko, Jr., a 23-year-old 
university student. They all voted for Hugo Chavez. "Venezuelans have 
become disillusioned with a traditional political party. They all 
have good programs, but they never delivered them, so people were 
disappointed. And when the economic crisis hits your kitchen, then 
you think twice. One of the things that motivated me most to vote 
for Chavez was his patriotism. He talks about the importance of our 
nation. He makes us feel proud to be Venezuelan, and that's something 
we have lost." Elikio, Jr., the youngest Gevarez, doesn't believe 
Chavez has a magic wand to solve Venezuela's problems, but he tracks 
him anyway. Definitely not, but he has a strong political will and 
we need that. Hugo Chavez was well prepared. He was one of the best 
in the military academy. He inspired my confidence. He is very patriotic. 
He loves his country and wants the best for Venezuela. Not everyone 
has that much confidence in Chavez as the Gevarez do. Those who fear 
that Chavez will limit their economic activities are said to be taking 
their money out of the country. Clearly, Chavez will have to work 
hard to win their confidence and that of foreign investors. For THE 
WORLD, I'm Mariusa Reyes in Caracas. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>