<DOC>
<DOCNO> PRI19981207.2000.2487 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Five days before President Clinton is due in the Middle East to urge 
Israel and the Palestinians to sort out their differences, Prime Minister 
Benjamin Netanyahu is facing possibly the most serious challenge to 
his administration yet. A bill put before the Israeli Knesset today 
calls for early elections to be held next year. Some members of Netanyahu's 
coalition, which has the slimmest of majorities, believe elections 
may be the best way to halt a peace process they oppose. Netanyahu 
has so far managed to avert early elections by calling for a no-confidence 
vote in two weeks time. THE WORLD's Richard Myron is in Jerusalem. 
Richard, before describing to us how serious a threat this is to Netanyahu, 
just fill us in on the strategy for calling for a no-confidence vote 
on yourself. One of Netanyahu's coalition powers, the United Toward 
Judaism Party has, in fact, called for the no-confidence motion. This 
gives him a week. With the president's visit, this will be delayed 
for longer to get together sufficient numbers so that he hopefully 
- He will be hoping he will not fall from this. If indeed he loses 
the no-confidence vote, there will be 60 days until a new election. 
There was today a choice between early elections where the opposition 
thought they'd get sufficient numbers in the first reading of this 
bill to call early elections or possibly a no-confidence vote. And 
the prime minister felt that possibly he could frighten the waverers 
on his side into supporting him, and this is clearly what he's trying 
to do today by calling a no-confidence vote. Now, underscore that 
for us if you can, Richard. Whose support does Netanyahu have to get 
in the next two weeks in order to be able to stay in office? There 
are various members of the right wing who've opposed his views on 
the peace process who said they would support advancing early elections. 
These people are waverers. There's even some members of his own party, 
for example, Benny Begin, son of the late Prime Minister Menachem 
Begin, who would have voted against the prime minister today. He may 
also rise against the no-confidence motion. There are various people 
like this who have opposed Netanyahu ideologically or indeed personally, 
and he has to win them over, mostly people from his camp, not the 
opposing camp. President Clinton is planning to land in the midst 
of this latest crisis. Is this going to be something that will help 
or hurt Mr. Netanyahu, or is it like most things in this situation 
really hard to call? It's very hard to call whether this will hurt 
or help Netanyahu. Certainly, it's going to be difficult for President 
Clinton. He's landing in the eye of the storm, certainly in terms 
of Israeli domestic politics, also in terms of what's going on the 
ground here between the Israelis and the Palestinians. There's a stalling 
of the Wye implementation, the Wye accords we've heard about today, 
as Ariel Sharon said to Secretary of State Albright that there would 
be no second withdrawal on the 18th. And also, we're seeing increasing 
violence on the ground. All these things are going to present great 
challenges for President Clinton and also a certain amount of Israeli 
dissatisfaction that he's going to be seem to be enhancing Palestinian 
aspirations for statehood by going to Gaza. And this is causing a 
lot of in Israel. Is the violence that we've seen happening there 
today in any way different from what has been happening in the past? 
We're seeing violence gathering steam. We've seen day after day now 
violence. This is linked to the Palestinian demand that political 
prisoners be released as part of the Wye accords. The Israelis have 
been releasing criminal prisoners and saying it's up to them who they 
release. Also, the prisoners in Israeli jails are on hunger strike. 
And the longer this goes on, the more tension on the ground increases, 
and the more there is violence. We've seen one person critically injured 
today shot by apparently by an Israeli whose car was being stoned 
at the time, and this is very dangerous. In addition, we've seen Palestinian 
police shooting on Palestinians in the West Bank kind of Nablus as 
a mob tried to surround Israeli enclave. This is very, very dangerous. 
And really, the whole process could unravel simply because the violence 
at this stage. THE WORLD's Richard Myron in Jerusalem. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>