<DOC>
<DOCNO> PRI19981207.2000.0611 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
This week, Augusto Pinochet should learn whether he'll be free to 
return to Chile or be extradited to Spain to be tried on charges of 
torture and murder. Britain's home secretary is making the decision 
and his deadline is Friday. General Augusto Pinochet's charged with 
orchestrating the deaths of more than 3,000 people when he ruled Chile 
during the 1970s and '80s. Two of the victims, Chile's former ambassador 
to the United States, Orlando Letellier, and his assistant, Ronnie 
Moffett, died in a car bomb explosion in Washington 22 years ago. 
The head of Pinochet's secret police is currently serving a prison 
term in Chile for ordering those murders, but Letellier's widow, Isabelle, 
says she and the Moffett family believe the trail of evidence leads 
all the way to the top. We want Letellier-Moffett case to be reopened, 
given the fact that there is new evidence because the former chief 
of the secret police in Chile that is in jail sent a legal document 
to the court saying that all his doings were done under the orders 
of General Pinochet. And the second demand to the United States government 
is to release all the documents that they have that have Pinochet 
and the armed forces in Chile involved in crimes of human rights violations. 
And what a kind of a response have you received specifically? They 
are going to release some documents. The ambassador of the United 
States in Chile said that as soon as the documents are released, that 
he is going to put it in the Internet. Right. But as responsible an 
individual as Madeleine Albright, the secretary of state herself, 
has admitted as recently as last week that serious mistakes were made 
at the time of the Pinochet era, she has admitted that a can of worms 
might indeed be opened if it were investigated more fully. Do you 
have - Have you had any direct dealings with her office, or have you 
had any indication from them that this is something - what you want 
is something that they would oppose? No, but I would like to tell 
her that in this case, the blood of my husband and Ronnie Carfen stain 
the streets in Washington, D.C. on Massachusetts Avenue. So that's 
why we feel strongly that we have all the right to ask from them the 
release of documents pertinent to this case. And I have no doubt that 
General Augusto Pinochet's name will be somehow mentioned there. Let 
me ask you a question that deals really with the possible side effects 
and aftermath. There's some people who have expressed concern that 
in stirring up these problems of a generation ago, you are bringing 
back to the surface fears and resentments and angers which might not 
be very controllable if they are fully released and aired in public. 
Look, if the United States government is against terrorism, this is 
the best time to prove that they are against terrorism, because if 
Pinochet is put in front of justice, it will be a lesson, a big lesson 
for people that want to be above justice, about ethical and moral 
principles, and above human lives. Do you feel comfortable with General 
Pinochet's being judged by somebody outside of Chile for a crime basically 
against a Chilean? Look, as a Chilean, nothing would have given me 
for satisfaction than having Pinochet tried in Chile as soon as he 
ended up his period of his dictator. That has not been possible. The 
conditions in Chile have not made it possible even now that the Chilean 
government is trying as much as they can to give satisfaction to the 
international community saying, "We can try Pinochet in our country." 
The conditions still are not given. They are working on creating the 
conditions that, as far as today, Pinochet should face justice in 
any place in the world where that is possible, whether it's England, 
Spain, Belgium, France, whatever. Let me ask you one final question, 
Mrs. Letellier, and it's with great respect that I ask it, because 
we can't overlook the fact that the victim was your husband, and that 
you couldn't be more personally involved with what you regard as the 
crimes of that era. If tomorrow General Pinochet, for whatever reason, 
was to die, as out of the picture, would you be satisfied? Would that 
be a sufficient justice for you and for what happened to you and to 
your husband? So far what has happened, his arrest in London and the 
response of all the international community makes us feel that we 
have seen a large measure of justice. Mrs. Letellier, thank you very 
much for speaking with us. You're very welcome, thank you. Isabelle 
Letellier is the widow of Orlando Letellier, Chile's former ambassador 
to the United States. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>