<DOC>
<DOCNO> PRI19981207.2000.2016 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Four months ago today, more than 200 people died in bomb explosions 
at the U.S. embassies in Kenya and Tanzania. Thirteen days later, 
the United States launched cruise missiles at targets in Afghanistan 
and Sudan, which the Clinton administration said were linked with 
the activities of suspected terrorist master mind Osama bin Laden. 
The strike against the base southeast of Kabul caused little controversy 
at least in the West, but almost immediately, questions arose about 
the attack against the factory in Khartoum. Washington claims the 
plant was producing chemical weapons. Sudanese officials, including 
the deputy speaker of the National Assembly, Abdul Shido, say the 
factory was producing strictly legal pharmaceuticals. Let the of the 
United States prove to these people that this actually was involved 
in any. Let the United States prove its allegation. Just last week, 
Sudan made its third request for the United Nations to investigate 
Washington's allegations. THE WORLD's Andrew North reports on the 
controversy. Sudan is still waiting for a decision from the U.N. Security 
Council on its latest call for an investigation into the U.S. strike 
on the Khartoum factory. Sudan's position has won some high-level 
support in the United States. Former President Jimmy Carter says American 
credibility is on the line. And just recently, Republican Senator 
Arlen Specter of Pennsylvania said we ought to be finding the facts. 
But the Clinton administration maintains no investigation is necessary. 
Its position on the question hasn't changed since America's acting 
U.N. ambassador, Peter Burley, stated it four days after the strike. 
First of all, there's no doubt about the credibility of the evidence 
the U.S. government has that's number one. There is no question about 
that. And number two, putting together a technical team to confirm 
something that we already know based on our own information doesn't 
seem to have any point to us. The administration still cites the same 
primary evidence to justify the Khartoum strike, too, a soil sample 
secretly obtained from near the factory. That soil, according to the 
CIA, contain traces of a chemical used in producing VX nerve gas. 
But Sudan's ambassador to the United Nations, Alfatami Mohammed Ahmed 
Irwa asks, "What soil?" The area around the plant, he says, is paved 
with concrete. The soil is paved. Found there is actually no soil 
can be tested, but we certainly, if you want to test, you can come 
and test it. It's not just Khartoum that's making such claims. Bobby 
Mae, an Arkansas-based businessman, was in Sudan in August exploring 
potential future investments in the country's oil and gas industry. 
And a few days before the U.S. attacked, he toured the plant owned 
by the Al Shifa Pharmaceutical Industry's company. That's a rather 
large plant, but it has asphalt and concrete areas all around it. 
I know they mentioned they got soil samples. Well, I'd like to know 
where they got the soil samples because the plant is completely surrounded 
by asphalt and cement. Mae, who has known President Clinton for over 
20 years, has told White House officials what he saw at the plant 
and that he believes they made a serious mistake in targeting it. 
But so far, he's had no response. THE WORLD put these claims that 
there is no soil near the factory to P.J. Crowley, spokesman for the 
National Security Council. We tested that soil sample from an area 
adjacent to the Al Shifa facility. We found the presence of Empta, 
a chemical essential for making deadly VX nerve gas. Empta is not 
used in commercial applications. It does not occur in nature, and 
we have - We stand by that finding that Al Shifa, you know, which 
clearly tied to, you know, chemical weapons activity. Aside from doubts 
about the terrain at Al Shifa, some chemical weapons experts question 
whether Empta could have been detected in any soil sample. The substance 
is unstable, they say, and would probably react with other chemicals 
in the earth and break down. Doubts about the U.S. evidence have been 
fueled by the Clinton administration's reluctance to allow an investigation. 
Lately, we felt that the United States started putting very strange 
reasoning. Sudan's U.N. ambassador, Ahmed Irwa. In the beginning, 
they categorically refused the idea of sending an investigation because 
they are sure of their information. Now they're coming with a new 
story saying that the rain has come, and it will not be feasible now, 
scientifically it is not possible now to examine the soil. But a U.S. 
government official told THE WORLD that in fact, it's not possible 
now to examine the soil. He sites the recent flooding in Khartoum 
which he claims would make any investigation of dubious value. National 
Security Council spokesman P.J. Crowley goes one step further. He 
says this is not really a story about Sudan. This is a story about 
Osama bin Laden and the fact that he declared a fatwa against the 
United States. We have no doubt that we can tie Osama bin Laden's 
network to the Al Shifa facility. We have no doubt that our action 
was appropriate. But there is still many questions about that action, 
and even some who support the Sudan attack such as former National 
Security Council analyst, Gideon Rose, say the administration has 
not done a good job explaining it. If you are going to rely on the 
credibility of your own statements for justifying your actions, you 
better be damn sure that people can take your word to the bank. There 
was obviously a screw up in the Sudan thing. It's not necessarily 
the screw up that they were absolutely wrong, but the screw up was 
that they didn't have the facts sufficiently down and sufficiently 
clear. They allowed people to question the U.S. bonafides, which is 
a crucial political mistake. Since the strike from Sudan and Afghanistan, 
U.S. officials have talked repeatedly of America now being engaged 
in a long-term struggle against terrorism. Secretary of State Madeleine 
Albright has described it as the war of the future, but some worry 
that by conducting long-range air strikes such as the one on the Al 
Shifa plant, America may be giving its enemies an excuse to keep the 
terrorists war going. The day after the attack on the factory, there 
was plenty of ant-American feeling outside the U.S. embassy in Khartoum. 
For THE WORLD, this is Andrew North. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>