<DOC>
<DOCNO> PRI19981207.2000.0946 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Tomorrow could mark a turning point in a ten-year struggle to try 
the bombers of a Pan Am airliner over Lockerbie Scotland. The United 
States and Britain have been pressing Libya to turn over two suspects 
to stand trial in the Netherlands. And in this past weekend, U.N. 
Secretary-General Kofi Annan traveled to Libya to press the point 
with the country's Muammar Qadhafi. Libya's People's Congress will 
take up the matter in a session opening tomorrow. THE WORLD's Alan 
Dow reports. When Kofi Annan arrived at Muammar Qadhafi's tent in 
a Libyan desert this weekend, the signs of a quick handover of the 
two Lockerbie suspects weren't good. Colonel Qadhafi failed to show 
up and left the U.N. chief waiting for hours. But when the meeting 
did take place, Annan said the two men made good progress. We had 
very positive discussions, and some of the issues that has to be resolved 
involves others. And I would prefer at this stage not to enter into 
too many details. But I think having heard from the minister and myself, 
you can take it that we have moved ahead and made considerable progress. 
Since the Pan Am flight was American and the bombing occurred over 
Scotland, London and Washington have offered a trial in a third country, 
in the case, the Netherlands. Libya has agreed to this in principle, 
but as State Department spokesman James Foley explains, Tripoli is 
making some fresh demands of its own. The Libyans have raised questions, 
indeed opposition to the idea that the suspects would be, if found 
guilty, would be incarcerated in the United Kingdom. And we have made 
crystal clear, as has the U.K., from the beginning that that's not 
a negotiable point. There can be no movement on the principle that 
they have to serve their sentence in a Scottish prison. Britain's 
foreign secretary, Robin Cook. This was a crime that was committed 
in Scottish jurisdiction, the bomb went off over Lockerbie. That is 
a logical place for these people to serve their sentence if convicted. 
Although both London and Washington say they're not willing to negotiate 
further, Robin Cook says Libya is welcome to send human rights monitors 
to Scotland to observe the conditions of Scottish jails and the treatment 
of the two Libyans should they be convicted. This protracted haggling 
is testing the spirits of the families of those who died in the bombing 
according to Lee Krandler, a U.S. lawyer representing some of them. 
The mood among the families differs, quite frankly. Some of the families 
are still extremely skeptical. They don't expect anything like this 
to really happen. I would say the majority have been persuaded by 
our own State Department to believe that this is a real effort to 
move forward, and that something may very well happen, but they certainly 
are all interested. If this does go forward according to plan with 
the Scottish judges, Scottish law, and so forth, I think it will lift 
the spirits of all concerned. Libyan officials say they are still 
committed in principle to handing over the two suspects to a Scottish 
court in the Netherlands. This may be just the case of dotting the 
Is and crossing the Ts, or it may be a stalling tactic. British and 
U.S. officials say they'll reserve their judgment on Libya's sincerity 
until they see some action. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>