<DOC>
<DOCNO> PRI19981207.2000.1185 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Some farmers on St. Vincent are protesting military invasion, but 
it's not what you think. This week, U.S. Marine Corps helicopters 
are ferrying more than 120 troops from the Caribbean Regional Service 
and the St. Vincent police force to the island's northern pot plots. 
Their mission, and they have chosen to accept it, is to uproot and 
burn marijuana plants. The problem is that the livelihood of hundreds 
of farmers depends on the cultivation and sale of marijuana. Carlita 
Oliveira reports for the Caribbean news agency and is in Kingstown, 
St. Vincent. Ms. Oliveira, do you know whether the Marines have landed 
yet and if the eradication mission is underway? I have not been able 
to independently verify that the mission has, in fact, started. It 
was supposed to have begun today, but we've been having rains, and 
the mountains are shouldered in mist today. And on the ground literally 
from the farmers who are going to be affected by this adversely, what 
have you heard? Well, they've made their position clear since word 
of the eradication. They claim that the cultivation of marijuana is 
their only means of livelihood, and that it has been fueled by the 
high unemployment which we have in the country, that any eradication 
is going to deprive them of earnings for months. And they have consequently 
said that now that the eradication is going ahead, they have not been 
able to prevent it; now that it's going ahead, they should be compensated 
for whatever is destroyed. What kind of popular support would you 
say there is for the smoking of marijuana in that area, and has it 
been very vocal? I would not say that there is popular support for 
the smoking of marijuana. However, there are quite a number of people 
who are sympathetic to the economic arguments that has been put out, 
because speaking to some of the growers, I have heard young persons 
who have said they have come out of secondary schools several years; 
they've been there, they have not been able to find employment. Now 
one can argue that this might or might not be a valid argument, but 
these are some of the things that I have heard. Well, how much is 
likely to be pulled out of your economy if this eradication process 
does succeed? If it takes place? Yeah. Unfortunately, I cannot give 
you that figure, because it's one question that I have also asked 
all of the growers, and they have not been able to supply that as 
well. They only say it's millions of dollars that will be pulled out 
of the economy. Whether it is 15 or 50, I really can't say. I suppose 
you can hear in the background a buzz. That's one of the helicopters 
that's being used in the raid. Explain to me what the helicopter's 
doing right now, will you? Hello? Yes, could you explain to me what 
the helicopter's... I suppose that that one might be going to its 
base because there come a few miles from where I am. They fly in - 
They're supposed to be flying in from St. Lucia because the U.S. team 
is based in St. Lucia, and they commute daily. The people who are 
carrying out the eradication exercise have been undergoing training 
exercises in St. Lucia, as well as here. They began coming on Thursday, 
and they have been carrying out maneuvers to help them to negotiate 
the. Is there any concern that should there be a successful eradication 
of the marijuana market, that it might be replaced by even more fearsome 
drugs in that area? God forbid. And I think part of the sympathy that 
lies for the argument, to the economic argument that's being put out 
by the growers has to do with the evidence that we're seeing here 
of the crack cocaine culture. Over the past few years, there has been 
a new breed of vagrants who have been walking the streets, particularly 
of the capital, Kingstown, spaced out, gone - just gone off on crack 
cocaine. It is important. St. Vincent is said to be one of the numerous 
places in the Caribbean where coke is trans-shipped on its way to 
the United States or to Europe so that there is that fear that person 
who might be using marijuana and not being able to get a supply of 
it, might move into using harder trucks like the crack cocaine. And 
as I said, that's probably one of the reasons why there is quite a 
lot of sympathy for the economic argument that's being put out. Carlita 
Oliveira reports for the Caribbean News Agency. She's been speaking 
to us from Kingstown, St. Vincent. Thank you Victor Morales. You're 
welcome. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>