<DOC>
<DOCNO> VOA19981207.1600.2996 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
The history of U.S. antitrust law is largely the history of the oil 
industry since so many rulings, beginning with the 1911 breakup of 
the Standard Oil Company into 34 separate companies, have involved 
oil conglomerates. Economics correspondent Linda Cashton reports that 
antitrust regulators are now scrutinizing the Exxon-Mobil merger to 
make certain it won't stifle competition. The theory behind antitrust 
laws is that competition is essential because it holds down prices 
and improves product quality. Therefore, any move that hinders competition 
must be stopped. In the case of the Exxon-Mobil merger, U.S. antitrust 
regulators will study whether competition is being stifled in four 
separate areas: oil exploration, refining, transportation and marketing. 
Robert Doyle, an antitrust expert at the Washington law firm of Arent 
Fox says there should be little problem in the area of exploration 
since competition in that area is international and robust. However, 
Mr. Doyle says oil refining is a different issue. The companies have 
already announced that they may eliminate duplicative assets, so if 
they decide to shut down or take off-line refining capacity, the result 
is you have less product being produced. Less product obviously translates 
into potentially higher costs. So if they eliminate refining capacity, 
the immediate result will be less gasoline being refined and less 
heating oil being refined, having an adverse impact on consumers who 
purchase those products. Mr. Doyle says the same thing is true at 
the retail level. In those U.S. towns were Mobil and Exxon operate 
the only gas stations, he says, their merger will give them a monopoly 
that could enable them to set prices at whatever level they want. 
That type of situation, he says, is what regulators will want to step 
in to prevent. Everybody's crystal-balling what potentially could 
happen, and the government looks at a market situation, examines how 
it could change if the acquisition, for example, goes through, and 
attempts to predict what impact the change in market structure will 
have on price and output. Those antitrust restraints that are applied, 
Mr. Doyle says, will probably be at U.S. regional and local levels. 
Whereas a decade ago, a merger between the top two U.S. oil companies 
would not have been possible, he says, there's virtually no talk today 
about blocking the merger. He says that is because oil mergers have 
become a global trend, and because of the assumption that bigger is 
not only better in today's global commerce, but vital to the survival 
of any company. Linda Cashton, VOA News, Washington. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>