<DOC>
<DOCNO> VOA19981207.1600.2157 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
In its latest report on anti-Semitism, the New York-based American 
Jewish Committee said while anti-Semitism may be on the decline in 
most countries, racism is on the rise. In Europe neo-facists target 
immigrant populations. In the United States African Americans, Native 
Americans and homosexuals continue to be subjected to discrimination. 
Here's Pamela Taylor with the first of a two-part Dateline series 
on racism and hate crimes. American history is marred by the struggle 
of Indians and the black descendants of slaves to gain equal rights 
with whites. Although much has been achieved for African Americans 
through the heroic efforts of people like Martin Luther King, President 
Clinton acknowledged there's a long way to go and has called for a 
dialogue on race. VOA's Lattie Tahoke discussed race relations in 
America today with an African American couple, Shirley and Harold 
Haislip are authors of the biographical book, "In the Garden of our 
Dreams." Do you find that when you go to social gatherings that all 
white and black people mix freely. Not now, no. Not now? Was it -- 
does that mean that it was in the past? There was more -- it's a regional 
thing. In the '60s and '70s I think there was a more self-conscious 
effort on the part of many, many Americans to do something about the 
balkanization that then existed. But are we slipping back now? Yes, 
I think we are. You take a city like Washington, D.C., black and white 
people rarely get together except for government functions. But it's 
a very balkanized society. Why is that? The remnants of segregation 
and the remnants of prejudice and discrimination and people being 
uncomfortable with people unlike themselves. What bothers me now is 
that there's no conscious effort to organize activities against the 
voluntary balkanization that is taking place. You just walk into any 
high school, for example, and you'll see all the black kids sitting 
in one area and that's their tables. And the Latino kids are in another 
area, the Asian kids are in another, the whites in another. You know, 
it's sad. It saddens me greatly. Can you tell me about some of the 
prejudices that black people experience? Sure, I can speak from my 
own personal experience. I can go into Saks Fifth Avenue or Nordstroms 
or the neighborhood store dressed in my little three-piece suit and 
necktie and having a brief case under my arm, and without question, 
the security will begin following me around their -- you know, you 
just know you're being followed and watched, while others, whites 
in particular, are being ignored. Tell me some of the prejudices that 
black people have against the whites. Well, I think they always feel 
that many white people are going to treat them badly, that as soon 
as they see the color of the skin, something happens to a white person, 
and he puts -- or she puts the black person in a certain category, 
and that is a category of either subservience or inferiority. So there's 
always that inner resentment that many black people have -- I won't 
say all -- that as soon as you see me, you think, "Aha, a descendant 
of a slave, this person was once inferior in this country and has 
never risen beyond that inferiority." So what we resent generally 
is the fact that because of the color of our skin, we are immediately 
categorized as less-than and a negative-other. Tell me, are there 
any prejudices among black people against one another? Oh, absolutely. 
We have black people of different colors.... Oh, yes. ... different 
color black and different shade of black. Different colors and certainly 
different classes, because black people are not one economic class. 
So those prejudices reflect the broader prejudice within society. 
Black people have been taught to hate themselves, and they, of course, 
have a pecking order of color, and the more light you are -- or the 
closer to the white mainstream you are... In appearance. ... some 
people feel that you are more valuable. What chances has a mixed marriage 
of surviving happily? Much greater than before. The largest number 
of children growing up in America today are children of mixed race. 
That's the largest.... And there are certain cities in America that 
are much more favorable and look more favorably on mixed marriages 
than certain areas of the country. For example? San Francisco and 
Seattle and Denver. College communities. College communities. So it's 
much more common. You can meet people in certain communities, and 
you ask them to raise their hand if they have a mixed marriage in 
the family, and everybody will raise their hand in a place like Palo 
Alto, for example. Or certainly a significant number.... So it's changing 
in that way. So you think education makes a difference. Education.... 
I think education makes a difference, but also young people are making 
some decisions that will change the landscape of -- of our country, 
because it's not just racial, it's also religious. I mean, there are 
as many marriages outside of a -- one person's religious history as 
there are marriages outside of ethnic groups. And that's just a documented 
fact. It's projected that by the year 2010 the majority of children 
in -- in our public schools will either be children of color or children 
of mixed race. Harold and Shirley Haislip speaking with VOA's Eslattie 
Tahoke. Older than racism against African Americans, of course, is 
discrimination against the original Americans. Jeanie Etter is a Sioux 
Indian from the western state of Montana. She is also a history professor 
at Western Montana State University. She says prejudice against Indians 
is very strong in the American West. If you see me on the street in 
Butte, Montana, you wouldn't see me as a college administrator, you'd 
see me as Indian first, and all of the negative things that that carries 
with it are the kind of cultural baggage that I have to carry around. 
I can't just be an educated Indian. I have to be -- or at least I'm 
treated by others as being less than human. When you go in the South, 
there's a lot of negativity towards blacks. When you come to the West, 
and particularly in Montana where there are seven Indian reservations, 
the negativity is towards Indians. Jeanie Etter of Butte, Montana, 
spoke to VOA's Adam Phillips. The western United States was also the 
scene of another type of hate recently, that against homosexuals. 
University of Wyoming student Matthew Shepherd was murdered in October 
in part because he was homosexual. Gay rights groups are now seeking 
to have the definition of hate crimes extended to include sexual orientation. 
At present hate crimes are defined as efforts to intimidate or injure 
people based on race, ethnic origin or religion. Forty states have 
hate-crime laws, but only 21 have extended the definition to cover 
sexual orientation. Ten states, including Wyoming, have no hate-crimes 
laws at all. Gay rights activist, Elizabeth Birch, of the Human Rights 
Campaign, explains why expanding the law is necessary. Hate crimes 
are unique because it is not just Matthew Shepherd that is victim 
here -- when a hate crime occurs, they're designed that they are meant 
to send a message of kind of domestic terrorism to an entire community. 
Elizabeth Birch's comments are supported by at least one U.S. congressman. 
Republican Jim Kolbe of Arizona is one of two openly gay members of 
Congress. A loving God has gathered Matthew Shepherd to his bosom. 
He will never face hate again. That same God may grant His mercy and 
forgiveness to those who killed him, but a harsher justice awaits 
them in this life. But many conservative groups disagree with Ms. 
Birch and Congressman Kolbe that strengthening legislation is the 
way to punish those who commit hate crimes. Christy Hamrick of the 
conservative Family Research Council is one of them. We know that 
all murders, all crimes in which a life is taken, are hate crimes, 
because they all devalue and debase and demean people. And in fact, 
if we look at murder -- one of the things that we're concerned about 
is, hate-crimes legislation tends to demonize a kind of thinking, 
it attempts to say, because of the way you think, your murder somehow 
is worse or different. Christy Hamrick of the conservative Family 
Research Council. The Federal Bureau Investigation, the FBI, says 
hate crimes are on the rise in the United States, up 8 percent from 
1995 to 1996. The majority of the crimes, 62 percent, were attributed 
to racial bias. Racism on the rise was the subject of today's Dateline. 
I'm Pamela Taylor. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>