<DOC>
<DOCNO> VOA19981207.1600.3184 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
For more than a century the Washington Monument has stood down the 
mall from the U.S. Capitol building here in the center of Washington, 
D.C. The nearly 170-meter-tall memorial is an engineering marvel, 
the hollow, tapered shaft that mimics exactly the proportions of ancient 
Egyptian obelisks. But the monument is in need of repairs and an extensive 
restoration project is now underway. Scaffolding has crept up the 
exterior of the structure, and the project is scheduled to be finished 
in May of 2000. VOA's Martin Seacrest has more. Lit by floodlights 
at night, the Washington Monument is rivaled only by the U.S. Capitol 
for first place on the Washington skyline. Austere and beautiful in 
its simplicity, the monument is made of 36,000 blocks of white marble 
and granite and is visited by over a million people each year, most 
of whom ride elevators to the top to see a wonderful view of the nation's 
capital. But at the monument there are problems that are now receiving 
attention. Vicky Keys is a deputy superintendent with the National 
Park Service. She says that a heating and air-condition-system upgrade 
has already been completed, and now exterior repointing will be done, 
replacement of mortar that is cracked or crumbling. Part of this is 
sort of a well-check on the resource itself. Masonry structures -- 
and the Washington Monument is the tallest free-standing masonry structure 
in the world -- have to be repointed periodically. The mortar between 
the stones has a life of about 20, 25 years. So we had noticed that 
there was fairly severe water infiltration, particularly at the upper 
levels of the monument where the stone is much thinner. A novel approach 
is being taken for the exterior work on the Washington Monument. I 
was asked to -- to design scaffolding, which is quite rare for an 
architect. That's architect, Michael Graves, who came up with a plan 
to limit the visual impact the scaffolding has on the monument. He 
designed a scaffold that follows the contour of the obelisk, strips 
of a see-through fabric that replicate the monument's mortar lines 
will be attached to the scaffold, a trick, says Ms. Keys, to improve 
it's appearance during the 18-month-long restoration. They are strips 
of architectural fabric -- from a distance, again, what you should 
see is something that sort of creates a visual effect of stone-on-stone 
construction. The restoration project is a cooperative effort between 
the public and private sector. It will cost almost $9.5 million, and 
while Congress has appropriated several million dollars for the project, 
most of the money has been denoted by large American corporations. 
But money was not always so readily available for the monument. Construction 
was begun on it in 1848, but abandoned for lack of funds after only 
46 meters of the structure was complete. The Civil War further delayed 
construction, but in 1876, during this centennial of American independence, 
Congress finally appropriated money to finish building the monument. 
Today the structure still is visibly different at the 46 meter mark, 
because marble used to complete it was mined from a different part 
of the original quarry. Vicky Keys of the National Park Service says 
that the monument is now closed to the public, but it will reopen 
when the scaffold is complete, and that, she says, is good news for 
tourists. So when we explain to visitors that we will be reopening 
and we intend over the next 18 months to stay open as much as possible, 
they're very pleased that the National Park Service is doing the right 
thing for the resource, that we're making sure that it's preserved 
for future generations. In addition to the work on its exterior, other 
internal work is to be done on the building, including improvements 
to its elevators and observation decks. But as a free-standing masonry 
structure constantly exposed to the elements, says Ms. Keys, exterior 
repairs to the Washington Monument will be needed again in about the 
year 2025. I'm Martin Seacrest. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>