<DOC>
<DOCNO> VOA19981207.1600.1353 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Choreographer Garth Fagan has been called a painter in movement, whose 
dancers defy the balance of gravity. He's often won praise for his 
imaginative modern dancers, but as Martin Bush reports, a popular 
Broadway musical has now brought him even wider attention. For 28 
years Garth Fagan has been the artistic director of a highly respected 
contemporary American dance company. But he only achieved popular 
acclaim last year when he created the award-winning dances for the 
Broadway hit musical, The Lion King. Modern dance choreographers are 
not-for-profit choreographers who've had a very hard time on Broadway. 
It's wonderful to have 2,000 people looking at your work, eight shows 
a week. That doesn't happen for modern dance. I'm getting a much broader 
audience. It has also brought more people to my concert now at the 
Joyce Theater. We're selling out, and I'm very happy about that, because 
lots of crossover people have come. During his company's engagement 
at New York's Joyce Theater, the 58-year-old Garth Fagan has unveiled 
a new ballet called "Two Pieces of One, Green." Like so many of his 
works, it blends diverse dance and musical styles. And the whole idea 
is from two different perspectives coming to one point of view. Throughout 
the piece you have lots of double duets and double solos where you 
have two dancers becoming one person, two couples becoming one couple. 
I just notice us going back to conservatism and separatism between 
the races and the sexes and different cultures, and I wanted to do 
something unifying, the idea being that two people can come from entirely 
different areas culturally, financially, what have you, and still 
get to the same place by respect for human beings. So it was an intellectual 
idea for us, and then I found the music. Mr. Fagan shows two musical 
motifs for his new dance: one written in 1997 by the late jazz composer, 
Tony Williams. Then a wailing alto saxophone plays a Tony Williams 
jazz obligato over a chant written for male voices in the 16th century 
by the Spanish composer Christobal DeMoralis. Garth Fagan left his 
native Jamaica as a teenager to tour Latin America with the Jamaica 
National Dance Company. Among his major influences have been choreographer 
Pearl Premis, Martha Graham, Alvin Alley and Jose LeMon. After leading 
three dance troupes in Detroit, he moved to Rochester, New York, in 
1970 to found the Garth Fagan Dance Company. Dance critic, Susan Ryder, 
writes in New York News Daily newspaper: "Garth Fagan's exceptional 
ensemble is that rarity in dance today, a group that embodies a distinctive 
style." And Ms. Ryder continues: "No one else moves like these virtuosos 
with their uncanny air of calm focus, their ability to spring into 
the air with elastic ease." Like several other top dance directors 
such as Bob Fossi and Martha Graham, Garth Fagan brings an identifying 
or signature movement to his dance works, one that he says is extremely 
difficult to do and extremely difficult to put into words. And the 
back it's completely rounded, you're as low as to the earth as you 
can get, and then you have to suddenly, in one beat, do a full extension, 
hold it on your toes. Garth Fagan says his dances reflect, for the 
most part, affirmative images. He's an optimist, he says, who wants 
to give people something positive to see in the dance theater. This 
is Martin Bush, VOA News, New York. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>