<DOC>
<DOCNO> VOA19981207.1600.0358 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
In Nigeria, results from Saturday's local government elections show 
the center-left People's Democratic Party, or PDP, with a strong lead 
over it's two main rivals. With most of the returns counted from Nigeria's 
36 states, the PDP has won more than a third of the contested positions 
on Saturday. VOA's John Pitman has details from Lagos. On Monday morning, 
Lagos newspapers used the words "landslide" and "sweep" to describe 
the gains made by the People's Democratic Party, the PDP, in Saturday's 
local government poll. Elsewhere the PDP's gains were overshadowed 
by its two main rivals. Here in the southwest, the Alliance for Democracy, 
or AD, an ethnic Yoruba-based party, won commanding majorities, including 
the chairmanships of 17 of the 20 local governments in Lagos State. 
In the southeast and far north, voters threw their support behind 
the center-right All People's Party. In all areas of the country, 
the split between parties was fairly stark, with one party generally 
showing its dominance over the others. But the results also show the 
APP and the PDP making unexpected advances in the southwest in areas 
believed to be firmly controlled by the Alliance for Democracy. On 
Monday in Lagos, electoral commission spokesman, Iodeli Falami, said 
early indications show a large majority of Nigeria's 60 million registered 
voters did cast ballots. We saw a very large turnout. As a matter 
of fact, in the last five years, there have never have been a turnout 
that was as large as the one that was recorded last Saturday. International 
and domestic observers declared Saturday's vote free and fair, an 
opinion which has largely been echoed by the local press. However, 
a number of irregularities were reported on Saturday, including allegations 
of ballot-box stuffing and the use of fake voter registration cards. 
Several incidents of election-related violence also occurred which 
left up to 20 people dead. On Sunday the chairman of the electoral 
commission acknowledged these problems and said they would be dealt 
with before the next round of voting in January. Electoral commission 
spokesman Iodeli Falami said Saturday's vote was just the first step 
in a larger learning process. The learning process will -- see, we 
all make mistakes. We will correct those mistakes, and where there 
was no mistake, we'll make sure we don't just rest on our laurels 
so that things don't go. So we want to keep on improving until we 
reach a standard that will be judged perfect. Electoral officials 
say so far runoff elections do not seem likely, since virtually every 
contest was decided by a fairly large margin. John Pitman, VOA News, 
Lagos. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>