<DOC>
<DOCNO> VOA19981207.1600.0523 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Bosnian Serb General Radislav Kerstic has pleaded not guilty to charges 
of genocide and crimes against humanity for his actions during the 
Bosnian War. General Kerstic denied the charges as they were read 
at his arraignment at the UN War Crimes Tribunal in The Hague. The 
Boston-based group, Physicians for Human Rights, did much of the forensic 
research that told the outside world what happened in Srebrenica. 
That evidence is likely to be used in the trial of General Kerstic 
and some of the groups' researchers are expected to testify. Susanna 
Serkin is the group's deputy director. She told VOA's Challis McDunna 
what they found in Srebrenica. Well, there's an enormous amount of 
testimonial evidence from relatives of the survivors and even survivors 
of the incidents surrounding Srebrenica. Physicians for Human Rights 
supported the international criminal tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia 
in the forensic work in 1996, during which time we sent scientist 
who participated in exemations of at least four mass graves in the 
Srebrenica area. And over 400 bodies were removed from those graves. 
Several of the graves contained over a hundred bodies apiece. And 
in the bodies were found -- individuals, young men and boys, all dressed 
in civilian clothing. Most of them had been shot in the head or other 
parts of their body. Most of the individuals had been shot more than 
once, some of them dozens of times. Many of the bodies were found 
with wires tied to their hands which were tied behind their backs. 
There were some individuals who were found with blindfolds. All of 
this is consistent with witness testimony. And the evidence is really 
overwhelming. I believe that these were premeditated mass murders. 
What does the evidence tell us about what happened there? The evidence, 
I think, will probably point to the fact that people were rounded 
up, removed from Srebrenica, and we know from numerous other human 
rights reports, including reports from Human Rights Watch, that these 
men and boys were sent on a march outside of the town into fields. 
They had very little possessions with them, and they were in many 
cases lined up and shot and then buried -- very hastily -- in graves. 
It doesn't appear from most of the graves that there was much of an 
effort to cover it up substantially. These bodies were just dumped, 
discarded, as if no one really expected that there would be a serious 
effort later to hold people accountable and responsible for these 
atrocities. Everything points to just a horrific disregard for human 
beings and blatant violation of the most fundamental human-rights 
norms. This really was a crime against humanity. Susanna Serkin of 
Physicians for Human Rights speaking with VOA's Challis McDunna. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>