<DOC>
<DOCNO> VOA19981207.1600.0723 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
In the Middle East there were more clashes on the West Bank Monday 
as Palestinians continued to demand the release of political and security 
prisoners held by Israel. The unrest comes less than a week before 
President Clinton's scheduled visit to Israel, Gaza and the West Bank. 
VOA's David Gollust reports from Jerusalem. There were violent clashes 
in virtually all the major towns in the West Bank as Palestinians 
stepped up their protest of Israel's approach to prisoner releases 
under the Wye River accords. Dozens of Palestinians, and at least 
four Israeli border policemen, were injured in incidents of stone 
throwing that were answered by troops firing tear gas and rubber-coated 
metal bullets. Israel radio says one Palestinian was shot and seriously 
wounded by an Israeli civilian whose car was stoned in a village near 
Jerusalem. Palestinians accuse Israel of violating the Wye understandings 
by releasing mostly common criminals rather than political and security 
prisoners in the first phase of implementation of the U.S.-brokered 
deal last month. Israel maintains it is adhering to the agreement 
and accuses the Palestinian Authority of inciting the protests, including 
a hunger strike by hundreds of Palestinians still in Israeli jails. 
The violence is a troubling prelude to the Clinton visit to Israel 
and the Palestinian areas which begins late next Saturday and has 
already been marked by controversy. Israeli officials fear the high 
profile visit to the West Bank and Gaza will boost Palestinian leader 
Yassar Arafat's drive for Palestinian statehood next year. Some members 
of the Israeli cabinet openly suggested over the weekend that Mr. 
Clinton be disinvited. Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu told Israel 
radio Monday the U.S. president will be a welcome guest, though insisting 
that the idea for the visit was Mr. Clinton's and not his. Mr. Netanyahu's 
handling of the issue drew broad criticism from members of parliament. 
Knesset Deputy Zvi Weinberg, a member of the prime minister's own 
right-of-center coalition, called the perceived snub of President 
Clinton "disgraceful." The president of the United States has offered 
to come to the Middle East to help in the furthering of the accords, 
of the Oslo accords. I think he should be given every courtesy, and 
I think any discussion, any talk, about the president of the United 
States being not welcome in Israel, I think are irresponsible and 
wrong. Mr. Clinton will divide his time almost equally between Israel 
and the Palestinians during the three-day stay, a fact that in itself 
rankles some Israelis. Palestinian and Israeli officials say there 
is an agreement in principle for Mr. Clinton to add a joint meeting 
with Mr. Arafat and Prime Minister Netanyahu to his schedule next 
Monday. The three-way summit is expected to be held at the Arrez crossing 
point between Israel and Gaza, or in the nearby Israeli town of Ashqelon. 
It would take place after Mr. Clinton visits Gaza and addresses a 
gathering of Palestinian leaders that is expected to reaffirm the 
nullification of sections of the Palestinian Covenant calling for 
Israeli's destruction. David Gollust, VOA News, Jerusalem. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>