<DOC>
<DOCNO> VOA19981207.1600.2688 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
American schools are increasingly turning to technology to improve 
test scores and to help students master basic skills. But some experts 
argue that just because computers are placed in classrooms, it doesn't 
mean that the devises will always help youngsters learn. Dan Nobel 
has more. The federal government has undertaken an initiative to wire 
all American public schools to the Internet. Many educators and government 
officials believe that the use of high technology will make it possible 
for students to master basic reading and math skills. Among them is 
Gaston Caperton, the former governor of West Virginia. In West Virginia, 
I saw firsthand a school system that was totally transformed by the 
use of technology. Governor Caperton now serves as the director of 
the Institution of Education and Government at Columbia University 
in New York City. He spoke of his West Virginia experiences at this 
year's Computer World Smithsonian Symposium in Washington, D.C. We 
had a dream that we would be the leader in the country in using technology 
in education. We truly have become the leader in using technology 
in our schools. However, not everyone agrees that technology can improve 
education. Jane Healey, an educational psychologist, former teacher 
and administrator, argues that in her words, "While some very exciting 
and potentially valuable things are happening between children and 
computers, we are currently spending far too much money with too little 
thought. It is past time," she says, "to pause, reflect and ask some 
probing questions." Why is that? Because we are spending so much money 
in education that we desperately need for other things, and we've 
really been sold a bill of goods that suddenly this is some magic 
bullet, wiring our classrooms or getting kids plugged into computers 
is somehow going to make education all right. It is so unfortunate 
because what I've seen in over two years of observing in schools, 
this particular aspect of education is suffering, and it's actually 
pulling down the whole level of education, and I believe that it's 
actually harming children's minds. Dr. Healey is also author of "Failure 
to Connect: How Computers Affect Our Children's Minds for Better and 
Worse." They're learning short attention spans, they're learning to 
be seduced by a bunch of flashy graphics, they're learning to push 
buttons instead of thinking through a problem, they're learning that 
if you don't come out right, you can just blow it up and start all 
over again, and they're learning, really, that learning is something 
that has a reward attached to it, a very superficial reward. I mean, 
you know, do two math problems and you get shoot a bunch of aliens. 
I mean, this is not the reason for doing math. The reason for doing 
math is to feel that you've accomplished something and that you've 
learned something. The human brain, the kid's brain, just wants to 
get better, they want to improve, they want to be motivated to learn 
new things. Ultimately, says Jane Healey, the key to providing a good 
education is to have teachers who are knowledgeable. It's good teaching 
and it's having a plan, it's knowing what your curriculum is, it's 
saying, OK, now we know what we want our kids to learn, which technology 
is going to do this particular job the best. We don't just put computers 
in and just expect them to do stuff. We say, all right, for this particular 
thing we know the computer's can do the job better than books and 
pencils and other technologies. Always we're going to need teachers 
there. Jane Healey and her book, "Failure to Connect," hopes that 
we will ultimately learn to harness electronic media to assist learning 
without compromising other important aspects of development. I'm Dan 
Nobel. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>