<DOC>
<DOCNO> APW19981114.0393 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
A top Serbian politician left Bosnia Saturday on orders from NATO 
peacekeepers who told him he was not welcome, amid a related conflict 
over who should head the Bosnian Serb government Serbian Deputy Premier 
Vojislav Seselj, an ally of Yugoslav President Slobodan Milosevic 
and a radical nationalist who espouses a harder line in the Serb conflict 
against ethnic Albanians in Kosovo, was told to leave late Friday 
by NATO troops. They were empowered to expel Seselj by the Office 
of the High Representative, the top foreign authority in Bosnia overseeing 
the country's postwar development. Seselj was attending an inauguration 
party for Nikola Poplasen, the new premier of the Bosnian Serb substate. 
Poplasen is also a radical nationalist, allied to the camp of Radovan 
Karadzic, the suspected war criminal and wartime Bosnian Serb leader. 
After arguing with dozens of NATO soldiers in armored vehicles, Seselj, 
a former paramilitary leader in Croatia and Bosnia, left the hotel 
where the inauguration reception was being held and returned to neighboring 
Serbia early Saturday. There was no violence. Seselj condemned ``American 
occupation'' saying it was aimed at destroying the Bosnian Serb republic. 
He left with a Bosnian Serb police escort. Maj. Sheena Thomson, a 
spokeswoman for the NATO-led peace force, said Seselj ``had his last 
word to say before the departure, but went without screaming and kicking.'' 
The expulsion order was signed by Jacques Klein, the American deputy 
head of the Office of the High Representative. ``Seselj's activities 
and statements both during the war and recently offer clear evidence 
that his presence in Bosnia would constitute an activity detrimental 
to the implementation'' of peace, said the order. In September presidential 
elections Poplasen won over a moderate Bosnian Serb who was supported 
by world powers involved in Bosnia. Seselj was banned from Bosnia 
during the election campaigns. But he and Poplasen have vowed to keep 
close ties nevertheless. Later Saturday, Poplasen proposed fellow 
nationalist Dragan Kalinic as new Bosnian Serb premier of the Bosnian 
Serb entity, to replace Milorad Dodik, the moderate now holding the 
post. Dodik is favored by the world powers because of his commitment 
to the Dayton accords that mandate ethnic harmony, freedom of movement 
and other postwar aims for Bosnia. But Poplasen said Kalinic would 
also ``continue good cooperation with the international community 
and with big Western nations, and strictly respect the Dayton peace 
agreement...to the benefit of the Serb people without infringing the 
rights of other ethnic communities. The two feuding Bosnian Serb factions, 
moderates and nationalists, each hold 32 seats in the 83-seat Bosnian 
Serb parliament. Votes from the 19 Muslim and Croat deputies will 
likely decide if Kalinic will replace Dodik. But with radicals like 
Kalinic opposed to ethnic coexistence, the Croats and Muslims were 
likely to vote against him. In Sarajevo, the High Representative's 
office signaled it would not permit Kalinic to become premier, saying 
Dodik was the only candidate supported by world powers involved in 
the peace process. High Representative Carlos Westendorp has the power 
to effectively veto any candidate deemed harmful to the peace effort. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>