<DOC>
<DOCNO> APW19981114.0371 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
As officials from 20 Pacific Rim nations met Saturday to discuss Asia's 
financial crisis, police fired shots into the air to disperse hundreds 
of people demonstrating against the Malaysian government. It was the 
first time that security forces have fired shots since anti-government 
protests began with the dismissal of the deputy prime minister on 
Sept. 2, triggering social unrest. Defying thousands of police and 
security officers stationed in Kuala Lumpur during the international 
meeting, 2,000 people rallied downtown to criticize Prime Minister 
Mahathir Mohamad. Shouting slogans and carrying banners saying ``Mahathir 
is power crazy,'' the protesters criticized his treatment of Anwar 
Ibrahim, the minister who was fired, then jailed after launching a 
nationwide anti-Mahathir reform movement. The crowd scattered when 
several undercover police opened fire, but some protesters chased 
the officers down a road of the residential neighborhood of the capital, 
witnesses said. No injuries were immediately reported. Mahathir is 
determined to prevent Anwar's struggle from becoming a focus of this 
week's Asia-Pacific Economic Cooperation summit. But as officials 
from the many foreign governments met over the weekend to prepare 
for it, several officials went out of their way to sympathize with 
Anwar. Two top Canadian officials met on Saturday with his wife, Azizah 
Ismail, who has become the de facto leader of his pro-reform movement 
since he was jailed and put on trial on corruption and sex charges 
that he vehemently denies. Canada's foreign minister, Lloyd Axworthy, 
and its trade minister, Sergio Marchi, invited Azizah to lunch between 
their meetings with other APEC officials. ``It's important that these 
meetings take into account seriously the changes that are going on, 
and impact on the Malaysian people. And it's important that APEC addresses 
some of these issues,'' Axworthy said after the luncheon. He said 
the meeting with Azizah took place at the request of Canadian Prime 
Minister Jean Chretien. Afterward, Axworthy said, he told Malaysia's 
foreign minister, Abdullah Ahmad Badawi, that Canada is concerned 
that Anwar receive a fair trial. Anwar, also ousted as finance minister, 
has claimed that he was beaten by police before his trial started. 
Pictures of him walking into his trial with a black eye have been 
seen in newspapers and television broadcasts around the world. Some 
APEC leaders, including U.S. President Bill Clinton, have said they 
won't meet privately with Mahathir during the summit because of what 
has happened in Malaysia. Chretien, the host of last year's APEC summit, 
said in Singapore on Saturday that he would discuss Anwar's treatment 
directly with Mahathir during his visit to Malaysia. Azizah also plans 
to meet with U.S. Secretary of State Madeleine Albright, who was to 
arrive in Malaysia Saturday night to participate in the meetings before 
the APEC summit. The Malaysian government said that Albright should 
not meddle in Malaysia's internal affairs by meeting with Azizah. 
Abdullah said Albright ``will be here as a guest and she should know 
what to do.'' Speaking to Malaysia's government news agency, he also 
said: ``Foreign officials and leaders attending the APEC meetings 
should not interfere in Malaysia's affairs.'' Australian Prime Minister 
John Howard, who was to arrive in Malaysia on Sunday, said he may 
meet with Azizah, too. In the meantime, APEC Cabinet ministers met 
Saturday to discuss a deal to cut tariffs on dlrs 1.5 trillion in 
global trade, but Japan and the United States remained deeply divided 
over a key provision, officials said. The United States believes such 
a step to promote freer trade would send a strong signal that Asian 
nations are not turning inward, despite their worst economic crisis 
in 50 years. But Japan has just as adamantly argued that it is in 
no position to cut border taxes in two sensitive areas _ forestry 
products and fish _ at a time when its economy is in recession. The 
original aim was to have the tariff reductions in nine sectors effective 
by 2002, as a start toward APEC's ultimate goal of a free trade area 
in the Pacific by 2020. But that was before Japan and the United States, 
the world's two largest economies, began arguing over some provisions. 
A Japanese news agency, which obtained a draft of the APEC group's 
final statement, reported Saturday that it urged APEC to deal urgently 
with the global crisis and to closely examine the operations of the 
world's secretive and risky hedge funds. Investments by the funds 
have been blamed for the some of the wild fluctuations in Asia's currency 
and stock markets. Mahathir said in an interview with a government 
news agency that he will take his biggest pet complaint to APEC leaders: 
currency speculators. Mahathir has made it clear that international 
controls on foreign currency trading will be on the agenda of the 
APEC summit next Tuesday and Wednesday. ``We cannot miss even one 
international forum and let it go without our bringing to their attention 
the problem raised by currency speculation,'' Mahathir said. APEC 
comprises Australia, Brunei, Canada, Chile, China, Hong Kong, Indonesia, 
Japan, South Korea, Malaysia, Mexico, New Zealand, Papua New Guinea, 
the Philippines, Singapore, Taiwan, Thailand and the United States. 
Russia, Peru and Vietnam will join at this summit. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>