<DOC>
<DOCNO> APW19981114.0792 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
The main opposition party is on the road to victory in the first round 
of Senate elections and another opposition grouping is likely to finish 
second, preliminary results showed Saturday, With all or nearly all 
results counted in 17 out of 27 districts, candidates for the conservative 
Civic Democratic Party advanced to the second round in 16 regions 
in the two days of voting. They were followed by the four-party center-right 
coalition led by the Christian Democrats and the Freedom Union, with 
10 candidates through to the next round. The ruling Social democrats 
are third with 7 candidates, which is seen as a dissapointment by 
the party leaders. Polling stations closed at 2 p.m. (1300 GMT), and 
final results were expected late Sunday. At stake in the 81-member 
Senate were seats of 27 members whose terms had run out. Candidates 
had to get a 50 percent majority to win the election outright or face 
a run-off between the two top finishers. The run-offs are scheduled 
for Nov. 20-21. None of the candidates gained more than 50 percent 
of first round vote, meaning that run-off elections will be necessary 
in all districts. Turnout was estimated at 30 percent, the lowest 
number of voters ever taking part in any Czech elections. Election 
fatigue after a relatively recent national election could have contributed 
to the lack of voter enthusiasm. ``I'm worried by the low turnout,'' 
Premier Milos Zeman said. Before the vote Friday and Saturday, the 
Civic Democratic Party controlled 29 seats in the Senate. Twelve of 
those seats were up for grabs in the current vote. The Social Democrats 
had 26 senators, with six being contested. The rest of the seats were 
controlled by four other smaller parties, including the Christian 
Democrats, Freedom Union and the Communists. The Senate vote is in 
part considered a test of support for Zeman's government. Following 
two years of political deadlock, the country's early general election 
in June produced a one-party minority government of Social Democrats 
led by Zeman. His government survived in Parliament thanks to a pact 
struck with the runner-up, the center-right Civic Democratic Party. 
``I expected we would fare better,'' Foreign Minister Jan Kavan commented 
on the election results. But the relatively disappointing showing 
for the governing party was due less to policies than personalities. 
The Civic Democrats, the former governing party, had the better-known 
candidates for the seats. The four-member opposition bloc _ in second 
place _ appeared to get most support from center-right voters who 
distrust the Civic Democrats. The Senate was created as a safety mechanism 
to ensure the country could function in case of a constitutional crisis. 
It can pass laws, except laws on budget and constitution, should the 
200-seat lower house of the parliament be dissolved. Since its formation 
in 1996, the Senate has been criticized by all members of the political 
spectrum for not being effective enough. Several parties, including 
the Communists and the ultra-nationalist Republicans, have even called 
for its abolishment. No exit polls were done for local elections, 
which also took place also Friday and Saturday. More than 60,000 local 
posts are at stake. Independent candidates are expected to dominate 
the local elections, which have little bearing on the balance of political 
power in the country. Final results are expected Tuesday. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>