<DOC>
<DOCNO> APW19981114.0547 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
As officials from 20 Pacific Rim nations met Saturday to discuss Asia's 
financial crisis, police fired shots into the air to disperse thousands 
of people demonstrating against the Malaysian government. It was the 
first time that security forces have fired shots since anti-government 
protests began with the dismissal of Deputy Prime Minister Anwar Ibrahim 
on Sept. 2, triggering social unrest. Defying thousands of police 
and security officers stationed in Kuala Lumpur during the international 
meeting, 3,000 people rallied downtown to criticize Prime Minister 
Mahathir Mohamad. Some of the demonstrators marched toward the hotel 
where U.S. President Bill Clinton and Secretary of State Madeleine 
Albright were to stay for the Asia-Pacific Economic Cooperation summit. 
``Clinton, arrest Mahathir! Clinton, save us from Mahathir!'' the 
crowd screamed. Albright arrived in the Malaysian capital late Saturday, 
just as demonstrators set a police motorcycle on fire several blocks 
from the Renaissance Hotel. Clinton was due to arrive Monday. The 
protest began in a nearby residential area, and the crowd scattered 
when several undercover police opened fire, witnesses said. Some protesters 
chased the officers down a road. The demonstration ended around midnight 
(1600 gmt). At least two people were beaten by the crowd protesting 
Mahathir's treatment of Anwar, who was fired and then jailed after 
launching a nationwide anti-Mahathir reform movement. It was the first 
demonstration since meetings among senior officials from APEC began 
meeting in Kuala Lumpur on Thursday. Mahathir had been determined 
to prevent Anwar's struggle from becoming a focus of the APEC summit. 
But as officials from the many foreign governments met over the weekend 
to prepare for it, several officials went out of their way to sympathize 
with Anwar. Two top Canadian officials met Saturday with his wife, 
Azizah Ismail, who has become the de facto leader of his pro-reform 
movement since he was jailed and put on trial on corruption and sex 
charges that he vehemently denies. Canada's foreign minister, Lloyd 
Axworthy, and its trade minister, Sergio Marchi, invited Azizah to 
lunch between their meetings with other APEC officials. ``It's important 
that these meetings take into account seriously the changes that are 
going on, and impact on the Malaysian people. And it's important that 
APEC addresses some of these issues,'' Axworthy said after the luncheon. 
He said the meeting with Azizah took place at the request of Canadian 
Prime Minister Jean Chretien. Afterward, Axworthy said, he told Malaysia's 
foreign minister, Abdullah Ahmad Badawi, that Canada is concerned 
that Anwar receive a fair trial. Anwar has claimed he was beaten by 
police before his trial. Pictures of him walking into his trial with 
a black eye have been seen in newspapers and television broadcasts 
around the world. Some APEC leaders, including Clinton, have said 
they won't meet privately with Mahathir during the summit because 
of what has happened in Malaysia. Chretien, the host of last year's 
APEC summit, said in Singapore on Saturday that he would discuss Anwar's 
treatment directly with Mahathir during his visit to Malaysia. Azizah 
also plans to meet with Albright. The Malaysian government said Albright 
should not meddle in Malaysia's internal affairs by meeting with Azizah. 
Abdullah said Albright ``will be here as a guest and she should know 
what to do.'' Speaking to Malaysia's government news agency, he also 
said: ``Foreign officials and leaders attending the APEC meetings 
should not interfere in Malaysia's affairs.'' Australian Prime Minister 
John Howard, who was to arrive in Malaysia on Sunday, said he may 
meet with Azizah, too. In the meantime, APEC Cabinet ministers met 
Saturday to discuss a deal to cut tariffs on dlrs 1.5 trillion in 
global trade, but Japan and the United States remained deeply divided 
over a key provision, officials said. The United States believes such 
a step to promote freer trade would send a strong signal that Asian 
nations are not turning inward, despite their worst economic crisis 
in decades. But Japan has just as adamantly argued that it is in no 
position to cut tariffs in two sensitive areas _ forestry products 
and fish _ at a time when its economy is in recession. The original 
aim was to have the tariff reductions in nine sectors effective by 
2002, as a start toward APEC's ultimate goal of a free trade area 
in the Pacific by 2020. But that was before Japan and the United States, 
the world's two largest economies, began arguing over some provisions. 
A Japanese news agency, which obtained a draft of the APEC group's 
final statement, reported Saturday that it urged APEC to deal urgently 
with the global crisis and to closely examine the operations of the 
world's secretive and risky hedge funds. Investments by the funds 
have been blamed for some of the wild fluctuations in Asia's currency 
and stock markets. Mahathir said in an interview with a government 
news agency that he will take his biggest pet complaint to APEC leaders: 
currency speculators. Mahathir has made it clear that international 
controls on foreign currency trading will be on the agenda of the 
APEC summit next Tuesday and Wednesday. ``We cannot miss even one 
international forum and let it go without our bringing to their attention 
the problem raised by currency speculation,'' Mahathir said. APEC 
comprises Australia, Brunei, Canada, Chile, China, Hong Kong, Indonesia, 
Japan, South Korea, Malaysia, Mexico, New Zealand, Papua New Guinea, 
the Philippines, Singapore, Taiwan, Thailand and the United States. 
Russia, Peru and Vietnam will join at this summit. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>