<DOC>
<DOCNO> APW19981114.0768 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Text of the letter from Iraqi government to U.N. Secretary-General 
Kofi Annan regarding agreement to allow resumption of weapons inspections: 
H.E. Mr. Kofi A. Annan The Secretary General of The United Nations 
New York Excellency: Your letter dated 13/11/1998 addressed to President 
Saddam Hussein was presented to a joint meeting of the Revolutionary 
Command Council and the National Command of the Arab Ba'ath Socialist 
Party presided over by His Excellency the President. I was entrusted 
with the task of conveying to you the following: 1. The goal sought 
by Iraq from its decisions of 5 August and 31 October was not to sever 
the relationship with UNSCOM and the IAEA and to cease the implementation 
of its obligations ... under section C of SCR 687. The objective of 
Iraq is to end the suffering of its embargoed people and to see the 
implementation of paragraph 22 of SCR 687 as a first step for lifting 
the other sanctions. 2. Due to its trust in you and your good faith, 
the Government of Iraq has dealt with your initiative regarding the 
comprehensive review. But unfortunately, the deliberations of the 
Council on the procedures for carrying out the review did not result 
in a clear picture which ensures fairness and objectivity in reaching 
the implementation of Paragraph (22) of resolution 687, which represents 
the declared objective of the comprehensive review according to your 
proposal. It is well known that the main reason for that was the American 
position, which does not represent the prevailing opinion of the Council. 
That position, contrary to your initiative, objected continuously 
to the presentation of any clarity in regard to the objective of the 
comprehensive review. 3. Despite the assurances that we have received 
from you and from many members of the Council that supported the main 
objective of the comprehensive review, and despite the confidence 
we have in you and in the majority of the Council members and our 
belief in your good faith and sincerity, those assurances were not 
satisfactory because they did not meet the basics from our point (of) 
view. On the basis of what was stated in your letter, and in appreciation 
of the content of the letter of President Boris Yeltsin the President 
of the Russian Federation and Mr. Yevgeny Primakov the prime minister 
of the Russian Federation, and the positive positions expressed and 
conveyed to us by China, France, Brazil, and other States, and in 
order to give a further chance to achieve justice by lifting sanctions 
commencing with the implementation of paragraph (22) of resolution 
687 (1991), the Leadership of Iraq decided to resume working with 
the Special Commission and the IAEA and to allow them to perform their 
normal duties in accordance with the relevant resolutions of the Security 
Council and on the basis of the principles which were agreed upon 
in the Memorandum of Understanding signed with you on 23 February 
1998. We offer this chance not out of fear of the aggressive American 
campaign and the threat to commit a new aggression against Iraq, but 
as an expression of our feeling of responsibility, and in response 
to your appeal and those of our friends. We affirm that the people 
of Iraq would not relinquish their legitimate right in having the 
iniquitous embargo lifted and to live normally like other nations 
of the world. We will be looking forward to seeing the outcome of 
your efforts and the review. Excellency, we rightly believe that if 
the comprehensive review were not to be a mere formality and to be 
free from the influences of the tendentious purposes, the adoption 
of the points we conveyed yesterday, 13/11/1998, to the Ambassadors 
of Russia, France, and China, a copy of which I enclose herewith, 
will render the review serious, fair and fruitful. We expect that 
you will continue with your efforts to lay down the basis and the 
correct procedures for the review and so as to commence with as soon 
as possible. Please accept, Excellency, the assurances of my highest 
consideration. (signed) Tariq Aziz Baghdad, 14 November 1998 
</TEXT>
</DOC>