<DOC>
<DOCNO> APW19981114.0766 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Text of the annex attached to a letter from the Iraqi government to 
U.N. Secretary-General Kofi Annan regarding agreement to allow resumption 
of weapons inspections: First, the goal sought by Iraq from its decisions 
of 5 August and 31 October was not to sever the relationship with 
UNSCOM and the IAEA and to cease the implementation of its obligations 
under section C of SCR's 687 and 715. Second, the objective of Iraq 
is to end the suffering of its embargoed people and to see the implementation 
of paragraph (22) of SCR 687 as a first step for lifting the other 
sanctions. Third, Iraq expressed its readiness to engage in the comprehensive 
review which had been proposed by the Secretary General. But, as a 
result of American pressure, the results brought about by the consultations 
of the Council do not ensure an honest and objective review with the 
aim of implementing paragraph (22). Fourth, the position of Iraq on 
the comprehensive review is: 1. The comprehensive review be carried 
out within a very short time, (seven days for example), after the 
resumption of UNSCOM and the IAEA of their normal duties. This is 
to be without conditions, (like those mentioned formerly in regard 
to what is called the confirmation of Iraq's cooperation). 2. The 
comprehensive review fundamentally concentrates on paragraph (3) of 
the concept paper of the Secretary General of 5 October (the three 
Iraqi questions of 3 August) and emphasizes the question of evidence. 
3. The Council be ready to implement paragraph (22) if the fulfillment 
of the requirements of section C of SCR 687 is established. 4. If 
the Council sees, through an objective study, that there are matters 
which need to be done, a short period be determined for their completion. 
Until that completion is reached, the Council implements measures 
for lifting or reducing sanctions in proportion to what has been fulfilled 
of the requirements of paragraph (22). Thereafter, the commencement 
with the implementation of paragraph (22) immediately upon the completion 
of the required work. 5. The Council assures the legal interpretation 
of section C of SCR 687 and that none of its members should impose 
additional conditions or restrictions on the implementation of paragraph 
(22). Fifth, the second phase of the review commences after completing 
the conclusions of the first phase. Sixth, the second phase of the 
review only encompasses the obligations determined by clear provisions 
of the resolutions and no matters be raised contrary to the legal 
interpretation of the resolutions. Seventh, the members of the Council 
and specially the permanent members abide by international law and 
the relevant resolutions of the Council in respect of all matters 
pertaining to Iraq. Eighth, the question of Butler and the structure 
of UNSCOM and its practices are important matters. The Council is 
to consider them seriously in order to ensure a good relationship 
in the future. We hope that this will be done as soon as possible. 
Ninth, it is necessary that these assurances be communicated directly 
to the leadership in Baghdad either by the Secretary General or by 
a delegation from the Council. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>