<DOC>
<DOCNO> APW19981114.0201 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
As officials from 20 Pacific Rim nations met here Saturday to discuss 
Asia's financial crisis, hundreds of people demonstrated against the 
Malaysian government. Defying the 5,700 police and security officers 
who have been stationed in the capital, more than 500 people rallied 
in downtown Kuala Lumpur to criticize Prime Minister Mahathir Mohamad. 
Shouting slogans and carrying banners saying ``Mahathir is power crazy,'' 
the protesters criticized his treatment of Anwar Ibrahim, the deputy 
prime minister who was fired two months ago, then jailed after launching 
a nationwide reform movement. No violence was reported, and the protest 
didn't immediately spread from the neighborhood where it began. Mahathir 
is determined to prevent Anwar's struggle from becoming a focus of 
this week's Asia-Pacific Economic Cooperation summit meeting. But 
as officials from the many foreign governments met over the weekend 
to prepare for it, several officials went out of their way to sympathize 
with Anwar. Two top Canadian officials met on Saturday with his wife, 
Azizah Ismail, who has become the de facto leader of his pro-reform 
movement since he was jailed and put on trial on corruption and sex 
charges that he vehemently denies. Canada's foreign minister, Lloyd 
Axworthy, and its international trade minister, Sergio Marchi, invited 
Azizah to lunch between their meetings with other APEC officials. 
``It's important that these meetings take into account seriously the 
changes that are going on, and impact on the Malaysian people. And 
it's important that APEC addresses some of these issues,'' Axworthy 
said after the luncheon. ``We have been meeting with a number of people 
to get a briefing on what the situation is, (and) expressed concerns 
with the treatment of Anwar and others detained.'' Anwar, also ousted 
as finance minister, claims that he was beaten by police before his 
trial started. And pictures of him walking into his trial with a black 
eye have been seen in newspapers and television broadcasts around 
the world. Some APEC leaders, including U.S. President Bill Clinton, 
have said they won't meet privately with Mahathir during the summit 
because of what has happened in Malaysia. Azizah also plans to meet 
with U.S. Secretary of State Madeleine Albright, who was to arrive 
in Malaysia on Saturday night and to participate in the meetings before 
the APEC summit. The Malaysian government said Saturday that Albright 
should not meddle in Malaysia's internal affairs by meeting with Azizah. 
Malaysia's Foreign Minister Abdullah Ahmad Badawi said that Albright 
``will be here as a guest and she should know what to do.'' Speaking 
to Malaysia's government news agency, he also said: ``Foreign officials 
and leaders attending the APEC meetings should not interfere in Malaysia's 
affairs.'' Australian Prime Minister John Howard, who was to arrive 
in Malaysia on Sunday, said he may meet with Azizah, too. In the meantime, 
APEC Cabinet ministers met Saturday to discuss a deal to cut tariffs 
on dlrs 1.5 trillion in global trade, but Japan and the United States 
remained deeply divided over a key provision, officials said. The 
United States believes such a step to promote freer trade would send 
a strong signal that Asian nations are not turning inward, despite 
their worst economic crisis in 50 years. But Japan has just as adamantly 
argued that it is in no position to cut border taxes in two sensitive 
areas _ forestry products and fish _ at a time when its economy is 
in recession. The original aim was to have the tariff reductions in 
nine sectors effective by 2002, as a start toward APEC's ultimate 
goal of a free trade area in the Pacific by 2020. But that was before 
Japan and the United States, the world's two largest economies, began 
arguing over some provisions. A Japanese news agency, which obtained 
a draft of the APEC group's final statement, reported that it urges 
APEC to deal urgently with the global crisis and to closely examine 
the operations of the world's secretive and risky hedge funds. Investments 
by the funds have been blamed for the some of the wild fluctuations 
in Asia's currency and stock markets. In the meantime, Mahathir said 
in an interview with a government news agency that he will take his 
biggest pet complaint to APEC leaders: currency speculators. Mahathir 
has made it clear that international controls on foreign currency 
trading will be on the agenda of the APEC summit next Tuesday and 
Wednesday. ``We cannot miss even one international forum and let it 
go without our bringing to their attention the problem raised by currency 
speculation,'' Mahathir said. APEC comprises Australia, Brunei, Canada, 
Chile, China, Hong Kong, Indonesia, Japan, South Korea, Malaysia, 
Mexico, New Zealand, Papua New Guinea, the Philippines, Singapore, 
Taiwan, Thailand and the United States. Russia, Peru and Vietnam will 
join at this summit. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>