<DOC>
<DOCNO> APW19981114.0188 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Deadly clashes between students and security forces gave way to widespread 
rioting in the capital Saturday as rock-throwing mobs burned cars, 
looted shops, and ransacked police stations. While outnumbered riot 
officers fired warning shots and tear gas at rampaging crowds, thousands 
of anti-government students attended funerals of slain protesters 
and later assembled peacefully outside of Parliament to demand democratic 
reform. Military helicopters swooped above the chaos. Palls of black 
smoke towered over a shopping area near one luxury hotel only a few 
hundreds meters (yards) from the heavily guarded state palace. There, 
President B.J. Habibie called for calm before an emergency meeting 
with military chief Gen. Wiranto, the defense minister, and other 
Cabinet members. Earlier Habibie accused troublemakers of trying to 
``overthrow'' his 6-month-old government and ``endanger the unity 
of the nation and the people.'' Opposition leaders and student activists 
called on Habibie and Wiranto to quit. ``Habibie must step down now. 
We have had enough of this government,'' said one man who identified 
himself by the single name of Irwan at the scene of one fire. Pro-democracy 
activists said Wiranto must resign immediately so order can be restored 
within military ranks and the streets. ``His policies have imperiled 
the nation's future,'' they said in a statement. At least 12 people, 
most of them students, have died this week in the worst violence in 
Jakarta since riots and protests ousted former President Suharto in 
May after 32 years of authoritarian rule. Most died from plastic bullet 
wounds in a series of deadly assaults on Friday night. Police chiefs 
denied their officers or troops fired live ammunition at the students 
when they tried to march on Parliament. The protests broke out this 
week against a government assembly that students claimed was not serious 
about democratic change. The looting and burning on Saturday was reminiscent 
of the May riots, which were fueled by discontent over Indonesia's 
economic crisis. They also were triggered by the shooting of students 
by the military. Buildings were burning in several areas on Saturday, 
including Jakarta's Chinatown, badly hit by rioting last May, when 
1,200 people were killed. The Chinese minority, prominent in business, 
is often targeted during times of civil unrest in Indonesia. As in 
the tumultuous days before Suharto quit, police and soldiers were 
again largely helpless or absent in the face of the rioting. Suharto 
weighed in Saturday, saying the government should apologize for the 
students' deaths and listen to protesters' demands. ``I resigned from 
my position to avoid bloodshed. Why does the government now cause 
bloodshed?'' Suharto's half-brother, Probosutedjo, quoted him as saying. 
The comments were reported by the official Antara news agency. The 
violence on Saturday started when neighborhood youths set military 
tents afire in the street near Parliament and burned several vehicles, 
including an army truck, next to the University of Indonesia. In another 
area, mobs stoned a shopping center as crowds cheered and police and 
soldiers stood by. In northern Jakarta, armored personnel carriers 
parked amid a crowd of rioters who smashed car showroom windows and 
set shops on fire. But soldiers did nothing. Mobs threw rocks at buses 
parked outside the foreign ministry. Earlier about 5,000 students 
gathered at a cemetery for the funeral of Sigit Prasetyo, a 20-year-old 
student who was shot dead Friday. They watched as his casket, draped 
in a red and white Indonesian flag and a traditional Islamic funeral 
cloth, was lowered in damp red earth. On Saturday morning a policeman 
accidentally shot and wounded a navy marine in the leg. At one riot 
later, a mob beat one policeman to death and police accidentally shot 
and wounded a navy marine. Critics say the nation's highest legislative 
body stopped short of promised democratic change, even though it backed 
a plan by Habibie to hold parliamentary elections in May or June and 
agreed to name Suharto in an anti-corruption decree. Members of the 
People's Consultative Assembly, filled with holdovers from the Suharto 
era, say the decree will bolster an ongoing investigation of the wealth 
of the 77-year-old former president. Students reject the measure as 
cosmetic and want an immediate trial of Suharto. The assembly also 
did not heed their demand that the military be banned from politics. 
Instead, delegates passed a decree calling for the gradual reduction 
of military representation in Parliament. At present, the military 
directly appoints 75 lawmakers to the 500-seat Parliament. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>