<DOC>
<DOCNO> APW19981114.0587 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Andre Venter scored a matchwinning try in injury time Saturday as 
South Africa overturned a 14-0 deficit to beat Wales 28-20 and post 
its 15th victory in a row. Expected to be overwhelmed by the world 
champion Springboks, the Welsh led 20-17 with three minutes to go 
at Wembley when South African center Franco Smith kicked his third 
penalty to tie the match. Then scrum half Joost van der Westhuizen 
broke through the Welsh defense down the right and passed inside to 
back row forward Venter, who charged over for his sixth try in South 
African colors. Although Smith missed the conversion, he scored with 
a penalty with the last kick of the match as the Springboks gained 
a victory that looked unlikely 26 minutes into the game when the Welsh 
had a 14-point lead through a try by winger Gareth Thomas and three 
Neil Jenkins penalties. Even in defeat, the performance was a boost 
for a Welsh team led for the first time by New Zealand coach Graham 
Henry while the South Africans looked far short of the team which 
had appeated dominant for a year. With Mark Andrews becoming the first 
South African to make it to 50 international appearances and Gary 
Teichmann beating Francois Pienaar's record of 29 games as captain, 
the South Africans were expected to take early control at Wembley. 
Instead they were 14-0 down inside the first 26 minutes. The Thomas 
try came 10 minutes into the game when a quick penalty in midfield 
by Rob Howley had the Springboks retreating. The ball went through 
four pairs of hands before the overlapping Thomas took a pass from 
fullback Shane Howarth and went over in the corner. Jenkins missed 
convertion but Wales led 5-0 Jenkins increased the lead to 8-0 in 
the 15th minute with a 35th minute penalty after South African hooker 
James Dalton had been penalized. And when Dalton was caught offside 
in the 22nd minute, the fly half kicked his 600th point in international 
rugby in his 58th game to stretch the advantage to 11-0. Four minutes 
later Jenkins made it 14-0 when Henry Honiball collected the ball 
from an offside position 35 meters from the South African line Stunned 
by the early Welsh drive, the South Africans produced a long spell 
of pressure and Andre Snyman and Venter were both held just short 
of the line by the strong tackling of centers Scott Gibbs and Mark 
Taylor. The South African forward pressure produced a penalty try 
in the 33rd minute when the Welsh forwards were penalized in a scrum 
in front of the posts. A minute later, the Welsh defense was carved 
open in midfield by a break from Snyman, who passed inside for Van 
der Westhuizen and the scrum half had no one between him and the posts 
as he ran 30 meters for the score. Franco Smith converted both tries 
and it was 14-14. The Springboks looked set to score another try just 
before the break when they pinned the Welsh back on their own line 
again but a stunning tackle by Colin Charvis stopped Johan Erasmus 
crossing the line. Then the Welsh broke out strongly with Daffyd James 
charging through the South African line and passing out to the overlapping 
Thomas, who had 70 meters to go. But South African winger Pieter Roussow 
got back to grab the winger and prevent a second Welsh try. Another 
South African offside handed Wales the lead once more with the second 
half only two minutes old as Jenkins kicked his 12th point of the 
match to make it 17-14. But the Welsh were penalized after the ball 
broke from a lineout and Smith kicked the teams level from 35 meters 
with 30 minutes to go. Jenkins was short and right of the target from 
40 meters in the 55th minute but sent a more difficult angled kick 
between the posts from way out on the right to make it 20-17 with 
21 minutes to go. The Welsh maintained possession for long spells 
to protect their lead but the South Africans looked certain to score 
a third try with only seven minutes to go when Snyman and Roussow 
broke from their own half, only for Howarth, who switched to Wales 
after four performances for New Zealand, to foil them with a try-saving 
tackle on the winger 15 meters from his own line. But the Springboks 
drew level with three minutes to go when the Welsh were caught offside 
and Smith kicked his third penalty. Then came the Venter try to end 
the Welsh dream of a first ever victory over South Africa. Lineups: 
Wales _ Shane Howarth; Gareth Thomas, Mark Taylor, Scott Gibbs, Daffyd 
James; Neil Jenkins, Rob Howley; Andrew Lewis, Jonathan Humphreys, 
Chris Anthony, Craig Quinnell, Chris Wyatt, Colin Charvis, Scott Quinnell, 
Martin Williams. South Africa _ Percy Montgomery, Stefan Terblanche, 
Andre Snyman, Franco Smith, Pieter Rossouw; Henry Honiball, Joost 
van de Westhuizen; Robbie Kempson, James Dalton, Adrian Garvey, Krynauw 
Otto, Mark Andrews, Johan Erasmus, Gary Teichmann, Andre Venter. Referee 
: Stuart Dickinson, Australia. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>