<DOC>
<DOCNO> APW19981114.0364 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Iraq's government is expected to respond positively to pleas from 
U.N. Secretary-General Kofi Annan to resume cooperation with U.N. 
arms inspectors, a senior Iraqi official said Saturday. Such a step 
could defuse the crisis over arms inspections that has led to threatened 
American attacks on Iraq and a buildup of U.S. military forces in 
the Gulf. The official, who spoke on condition of anonymity, told 
reporters he ``had information'' that the Iraqi leadership would reply 
favorably to a letter Annan sent to Iraqi President Saddam Hussein. 
Iraq's U.N. ambassador, Nizar Hamdoon, said Friday that Annan was 
sending such a letter. He said he didn't know the contents, but Western 
diplomats said it would repeat Annan's urgent appeal to Saddam to 
resume cooperation immediately. The Iraqi official, from the Culture 
and Information Ministry, did not reveal the letter's contents. But 
it was understood to contain Annan's personal pledge to work for the 
lifting of U.N. sanctions on Iraq if the weapons inspectors were allowed 
to go back to work. Sanctions were imposed after Iraq's 1990 invasion 
of Kuwait, which spurred the Gulf War. Under the cease-fire that ended 
Gulf War in 1991, sanctions cannot be lifted until U.N. weapons inspectors 
certify that Iraq has been disarmed. In Washington, David Leavy, spokesman 
for Clinton's National Security Council, said Saturday in commenting 
on Annan's letter that the U.S. position had not changed and Iraq 
must cooperate with the United Nations. ``Public commitment by Iraq 
must be followed by concrete and demonstrable actions.'' Iraq had 
demanded that the U.N. Security Council, in offering a comprehensive 
review of the U.N. arms inspections, specifically say that review 
was designed to end the sanctions, which ban Iraq's free export of 
oil and have devastated the economy. A promise from Annan would be 
less than a Security Council pledge, but it could offer Iraq a way 
out, as an American attack appears more and more likely. Iraqi officials 
in Baghdad, insisting on anonymity, said an official government announcement 
could come in several hours. The comments came after statements Friday 
by Saddam and U.S. President Bill Clinton appeared to offer little 
way out of the crisis. Most Arab countries _ especially Iraq's uneasy 
Gulf neighbors _ have called for a diplomatic solution. But they also 
have insisted that Iraq resume cooperation with U.N. inspectors or 
risk the consequences. On Saturday, Iraqi newspapers appealed for 
Arab help in the event of an attack, and Iraqis took to the streets 
in government-organized demonstrations backing Saddam. ``With our 
blood and souls we shall defend you, Saddam,'' chanted members of 
the ruling Baath Party, while at another demonstration, workers trampled 
on and burned American and Israeli flags. The statement from the Iraqi 
official followed Saddam's statement Friday making it clear that nothing 
less than a pledge to lift U.N. sanctions would end the standoff. 
Saddam insisted he was not trying to create a crisis with his decisions 
in August and last month to block the U.N. inspectors' searches for 
hidden weapons. Referring to Iraq's insistence that it see a path 
toward the end of sanctions, Saddam declared: ``Iraq will accept positively 
any initiative that meets these just and balanced demands.'' But Clinton 
said the standoff would only end when Iraq resumed its cooperation 
with the U.N. Special Commission, which is responsible for eliminating 
Iraq's weapons of mass destruction. In the Iraqi capital, fears were 
growing that a military strike was imminent. Motorists jammed by the 
hundreds into gasoline stations, forming long lines to fill their 
tanks. Shoppers found some prices rising in crowded markets. Editorials 
in state-run Iraqi newspapers Saturday pleaded with the Arab world 
to back Iraq. Al-Qadissiya pointed out that Iraq has sent sent troops 
to aid Arab countries fighting Israel, and urged others to reciprocate. 
Iraq sacrificed ``blood, money and everything'' in its defense of 
Arab causes, Al-Qadissiya argued. ``Arab governments and peoples have 
to assume their role now by effectively backing Iraq in its confrontation 
against American threats.'' Several hundred Iraqi workers marched 
from downtown Tahrir Square to the headquarters of the U.N. Development 
Program on the River Tigris on Saturday, shouting ``Saddam is staying 
forever.'' About a thousand young volunteers carrying Kalashnikov 
rifles, part of the government program to defend the capital, paraded 
at the National Stadium. No information was available in Baghdad about 
military preparedness. But the opposition Iraqi Communist Party and 
other opposition groups abroad said Iraq had moved troops north to 
protect oil installations and moved intelligence and security officials 
out of their Baghdad headquarters. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>