<DOC>
<DOCNO> APW19981114.0854 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
The Czech Republic's main opposition party won the first round of 
Senate elections and another opposition grouping came in second, preliminary 
results showed Saturday, in a blow to the governing Social Democrats. 
With all or nearly all results counted in 20 out of 27 districts, 
candidates for the conservative Civic Democratic Party advanced to 
the second round in 17 regions in the two days of voting. They were 
followed by the four-party center-right coalition led by the Christian 
Democrats and the Freedom Union, with 12 candidates through to the 
next round, according to the preliminary results. The ruling Social 
democrats were third with 9 candidates, which was a disappointment 
to party leaders. Polling stations closed at 1300 GMT, and final results 
were expected late Sunday. Exit polls indicated that none of the candidates 
gained more than 50 percent of first round vote, meaning that run-off 
elections would be necessary in all districts The 81-member Senate, 
often criticized as ineffective, was created in 1996 mainly as a safety 
mechanism to allow the country to function in the event of a constitutional 
crisis. It can pass some laws if the more powerful upper house is 
dissolved. At stake in the elections were the seats of 27 Senate members 
whose terms had run out. Candidates had to get a 50 percent majority 
to win the election outright or face a run-off between the two top 
finishers. The run-offs were scheduled for Nov. 20-21. The Senate 
vote was in part considered a test of support for the government of 
Premier Milos Zeman. Following two years of political deadlock, the 
country's early general election in June produced a one-party minority 
government of Social Democrats led by Zeman. His government survived 
in Parliament thanks to a pact struck with the runner-up, the center-right 
Civic Democratic Party. ``I expected we would fare better,'' Foreign 
Minister Jan Kavan commented on the election results. Turnout was 
estimated at 30 percent, the lowest number of voters ever taking part 
in any Czech elections. Election fatigue after a relatively recent 
national election could have contributed to the lack of voter enthusiasm. 
``I'm worried by the low turnout,'' Zeman said. Before the vote Friday 
and Saturday, the Civic Democratic Party controlled 29 seats in the 
Senate. Twelve of those seats were up for grabs in the current vote. 
The Social Democrats had 26 senators, with six being contested. The 
rest of the seats were controlled by four other smaller parties, including 
the Christian Democrats, Freedom Union and the Communists. The relatively 
disappointing showing for the governing party may have more to do 
with personalities than policies. The Civic Democrats, the former 
governing party, had the better-known candidates for the seats. The 
four-member opposition bloc that was in second place appeared to get 
most support from center-right voters who distrust the Civic Democrats. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>