<DOC>
<DOCNO> CNN19981114.1600.0155 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> CAPTION </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Even with the latest developments, the United States is continuing 
preparations for possible military action. Brent Sadler has more from 
Baghdad. As Iraqis were celebrating Baghdad day, a routine calendar 
event, involving top officials, the nation's governing body, headed 
by president saddam Hussein, was engaged in a diplomatic retreat from 
possible air strikes. Iraq's readiness to resume unconditional cooperation 
with weapons inspections was broadcast on national TV. In order to 
give a further chance to achieve justice by lifting sanctions commencing 
with the implementation of paragraph 22 of resolution 687, the leadership 
of Iraq decided to resume working with the special commission and 
the iaea and to allow them to perform their normal duties in accordance 
with the relevant resolutions of the security council. It was what 
United Nations officials in Baghdad wanted to hear. This indicates 
clearly the repeated desire of fulfilling the commitments under the 
resolutions or the obligations under the resolutions, and I would 
like to put it that way. Baghdad day festivities, rehearsals that 
are meant to remind all iraqis of their courageous past. The present 
though is far more pressing. U.S. officials now assessing whether 
Baghdad's latest statements were sufficient to avoid military action. 
The Iraqi U-turn came on the same day anti-U.S. anger poured onto 
the capital's streets. In line with their government's strategy they 
denounced both the United States and Israel and set fire to their 
flags. Iraq says there are no conditions attached to the announcement 
the weapons inspectors can resume their normal duties. Iraq's deputy 
prime minister insisting that any other interpretation is false. Brent 
Sadler, CNN, Baghdad. Members of President Clinton's national security 
team have been meeting today at the White House situation room to 
consider the offer. A former U.N. weapons inspector is urging for 
more comprehensive military strikes to eliminate Iraq's threat. An 
air campaign will never eliminate a weapons of mass destruction program, 
because the program is not just concrete buildings. And they're not 
always easy to find. It's also the technology in the minds of the 
individual. The only thing that would eliminate the weapons of mass 
destruction in Iraq is the elimination of Saddam Hussein's regime. 
In spite of the moves toward a peaceful resolution, a powerful force 
of U.S. troops, ships and warplanes continues to head to the Persian 
gulf. They are described as ready to mount sustained attacks to cripple 
Iraq's potential for developing nuclear, biological and chemical weapons. 
In their weekly radio address, republicans said the current standoff 
with iraq justifies an increase in military spending. They also cite 
various missions faced by the U.S. military as more reasons for appropriating 
additional money to the defense program. Idaho's new senator-elect, 
Mike Crapo, says the decline in defense spending is endangering our 
military personnel. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>