<DOC>
<DOCNO> NBC19981114.1830.0070 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> CAPTION </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Good evening. It came close, very close, and it may still happen. 
NBC news has learned that the United States was just 30 minutes away 
from executing an order to launch a cruise missile attack on Iraq. 
That's when Iraq issued a letter to the United Nations and the western 
world saying it would let the weapons inspectors in after all. But 
there are problems with the letter, there are conditions to the deal. 
That's being denied as we go on the air light tonight by Iraq. Enough 
of a problem for the president to cancel his long-planned trip to 
asia tonight. And tonight the White House is warning Iraq it's not 
over. It may yet happen. The U.S. remains poised to take military 
action. What seemed defused this morning is tonight a fuse that could 
be lit again, at any time. We begin with the situation on the ground 
in Baghdad and NBC's Ron Allen. Tonight Iraq appears to be backing 
down and putting its faith in u.N. secretary general Kofi Annan. The 
Iraqis now saying the U.N.'s weapons inspectors can resume their work, 
but Saddam still wants relief from the harsh economic sanctions the 
reason he brought his people to the brink of war. Dangerously close 
to pushing his demands too far, Saddam Hussein meeting this morning 
with his inner circle, putting his stamp of approval on a Letter from 
his deputy prime minister Tariq Aziz to the U.N. secretary general 
Kofi Annan saying, UNSCOM, the weapons inspectors. In Baghdad, the 
U.N.'s envoy calling Iraq's letter a positive step. This is indicative 
of Iraq's desire to continue cooperation with the United Nations. 
But Iraq attached a memo, saying it wants a quick comprehensive review, 
even suggesting a seven-day limit, of what it's done so far to comply 
with U.N. demands to destroy its weapons. Iraq is also insisting on 
some immediate sanctions relief such as a lifting of the oil embargo. 
It also wants UNSCOM's staffing reviewed, the number of Americans 
reduced. While diplomats sort out the details, Iraq's government claims 
that memo is just a wish list, not demands, and there's nothing stopping 
the inspectors from getting back to work. In Baghdad, a day of high 
emotion. In the morning, angry demonstrations directed at the United 
States. But after Iraq's government backed down, festive and patriotic 
programs on state-controlled TV, the apparent message to the people, 
Saddam has won again. The government's plan shows goodwill. He says, 
it's good for the people. "We weren't afraid," he says, "we're used 
to threats from America, they hate us." On the streets of Baghdad, 
a normal Saturday night, no sign anyone aware of how close the U.S. 
came to launching an attack. All of this is certainly not over, with 
the U.S. calling Iraq's letter to the U.N. unacceptable. Perhaps tonight, 
possibly another development for Iraq. But many of the humanitarian 
workers, who pulled out for security reasons, now plan to return here 
tomorrow. No word yet on whether the inspectors will follow. Brian, 
back to you. Ron Allen in Baghdad. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>