<DOC>
<DOCNO> NBC19981114.1830.0270 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> CAPTION </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
For its part, the White House remains in crisis mode tonight. Today, 
they've been to the brink of launching an attack. And because that 
could still happen, the president is staying home, scrubbing a planned 
trip to Malaysia for now. NBC's John Palmer joins us from there tonight. 
Good evening, Brian. The White House has totally rejected the conditions 
that Saddam Hussein attached to his promise to resume cooperating 
with U.N. inspectors, calling them unacceptable. And said unless those 
terms are dropped, Iraq faces military action. National security adviser 
Sandy Berger said the United States wants a clear statement from Iraq 
with no conditions that it will cooperate with U.N. inspectors. Given 
his long history of avoiding his obligations, we have every reason 
to be skeptical, because we have seen this before. Broken and unfulfilled 
promises, so-called positive answers that turn negative over time. 
We have been more than patient. The president met at the White House 
with his national security advisers, including defense secretary Cohen 
and the chairman of the joint chiefs of staff Hugh Shelton to discuss 
the Iraqi response with secretary of state Albright participating 
by telephone from Malaysia. The first indication of how inadequate 
the White House viewed Saddam's response came with the announcement 
that the president is delaying a trip to the far east that was to 
have begun tonight. Given the situation in Iraq, the president has 
decided to remain in washington to evaluate appropriate steps. British 
prime minister Blair joined the United States in its tough stand against 
Iraq. Any conditions of this nature are unacceptable. Compliance with 
the agreement must be absolute. There can be no negotiations, no further 
deals." Most foreign policy experts say the president has no choice 
to but take a tough stand. This is the time to say to Saddam we are 
no longer letting you set conditions. We won the war. You lost the 
war. The White House tonight, Brian, is setting no new timetable, 
but one senior White House official said a short time ago, we need 
total Ka pit lags, otherwise, it's going to be ugly. He said, if necessary, 
we are prepared to act alone. Brian NBC's John Palmer at the White 
House, thank you. All of the political moves and military moves took 
place against the backdrop of a United Nations security council meeting 
late today. NBC's Pat Dawson is on duty at U.N. headquarters tonight. 
Good evening, Pat. Good evening. All eyes now on the security council 
where diplomats began meeting a short time ago. Based on what we heard 
in the last hour or so, there's one thing certain, that the diplomatic 
ground here has shifted dramatically in the last 24 hours. Just hours 
after his last-minute initiative headed off a military attack, kofi 
Annan emerged with a Ringing endorsement of the Iraqi answer. Last 
night we went to bed not knowing what to expect. This seems like a 
positive development. As diplomats arrived, Annan seemed intent on 
pressing the council to accept the Iraqi response as fuel compliance. 
The final decision on the Iraqi letter and the fate of U.N. weapons 
inspections will rest with the security council, a body in which the 
United States has veto power. Richard Butler is chief of the U.N. 
weapons inspection team. It's for the security council to decide what 
it means and which way we go next. But the U.S. now has a much more 
delicate diplomatic task keeping some consensus behind the hard line 
on Iraq. The consensus that Iraq was defying the U.N. appeared to 
be lost. That consensus was centered on agreement of security council 
members and the secretary-general, that the Iraqis had to agree unconditionally 
to resume U.S. inspections. It now appears there are different interpretations 
here of what unconditional means. Brian. NBC correspondent Pat Dawson. 
From the United Nations tonight. Thanks. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>