<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981114.0044 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
There are enough familiar schools at the top of the preseason men's 
polls (Duke, Connecticut) to comfort college basketball aficionados. 
There are some names on the all-America lists (Elton Brand, Richard 
Hamilton) that promise electrifying drama as the season arcs toward 
one more show-stopping national tournament. So will college basketball 
be good? And, more important, is college basketball well? Surprisingly, 
no one rushes in with a resounding ``yes'' to either question. The 
men's game is changing at warp speed, and some of its most respected 
caretakers aren't sure they are equipped to keep up. The parade of 
players who left college early to join the National Basketball Association 
has become a stampede, as even high school players insist on drop-stepping 
straight to the pros. North Carolina's Antawn Jamison and Vince Carter 
were among eight players who left college early and were drafted in 
the National Basketball Association's top 10 picks last spring; one 
of them, Larry Hughes, left St. Louis after his freshman year. Point-shaving 
scandals surfaced at Arizona State and Northwestern, reminders of 
how easily these threats can take hold in a supercharged atmosphere. 
Constant recruiting violations; criminal behavior off the court; summer 
leagues for high school players in which many teams pay for play _ 
all threaten to knock college basketball off its wobbly pedestal. 
``Our game is in great shape and it is in poor shape,'' said Duke 
Coach Mike Krzyzewski, president of the National Association of Basketball 
Coaches. ``On the court, it is played passionately at a high level. 
But it's getting knocked back and back because the rules governing 
college basketball haven't kept up with this fast-break of changes. 
The house is still beautiful, but we may have termites.'' Those changes 
_ especially the early flight of players to the NBA _ have already 
affected everything from coaching and recruiting philosophies to the 
caliber of play. No one suggests they are killing the game, but they 
are dramatically reshaping how coaches assemble and run their teams 
_ and how good those teams are. Krzyzewski has been to the Final Four 
seven times and won two national championships. His current Blue Devil 
team is rated No. 1 in most preseason polls, which he believes is 
an honest assessment of a talented bunch. But Krzyzewski doesn't hesitate 
to say that the Johnny Dawkins-led 1986 national runner-up was much 
better, and that the Christian Laettner-Grant Hill back-to-back national 
champions of 1991 and '92 were better still. ``There has been a narrowing 
of the gap between the top 10 teams to, what, the top 100 or so because 
of how fluid things are,'' he said. ``But there's no doubt the dominant 
teams, in the days when kids stayed all four years, played better 
basketball than today. The downside was that there was a greater gap 
between these dominant teams and everybody else.'' Last spring's National 
Collegiate Athletic Association tournament, as well as this year's 
preseason favorites, illustrate the shifting dynamic. A senior-laden 
team from tiny Valparaiso drove into the round of 16. Rhode Island, 
with an unheralded, veteran backcourt of Tyson Wheeler and Cuttino 
Mobley, made it to the round of eight. Stanford and Utah, neither 
with a super talent, made the Final Four and the Utes lost in the 
final to Kentucky. ``You look at the guys who have left North Carolina 
and Kentucky, and you wonder if you can get kids a level below that 
and keep them four years,'' said Stanford Coach Mike Montgomery. ``Look 
at the Rhode Island guards. I don't know where they were drafted, 
but they weren't lottery picks and they took them to the brink of 
the Final Four.'' Mobley and Wheeler were both drafted in the second 
round. Montgomery's Stanford team returns 11 lettermen, five seniors, 
all of its starters; it is projected to contend for the title. In 
fact, the top spots in the preseason polls are crowded with teams 
from which most people could not name a star. Washington, Xavier, 
Tennessee and Temple are hardly known for producing lottery picks 
among their younger players. ``When you come in together and then 
stay, you experience the same difficulties and joys and it makes you 
closer,'' said Mark Seaton, the Stanford senior forward, summing up 
the advantage. The coaches concede that it makes for a far better 
team, too, and most have accepted that having a super talent who is 
around for his senior year is rare. Utah's point guard, Andre Miller, 
is one, but his choice made sense because he did not begin to create 
lottery buzz until late in Utah's superb season. Connecticut Coach 
Jim Calhoun has lost Ray Allen and Donyell Marshall early to the draft, 
and last spring he almost lost Richard Hamilton, the Big East player 
of the year. Hamilton, now a junior, decided to return. He, along 
with the sophomore Khalid El-Amin, gives the Huskies perhaps their 
best chance ever to crack the Final Four. There is a sense of urgency 
_ both will probably be gone after this season. Like most coaches, 
Calhoun says he does not recruit the Hamiltons and El-Amins believing 
they will leave early. But somewhere along the way, the hard truth 
sets in. ``I've never done a study of theater, but I don't know what 
happens if a brilliant young actor in his junior year decides to leave,'' 
said Calhoun, who believes the college game must just soldier on. 
``I don't know if it's particularly bad for the symphony at the university 
when someone gifted goes on. People don't necessarily have to see 
superstars. They have to see super competition.'' The competition 
on the court remains of high quality, but Krzyzewski argues that those 
who govern the game need to be more active in identifying potential 
problems and solving them. One of the boldest proposals comes from 
the Big Ten commissioner, Jim Delany, who suggested making freshmen 
and junior college transfers ineligible, eliminating summer recruiting 
and encouraging the NBA to set up a minor league for athletes not 
interested in college. To illustrate just how quick things come up, 
Krzyzewski likes to tell of how in the summer of 1990, before Grant 
Hill's freshman year at Duke, no one ever asked Hill if he intended 
to play professional basketball. Now, for the first time in his 18 
years at Duke, Krzyzewski has a player _ Brand _ who is not very likely 
to stay all four years and graduate with his class. Brand has been 
asked about the NBA since he was a sophomore in high school. What 
was once a sure-fire, three-prong recruiting pitch, Krzyzewski says, 
has become partly obsolete. ``I could tell them: One, you'll become 
a better player here. Two, you'll earn a degree _ a real one, not 
one to keep you eligible. Three, in four years you'll make more money 
as a player _ the bottom line will improve. ``Now only the first two 
are true.'' So come tournament time, older teams with slightly lesser 
talent may keep going deeper than expected. The superstars can't afford 
to stay around. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>