<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981114.0145 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Faced with a possible U.S. military attack, President Saddam Hussein 
of Iraq appeared to back down Saturday, saying in a letter to U.N. 
Secretary-General Kofi Annan that his government would resume full 
cooperation with international arms inspectors. But a two-page annex 
to the letter made clear that Saddam's interpretation of what he would 
get in return left ample room for continued conflict. The annex _ 
which Annan's special envoy in Baghdad, Prakash Shah, said the Iraqis 
did not want made public _ restates demands by Iraq that have already 
been rejected by the United States, Britain and other Security Council 
members. Publicly, Iraq wrapped its announcement Saturday in a cloak 
of statesmanship. Diplomats here and officials in Washington said 
that Saddam, isolated diplomatically by even his friends, apparently 
decided to buy time and head off a U.S. attack now. ``We offer this 
chance not out of fear of the aggressive American campaign and the 
threat to commit a new aggression against Iraq,'' the letter to Annan 
said, ``but as an expression of our feeling of responsibility and 
in response to your appeal and those of our friends.'' The letter 
was signed by Deputy Prime Minister Tariq Aziz. Initial reaction from 
Clinton administration officials as well as from U.N. weapons inspectors 
was skeptical. In Washington, officials said that the United States 
would press ahead with preparations for an attack on Iraq. At the 
United Nations, there was no urgency attached to returning the arms 
inspectors, who were withdrawn from Iraq last week. ``There is a very 
high degree of skepticism about Iraqi intentions,'' said David Leavy, 
a spokesman for the National Security Council. ``The president's national 
security team is reviewing the latest developments in a very prudent 
and deliberate way and will make a recommendation on what the appropriate 
next steps are.'' U.N. officials argued that the Iraqis were not hedging 
their decision to resume cooperation, and that the annex to their 
letter was no more than a wish list. ``Our understanding is that the 
annex to the letter does not constitute conditions,'' said Fred Eckhard, 
Annan's spokesman. The annex is a copy of Iraq's policy points as 
they were presented to Russia, China and France on Friday. The policy 
summary, mentioned in the public letter but not generally distributed, 
was made available to the press by U.N. officials. It asks that Baghdad 
be given direct assurances by the secretary-general or ``a delegation 
from the council'' that its demands be considered. It also asks that 
the comprehensive review of relations with the United Nations ``be 
carried out within a very short time, (seven days for example)'' after 
arms inspectors resume their work. The United States has already suggested 
that four to six weeks would be more realistic, to allow time to see 
if inspections were really unfettered. Iraq also wants to shift the 
burden of evidence to the U.N. Special Commission, forcing it to prove 
what Iraq is supposed to be hiding rather than allowing the commission 
to continue compelling Baghdad to produce answers and missing documents. 
The Iraqis want a timetable _ ``a short period, they say'' _ for them 
to take whatever steps are necessary to close files on weapons programs. 
Inspectors fear that this will result in the kind of sham activities 
like the pro-forma inspection of presidential properties earlier this 
year. The Iraqis would then declare they had met all their obligations 
and the oil embargo would be lifted. The annex again raises questions 
about the future of Richard Butler, the executive chairman of the 
U.N. Special Commission, known as UNSCOM, whom Iraq wants dismissed, 
and of the commission itself, which Iraq wants to make part of the 
U.N. system. It is now a free-standing creation of the Security Council. 
The Iraqis also reiterated their preference for a comprehensive review 
to be conducted under Annan's direction. The Security Council has 
already said that it will run that review. In their public letter 
to the secretary-general, the Iraqis said that the decision to resume 
cooperation was made at meetings on Saturday of the president's cabinet 
and party, chaired by Saddam. The meetings followed the receipt of 
a letter Friday night from Annan reiterating the secretary-general's 
warning, in effect, that Iraq could never hope to have sanctions lifted 
unless it played by the rules, and appeals from Russia, China, and 
France, among others, the Iraqis said. Arguing against recent evidence 
that ``the goal sought by Iraq was not to sever the relationship with 
UNSCOM and the IAEA,'' the two arms agencies monitoring Iraq. ``The 
leadership of Iraq decided to resume working with the Special Commission 
and the IAEA and to allow them to perform their normal duties,'' the 
Iraqi letter said. The first hint that Iraq would back down came early 
Saturday from an unnamed Iraqi official in Baghdad. A few hours later, 
Shah said publicly that the Iraqis had agreed ``without conditions'' 
to resume cooperation, which was broken off by Saddam on Oct. 31. 
As Shah spoke, the secretary-general was meeting with Iraq's representative 
at the United Nations, Nizar Hamdoon, at Annan's official residence 
in New York. There, Annan took a call from Aziz, and they discussed 
the letter. Once again, a last-ditch diplomatic gesture by the secretary-general, 
backed up by the considerable military might of the United States 
and Britain, has at least temporarily averted attack. Aides to Annan 
say that they have learned by now that when Saddam puts himself out 
on a limb, he needs a fig leaf to cover a reversal _ or, as some describe 
it, ``a ladder to climb down on.'' The secretary-general provided 
that with his trip to Baghdad in February, when the United States 
last lined up a force in the Persian Gulf to attack Iraq. At a news 
conference in the Iraqi capital then, Annan made the point, however, 
that the military force assembled in the region had made his mission 
possible, a message the Iraqis did not really want to hear. This time, 
Annan made his last-minute appeal to Saddam in a letter on Friday 
night, after a meeting with the Security Council that lasted nearly 
five hours. The secretary-general, who had abruptly cut off a trip 
in North Africa Wednesday to confront the crisis, said after the marathon 
session that ``events on the ground seem to be running away from us.'' 
By that time, the Iraqi president had been warned by virtually all 
his erstwhile friends _ Russia, France, China and the Arab nations 
_ that he would take the blame for bringing down U.S. missiles on 
his nation and people. Even governments that oppose the use of force 
to settle this crisis had made it clear that the Iraqis were isolated 
in their defiance this time and could not count on help from them. 
The present crisis with Iraq, which came on the heels of a year of 
confrontations, has its roots in a decision by Saddam on Aug. 5 to 
curtail cooperation with inspectors from UNSCOM, which monitors biological, 
chemical and prohibited missile systems. They and their counterparts 
from the International Atomic Energy Agency, which watched nuclear 
developments, were forbidden to make new, on-site searches and were 
restricted to using existing monitoring systems _ cameras and air, 
soil and water samplers _ and making routine inspection visits to 
previously agreed sites. That move set off alarms here for the short 
as well as long term, because the Security Council had intended the 
inspection system to keep functioning, with unannounced searches, 
even after sanctions were lifted. In early September, the council 
responded with a resolution that ended all further sanctions reviews, 
and therefore hopes of having the embargo lifted, until weapons inspections 
resumed. In the meantime, the Security Council and the secretary-general 
were working on plans for a comprehensive review of Iraq's relations 
with the United Nations, going back to the 1990 invasion of Kuwait, 
when sanctions were imposed. Iraq has also made demands about how 
the review should be conducted. On Oct. 30, the council laid out its 
plans for conducting a review. It did not promise more than a new 
look at sanctions after Iraq had met all its disarmament requirements. 
The next day, Saddam shocked everyone involved by shutting down the 
inspection system entirely. In the face of possible U.S. bombing, 
all the inspectors have now been withdrawn from Iraq. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>