<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981114.0050 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
There were cheers in the White House when this year's election returns 
came in. Across Capitol Hill and across the nation, Democrats seized 
on the results _ five new seats in Congress, the toppling of some 
of the nation's most conservative senators, a few gains across the 
South _ as if they were the first signs of spring. The reaction was, 
in retrospect, peculiar, for two reasons: The first is that the Democratic 
Party has arguably not undergone the kind of rejuvenation that some 
of its leaders discerned in the results of Nov. 3. And the second 
is, even if it has, there are good reasons why its leaders might not 
want to get too excited about it. If there is one recurring lesson 
in U.S. politics over the past decade, it is that few things are more 
hazardous than success. Politicians are forever ignoring history, 
claiming mandates that voters never intended and then paying a price 
for their miscalculation. It took President Clinton almost two years 
to recover from his failed effort to persuade Congress to adopt a 
national health care plan, inspired by the exuberant reaction the 
idea got when he broached it in New Hampshire in 1992. The seeds of 
House Speaker Newt Gingrich's demise were planted when he and the 
Republicans won control of Congress in 1994 and confidently proceeded 
to overplay their hand. Compared with Clinton in 1992 and Gingrich 
in 1994, the Democrats have clutched at a slender reed this time: 
Clinton and Gingrich defeated real opponents, while the Democrats 
merely beat expectations, doing better than the Republicans said they 
would. Still, Democrats across the country were talking last week 
about a new, post-Gingrich political paradigm: the decline of the 
right and the ascendancy of a new Democratic center. ``We, the Democrats, 
are changed for the next decade, for the better _ It took us 10 years 
to learn the lesson,'' said Rep. Charles Schumer, D-N.Y., who upset 
Sen. Alfonse D'Amato in one of the contests that most cheered the 
party. Al From, president of the Democratic Leadership Council, a 
centrist group closely identified with Clinton, described the vote 
as nothing short of a political coming of age. ``The Clinton-New Democrat 
redefining of the center has finally taken hold,'' he proclaimed. 
It will probably take another election cycle or two to judge whether 
From and Schumer are correct about the ideological remaking of their 
party. Other Democratic leaders, however, have a different interpretation 
of the election. And the contrasting views augur a resurgence of the 
ideological dissension that Clinton managed to quiet in 1992 to become 
president. In 1992, Clinton took advantage of the fact that the Democrats 
had been out of the White House since 1980 and were thus starved for 
victory. He could largely ignore liberal Democratic constituencies 
and move to the center, where, as he liked to say back then, elections 
are won. Gingrich's success in 1994 helped silence the Democrats' 
liberal wing again: In that atmosphere of Republican triumph, it was 
hard to persuasively argue that the path back to power was on the 
left. But last week it was possible to argue just that. In an interview, 
the Rev. Jesse Jackson declared, with considerable justification, 
that the Democratic Party had succeeded because its traditional constituents 
_ blacks, women, union members _ had come back to the polls. The election 
was proof, Jackson said, in a swipe at Clinton and his supporters, 
that the party had made a mistake with what he described as the ``push 
away from labor, push away from blacks'' approach. ``In 1998, we put 
all our players back on the field again _ labor, women, blacks, Hispanics, 
businesses that have benefited from growth _ and with our full team 
we won,'' said Jackson. He added that he was thinking about running 
for president again. And he said he would push the party to embrace 
universal health care and to funnel money from criminal justice into 
school construction. ``I intend between now and the year 2000 to force 
the party leadership to come to grips with those issues,'' Jackson 
said. Democrats who have been trying to moderate their party's course 
and who took the election as a testament to their success said they 
were unconcerned by such remarks. Still, it was clear from their comments 
last week that they would like to avoid a reprise of the Democratic 
infighting that has buoyed Republicans in the past. ``Our constituencies 
are all too familiar with the liabilities of being out of office,'' 
said William Carrick, a Democratic consultant based in Los Angeles. 
``They would much prefer to be somewhat disappointed by office holders 
occasionally than be in love with a bunch of people who weren't in 
office.'' From, who has enjoyed less than warm relations with Jackson 
over the years, said: ``I just don't see a constituency for massive 
spending. It doesn't mean people aren't going to be out there calling 
for it.'' The display of Democratic self-confidence _ some Democrats 
are even predicting the party will take back the House in 2000 _ would 
be risky even if the party had enjoyed an extraordinarily successful 
election night. But it did not. The Republicans continue to control 
both houses of Congress. They hold most governorships. And for the 
Democrats the outlook for the 2000 Presidential election isn't all 
that great. The Democrats' main contender, Vice President Al Gore, 
is, like Clinton, under investigation for campaign finance abuses, 
an inquiry that shows no sign of going away anytime soon. If nothing 
else, the scrutiny means that Gore is unlikely to reprise some of 
the more innovative, and effective, methods the Clinton White House 
came up with to raise and spend money in the 1996 presidential campaign. 
And both Gore and his main rival, House Minority Leader Dick Gephardt, 
are familiar figures in U.S. politics by now _ perhaps too familiar 
to voters ready for a change. In any case, Democrats are taking heart 
from exceedingly modest gains. They managed not to slip below 40 seats 
in the Senate and give the Republicans a filibuster-proof majority. 
While they won a gubernatorial election in California, they lost in 
Texas, Florida, Illinois, Michigan and New York. And Democratic gains 
this time came largely because of Republican missteps. It was the 
Republicans, after all, who allowed expectations to rise so high that 
even a modest Democratic showing was portrayed as a triumph. ``I didn't 
notice this election as having been notable _ except notable for how 
much the Republicans overestimated,'' said Sen. Daniel Patrick Moynihan, 
D-N.Y. And it was the Republicans who decided, at the last minute, 
to shift the focus to Clinton's morals. That was, even Republicans 
now say, a political miscalculation of the highest order. ``The joke 
here is that Republicans tried to turn it into a referendum on the 
president, and the president won,'' said Republican consultant Stuart 
Stevens. But even as Stevens was speaking, Republicans were pushing 
ahead with impeachment proceedings in Washington. ``The Republicans 
seem to be digging themselves in ever deeper,'' said historian Arthur 
M. Schlesinger Jr. ``I would think the one thing they learned from 
the election is it is a great mistake to extend the impeachment process. 
But they seem to have the bit between their teeth on that.'' If that 
is the case, then it might not matter how much skirmishing the Democrats 
do in their moment of almost-victory. The Republicans might help them 
out again. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>