<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981114.0087 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
First Thailand, then Malaysia, Indonesia and South Korea collapsed. 
Then Hong Kong and Singapore fell ill. Japan, the onetime powerhouse, 
sank back into recession. Not to mention neighbor Russia's fall into 
the gutter. Through it all China has continued to slog along, its 
economy bowed but not entirely broken. If its growth so far this year, 
officially said to be something more than 7 percent, is sluggish by 
recent Chinese standards, it looks spectacular compared to the rest 
of Asia's economies. And despite months of intense global speculation, 
China's currency has not been devalued. Monday, President Jiang Zemin 
will go with some pride to Malaysia for a summit meeting of Asian 
and Pacific leaders. Yet China has definitely entered a politically 
dangerous era of slower growth and rising unemployment. The signs 
of trouble are everywhere: it is hard to find a family in which at 
least someone has not been laid off in the last year or two, and in 
cities like Shanghai and Beijing, new commercial buildings stand half-empty. 
Around the country, protests by laid-off workers or retirees demanding 
overdue welfare or pension payments are almost routine. Still, there 
is no sense of panic, and for every empty building, another restaurant 
or shopping center seems to open. China's leaders, anxious to head 
off a severe slump and social unrest, are using every Keynesian tool 
at their disposal to stimulate domestic investment and demand. At 
the same time, they have delayed the badly needed overhaul of bloated 
state industries and overstretched banks. Critics say China is creating 
even bigger, more costly problems later on for its banks and industries. 
But officials say they had no choice. ``Maintaining growth and fighting 
unemployment had to get the top priority,'' said Li Shantong, a senior 
economist at the Development Research Center of the State Council, 
or Cabinet. ``Unless these two goals are met, you can't address the 
other problems like banking and state enterprise reform.'' The program 
of monetary and fiscal stimulus measures has already pushed tens of 
billions of extra dollars into state enterprises, and data from the 
first nine months of this year show that investments in capital projects, 
technology and real estate have jumped 20 percent over last year and 
are accelerating. A central question is just how soundly the extra 
funds are being spent. How much is going to build needed roads and 
irrigation canals and innovative factories, as the government says 
it intends? How much to build unnecessary office space and to help 
doomed companies produce unsalable stockpiles, as critics charge? 
Because of some deft policy moves, longstanding controls on currency 
trading and the sheer size of its economy, China does not appear to 
face an immediate risk of repeating its neighbors' debacles. Rather, 
the main concern involves the longer-term costs of its all-out program 
to wrench up the 1998 growth rate to an arbitrarily set target of 
8 percent. ``The danger is not a short-term economic collapse,'' said 
Barry Naughton, an economist at the University of California at San 
Diego, ``but excess slackening of pressure on state-owned firms, leading 
to serious problems a few years down the road.'' Still, Naughton praises 
the stimulus program as sensible. When Zhu Rongji became prime minister 
early this year, he boldly vowed to speed reforms that are essential 
to future prosperity. Outmoded, money-draining state enterprises would 
be drastically pruned and the survivors made to stand on their own. 
The giant state banks, courting insolvency because they had long funneled 
money to dubious state industries, would only lend on sound commercial 
terms. These changes, and the inevitable layoffs of tens of millions 
of long-loyal and cosseted workers, would be difficult under the best 
of conditions. Now they have been put on ice as the government pumps 
a new flood of money through the banks into public companies and projects. 
``Political pressures have forced the Chinese leaders to make some 
decisions that will come back to haunt them,'' said Nicholas Lardy, 
an economist at the Brookings Institution in Washington, one of China's 
sharpest critics on this subject. Lardy credits the Chinese with some 
skillful moves of late, like curbing foreign debt by imposing new 
limits on foreign borrowing by companies and banks. But he warned, 
``The dangers of a banking system failure are going up.'' Other experts 
say the banking problem should be manageable. But at best, after the 
current frenzy of government-induced spending, shaking out the state-owned 
companies and ridding banks of their albatross of bad loans will be 
all the harder, the ultimate price all the higher. The Asian crisis 
hit at a time when China was already facing an economic slowdown. 
Earlier in the decade the country had spectacular double-digit growth, 
but also spectacular inflation. Tight monetary and fiscal policies 
tamed the inflation dragon without a recession _ China's renowned 
``soft landing'' _ but by 1997, with an 8.8 percent economic growth 
rate, the country entered a time of deflation and excess production 
capacity. Some said the tight policies had overshot the mark. On top 
of this, global economic strains and the collapse of regional trading 
partners took their toll. This year the growth in exports has slowed 
sharply, and the inflow of foreign investment has fallen. These twin 
reversals alone would cut two to three percentage points from economic 
growth, said Yukon Huang, Beijing representative of the World Bank. 
The government's stimulus package is intended to recapture as much 
of that potential growth as possible, Huang said. ``The Chinese are 
walking a fine line,'' he added. ``They need to keep the economy growing 
so they can pursue the reforms. ``One lesson of the Asian crisis is 
that in a seriously contracting economy it's difficult for basically 
sound enterprises, as well as bad ones, to repay their loans.'' But 
the stimulus measures have definitely come at a cost. In a series 
of changes this year and last, China's banks were told they would 
be held responsible for bad loans, and would no longer be forced to 
dole out funds uncritically to state enterprises and local governments 
with pet projects. But over the summer, as part of the emergency program 
to bolster economic activity, banks were directed to expand lending 
to state companies, again exposing the financial system to trouble 
as it propped up moribund industries. This fall the government has 
used more direct fiscal methods, issuing $12 billion worth of bonds 
to support infrastructure projects and requiring the banks to lend 
an equivalent amount for the same purpose. Ms. Li, the State Council 
economist, acknowledged that the lending standards of banks had been 
relaxed, but again said that without economic growth, all else would 
be lost. Official statistics show that both lending and investment 
have jumped, but there is no way to sort out how that money is being 
spent, and how soundly. Much of the extra punch may be seen next year, 
experts say. Critics like Lardy ask why more of the new lending was 
not directed to the emerging private sector _ virtually ignored by 
Chinese banks for years _ which might spend it more productively. 
Government officials say that is impractical on such short notice. 
In that, the officials are supported by Ma Guonan, co-director of 
Asia-Pacific research at Salomon Smith Barney in Hong Kong, who notes 
that a transition to a sound system of private commercial lending 
will take time. ``Most state banks only know how to lend to state 
enterprises,'' Ma said. ``They just don't have the training to know 
how to evaluate risk in lending to private companies.'' This year's 
growth rate has become a matter of some contention. Seeking to exude 
confidence, Zhu, in the best old style of the planned economy, has 
firmly declared and repeated that growth this year would reach 8 percent. 
Some critics say that even the 7 percent-plus figures registered in 
the first nine months do not seem credible, compared with other indicators 
like falling imports and slower growth in power use and freight transportation, 
as well as declining prices. Last week even a senior government economist, 
Lu Benqiang, also of the State Council's Development Research Center, 
told Chinese journalists that local governments might be fabricating 
numbers or investing in useless projects simply to increase the growth 
rate. If output in the final quarter of this year truly rose enough 
to pull the annual average up to 8 percent, that would actually be 
``terrible news,'' said Naughton, because it would imply such a high 
level of wasteful investment. China's neighbors, and the United States, 
are closely watching for signs that the government might relent in 
its political determination not to devalue its currency, the yuan. 
Over the last year, China was said to be suffering a competitive disadvantage 
as other Asian countries devalued, making their exports relatively 
cheaper. In fact, there has been lengthy debate among economists as 
to whether China, with its particular mix of imports and exports, 
would benefit from a weaker yuan. Many experts feel that the case 
for a devaluation will strengthen next year if countries like Thailand 
and Indonesia, still reeling from the current crisis, begin to recover. 
So far, stricken countries in the region have been in such turmoil 
that few companies have been tempted to move in to take advantage 
of the low exchange rates, investing in export industries. But if 
those countries stabilize, with exchange rates still lower than in 
the past, they may begin to reap some of the competitive advantages 
_ at the expense of China's foreign investment and exports. With sluggish 
growth, declining prices and large unused productive capacity, China's 
economy would benefit more generally from a devaluation and the modest 
inflation it would promote, said Andy Xie, chief China economist at 
Morgan Stanley Dean Witter in Hong Kong. Expert opinion is divided 
as to whether there will be growth next year at close to this year's 
level, whatever it really is, or somewhat lower _ a dismal prospect 
for a country that is trying to refashion its economy and that has 
so many underemployed people. Much will depend on trends in the region 
and world, affecting China's trade and foreign investment prospects. 
A prolonged global slump could be China's undoing, since this year's 
stimulus measures cannot continue indefinitely. Since his audacious 
announcement of reform measures last March, Zhu has kept a low profile 
on that topic, saying little in public as many of his hard-won goals 
have been set aside. Still, there is no indication that China's leaders 
have dropped the goals in principle, and no indication that his power 
as economic czar in this perplexing time has diminished. ``There's 
no alternative to Zhu Rongji,'' Xie said, ``and Jiang Zemin knows 
that.'' 
</TEXT>
</DOC>