<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981114.0068 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
What author Tom Wolfe did for radical chic in the 1960s, narcissism 
in the '70s, and greed in the '80s, he may now be doing for runaway 
real-estate development in his new novel on America at century's end. 
Urban sprawl, with all its strip-mall excess and soul-deadening homogeneity, 
is not just a central backdrop, but almost a character in ``A Man 
in Full,'' the author's latest pen poke at contemporary life. ``The 
only way you could tell you were leaving one community and entering 
another was when the franchises started repeating and you spotted 
another 7-Eleven, another Wendy's, another Costco, another Home Depot,'' 
Wolfe writes. He was describing the San Francisco Bay Area, but it 
could have been any metropolitan region in the nation. On Election 
Day, voters from Southern California to New Jersey showed that the 
sprawl issue may have become a political driving force no less than 
a narrative function in the fictional world of Wolfe. Voters across 
the country and across party lines, from desert suburbs in the West 
to leafy cul de sacs in the East, voted to stop the march of new malls, 
homes and business parks at the borders of their communities, and 
to tax themselves to buy open space as a hedge against future development. 
For Vice President Al Gore, who has been ratcheting up the sprawl 
issue as a top green concern, edging aside more contentious and somewhat 
abstract environmental concepts like global warming, the votes are 
seen as the start of a winning national campaign. Who, after all, 
could be against what the Sierra Club now describes as an attempt 
to return to Beaver Cleaver's America, albeit with smaller lot sizes? 
``I've come to the conclusion that what we really are faced with here 
is a systematic change from a pattern of uncontrolled sprawl toward 
a brand new path that makes quality of life the goal of all our urban, 
suburban and farmland policies,'' Gore said in an interview. But Republicans 
such as New Jersey Gov. Christie Whitman have also listened to the 
same complaints around the barbecue. At the very edge of what the 
author Joel Garreau famously labeled ``Edge Cities,'' people say their 
new communities have become too dependent on the automobile, too removed 
from nature, too close to the clutter of boxy retail stores. Paving 
paradise, almost a reflex reaction in Southern California, was halted 
by a huge majority in Ventura County, where voters approved a series 
of urban boundaries around the fast-growing new cities wedged between 
Los Angeles and Santa Barbara, and stripped their elected supervisors 
of the power to approve new subdivisions and put it in the hands of 
voters instead. Developers now will have to get voter approval to 
push the flood of tile-roofed subdivisions any further into land that 
has some of the last big lemon groves in California. About 80 percent 
of the county will be off-limits to developers, unless voters say 
differently, supporters of the measure said. The Los Angeles Times 
heralded the vote as a ``revolution.'' In New Jersey, the most-densely 
populated state in the nation, voters in 43 cities and six counties 
decided to raises their taxes to buy and preserve open space. Statewide, 
by a two-to-one margin, voters also approved spending nearly $1 billion 
over 10 years to buy half of the Garden State's remaining garden space. 
Nationwide, voters approved nearly 200 state and local ballot initiatives 
on curbing sprawl. The idea of Al Gore talking growth management for 
the next two years and beyond may be no more appealing than hearing 
another flat tax speech from Steve Forbes. The vice president has 
been pounding the anti-sprawl bully pulpit for months, proclaiming 
the dawn of ``an American movement to build more liveable communities.'' 
The issue is seen by his supporters as a key to all those Jeep Cherokee 
driving suburbanites with few political passions beyond the afternoon 
traffic jam. The elections earlier this month, based largely on grass-roots 
initiatives, have only bolstered Gore's case, his aides say. But before 
Gore tries to lay a Democratic claim to an issue that cuts beyond 
most political lines, he will have to go through the Republican governor 
of New Jersey. Just five years ago, Whitman was held up by her party 
as a young Margaret Thatcher, with tax cuts as her banner. Now, a 
year into a second term, Whitman has made protecting open space the 
primary issue _ and perhaps her legacy _ for the state. In what may 
be an act of heresy to the tax-cutting wing of her party, the governor 
has been campaigning for tax increases to keep land out of the hands 
of developers. Initially, she proposed an increase in the gas tax, 
but has settled on the kind of selective property tax increases that 
were approved across New Jersey on election day. ``We have got to 
understand that once land is gone, it's gone forever,'' said Whitman 
while pushing the new open space measures. She could have been just 
another doorbeller from the Sierra Club, which, in response to a survey 
of members, has put sprawl at the top of its list of environmental 
concerns. The club says 400,000 acres of open space are lost to development 
every year. The successful anti-sprawl campaigns steered away from 
talk of government control or zoning arcana. They dwelled instead 
on images of lemon groves and tawny hills in Southern California, 
pumpkin patches and horse farms in New Jersey, and wind-whipped dunes 
in Cape Cod _ all just beyond the exurban fringe. ``We're not trying 
to subvert the American dream _ we're trying to get back to it,'' 
said Larry Bohlen, co-chairman of the Sierra Club's national campaign 
to fight sprawl. ``It's that `Leave it to Beaver' town where all the 
kids walk to school.'' Opponents of these measures, led in California 
by home builders and developers, say the new political calculation 
could change in the blink of an eye if the economy turns bad. In bad 
times, people are less likely to vote to restrict growth. But in Oregon, 
which pioneered boundaries around all its major cities in the 1970s, 
voters have upheld the state's far-reaching anti-sprawl laws even 
during the depths of two recessions over the last 20 years. Developers 
say the votes this month were not so much an anti-growth chorus as 
they were a reflection of the frustration people feel over traffic 
and crowded schools. Still, the opponents say they are stunned by 
how quickly suburban growth has become a pejorative. ``We seem to 
be at a point now where the word sprawl has been totally demonized,'' 
said Clayton Traylor, vice president for political issues for the 
National Association of Home Builders, which has 195,000 members. 
Washington politicians may find it difficult to nationalize what is 
basically a local issue. Gore has raised the possibility of using 
the Federal tax code or major transportation bills to discourage growth 
that goes against community planning goals. ``In the past, we adopted 
national policies that spend lots of taxpayer money to subsidize out-of-control 
sprawl,'' Gore said. ``They suck the life out of urban areas, increase 
congestion in the suburbs and raise taxes on farms.'' Gore is vague 
on what, precisely, could be done on a national level. But whatever 
he attempts to do will be met by stiff opposition if it ends up slowing 
development, Traylor said. Building lobbies for highways and some 
conservatives were outraged that the $217 billion transportation bill 
that was just approved by Congress contained a small amount of money 
for bike paths. ``To the extent that the vice president or anyone 
else at the federal level tries to turn off the spigot for new infrastructure, 
we'll be there to fight them,'' Traylor said. In Maryland, however, 
turning off the spigot proved to be a winning political cry, as supporters 
of new developments were hastily dispatched on election day. A Republican 
who favored two huge projects in Anne Arundel County, County Executive 
John Gary, was voted out office, while Republicans who vowed to pull 
the plug on new water and sewage systems in neighboring Calvert County 
took control of the Board of Commissioners. In other states, developers 
have tried to co-opt the anti-sprawl movement. Arizona voters narrowly 
approved a measure, sponsored by the state's banking and building 
industry, that would set aside $20 million a year for 11 years to 
buy open space. But in return, the law would ban development fees 
and urban growth restrictions. The homebuilders were heartened by 
at least one of the sprawl votes that went the other way. In Georgia, 
voters turned down a measure to use a real estate transfer tax to 
preserve historical sites and open space. Georgia is the main setting 
for Wolfe's novel, a place where a huge, troubled development at the 
far edge of suburban Atlanta is at the core of one man's decline. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>