<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981114.0013 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Students, thugs and soldiers fought pitched battles in the streets 
of Jakarta on Friday night, as Parliament adopted decrees intended 
to nudge this suffering nation toward a more democratic future. It 
was the worst violence since President Suharto resigned last May. 
At least eight people were killed and scores were injured as well-ordered 
soldiers and riot police fired volley after volley above and directly 
into throngs of demonstrators and into the grounds of a university. 
For hours on Friday night, as the Parliament voted to hold general 
elections next spring and to begin reforms, the streets were filled 
with shouts and screams, gunfire and the sting of tear gas. Angry 
students and local residents massed again Saturday morning in protest 
of the night's violence. Like the students whose protests helped bring 
down Suharto, the people throwing rocks and gasoline bombs were pressing, 
with the passion of the young, for immediate, if vaguely defined, 
changes. These appear to include a faster pace toward democracy, the 
withdrawal of the military from its dominant role in politics and 
a government investigation of Suharto's wealth. But unlike those earlier 
protesters, their demand that Suharto's successor, President B.J. 
Habibie, step down immediately was less representative of the national 
mood. Apart from the violence of the streets and the country's painfully 
shrinking economy, Indonesia seems in the past six months to have 
settled on a tentative course toward reforms on which both the government 
and its opposition generally agree. But the fury over political change 
and economic upheaval on both sides of the battle Friday night showed 
the depth of anger Suharto left behind him in the country he built 
but also ruined in his 32 years in power. The volleys of gunfire Friday 
night set off rattling echoes on the glass walls of tall office buildings 
that, along with the violence itself, are among Suharto's legacies. 
Throughout the night, small white ambulances with flashing red lights 
drove in and out of the university grounds as the fighting surged 
around them. Many of the casualties had gunshot wounds, but it was 
unclear if these were inflicted by live ammunition or by rubber bullets, 
which can be fatal at close range. ``I am sorry for my country,'' 
said Eky, a student journalist who like many Indonesians uses one 
name. ``This is brutal, too brutal. I don't understand why the military 
is doing this.'' There was no clear explanation for the harsh tactics 
of the security forces. Jakarta was full of rumors of a possible coup 
by the military and opposition politicians who might use the protests 
as pretext. For their part, the students, joined by young men from 
nearby slums, seemed driven by an unslaked anger over the abuses of 
the Suharto years and an impatience with the deliberate pace of Parliament. 
The young thugs had their reasons, too. ``Everybody hates the police,'' 
said Andri, 17, who had just thrown a plastic bottle of water toward 
the police lines. ``I see the police as a cruel person and I hate 
him.'' A Western diplomat watching the demonstrators Friday night 
said: ``They are sick of being poor. They are sick of being at the 
bottom.'' But it is notable, he said, that the students are essentially 
leaderless and that even the newly assertive democratic opposition 
no longer shares their urgency for change. The electoral outline presented 
to Parliament by Habibie suits both those in power today and those 
who hope to gain it in the future. The students, with their vague 
demands for immediate change, have been left to shout and throw stones 
in the streets alone. The pressure of their passions and potential 
violence may have helped push the Parliament toward reforms, but the 
decrees enacted Friday night were modest. A vote is to be held next 
year for an electoral assembly that will name a new president at the 
end of 1999. The military's powerful role in politics is to be phased 
out, but only gradually. And past corruption, including that of Suharto, 
is to be investigated. But still, as in the Suharto years, the work 
of the Parliament was carried out in something of a political vacuum, 
insulated from the turmoil of the streets outside. Clearly under orders 
to keep the demonstrators far away, the military stood in mass formations 
along the roads leading to the Parliament building. When the session 
ended near midnight, scores of delegates were stranded in the area, 
unable to cross the battle lines to go home. Though the demands voiced 
by various student groups vary, Friday night's parliamentary decrees 
failed to satisfy many of them, and the possibility of further violence 
hung over the nation. Whatever the motives of the students and the 
tactics of the military, the latest violence moved far beyond the 
realm of policy or politics and became a visceral struggle between 
enraged demonstrators and enraged soldiers. ``The students are crazy 
now,'' a plainclothes security officer muttered to a reporter. ``Maybe 
because since the afternoon they have nothing to eat. And the police 
are the same. They have gone crazy, too.'' Amid the gunfire, foreign 
diplomats paced the streets with cellular phones to their ears, reporting 
the action to their embassies. They said they were angered and shocked 
by what they were seeing. ``What's the game?'' said one of them. ``What's 
the objective of this military operation? To wound the students? The 
kids are inside the campus now. The shooting should stop.'' At one 
point, six truckloads of riot police officers drove along the white 
iron fence that surrounds Atmajaya Catholic University, standing and 
firing their weapons from the back. The officers jumped from their 
trucks and began running and shooting among the bushes by the side 
of the university. One turned and shot an Indonesian journalist in 
the back. His colleagues carried him to an ambulance. Later, the police, 
in their heavy, padded helmets, formed a tight line only 30 yards 
from the university's fence and began firing point-blank into its 
grounds from behind their tall plastic shields. Some broke ranks to 
hurl back rocks that the students had thrown at them. An officer stood 
behind them with a megaphone, directing their fire. From inside the 
campus grounds came a constant and extraordinary roar of animal rage: 
shouts, yelps, snarls and inarticulate cries, along with the sound 
of smashing glass and a relentless banging of sticks and stones against 
iron railings. In the main foyer, dozens of casualties were laid out 
on the floor and medical workers performed surgery without anesthetic. 
``It hurts, it's hot!'' moaned a young student named Imelda, who had 
a gunshot wound to her inner thigh. ``Jesus Christ, help me, I don't 
want to die!'' Other students shouted and wept in shock and anger 
and fear. They washed their faces with wet rags to clear away the 
tear gas. They ran to the iron fence and shouted at the soldiers: 
``You are killers! You are dogs!'' Outside, on a street lined with 
the banks and office towers that symbolize the prosperity brought 
by Suharto, as many as 10,000 demonstrators surged and taunted the 
military. They leaped up and down in the light of burning gasoline 
bombs, running forward occasionally to hurl stones and then retreat. 
They chanted, ``Killers! Killers!'' Soldiers chased some of them into 
an alley and an officer shouted after them: ``Whoever doesn't live 
here, please go home. Go home! But if you want to take us on, please, 
come ahead.'' Then in the midst of this, at just about the hour the 
parliamentary session ended, a police officer walked into the no-man's 
land outside the university's gate. He stood amid the rubble of stones 
and bits of brick, and offered a truce over a megaphone. A student 
ran from the gate and embraced him. Hundreds more poured out, shouting, 
leaping, uncertain whether to fight or cheer. They, too, embraced 
the startled riot police, some trying to kiss them through their heavy 
visors. ``Thank you! Thank you!'' one young man shouted over and over 
again. Negotiations began over whether the students would be allowed 
to march to the now-empty Parliament building. A light rain began 
to fall. In a widening circle, students and police lowered themselves 
to the ground in the thin yellow light of the street lamps. They sat 
together and after a while they began to sing the national anthem. 
In Washington, the State Department said on Friday it ``deeply regrets 
that peaceful demonstrations focused on the People's Consultative 
Assembly turned violent'' and urged calm. The department said that 
Secretary of State Madeleine Albright still planned to visit Indonesia 
next week after attending a summit meeting of Pacific Rim leaders, 
including President Clinton, in Malaysia. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>