<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981114.0112 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
When the young woman stood before the microphones here on Feb. 11, 
1994, and accused Bill Clinton of having made sexual advances on her, 
not much of the world noticed or cared. Paula Corbin Jones said she 
was the Paula referred to in an article in The American Spectator 
magazine that asserted that state troopers procured women for Clinton 
when he was governor of Arkansas. But she had been no compliant conquest 
as the article had implied, Mrs. Jones said, and she wanted to set 
the record straight. Her accusations, made before a conservative political 
gathering, drew jokes at first. But soon they would form a lawsuit 
against Clinton, and eventually they would lie at the heart of an 
investigation threatening his presidency. Turning points, and especially 
the wrong turns, are easier to see when the choices become part of 
the historical record. What if the Supreme Court had not ruled that 
a sitting president could be sued? What if the attitudes of Paula 
Jones and her husband, Steve, had not been hardened by cruel remarks 
attributed, rightly or not, to the president's camp? Perhaps the suit 
could have been settled quietly. In that case, the name Monica Lewinsky 
might not have become public. But the Jones suit took on a life of 
its own, even an afterlife, considering that it hobbled the president 
long after it was thrown out of court last spring. Before it was settled 
on Friday, with Clinton agreeing to pay Mrs. Jones $850,000 to drop 
her legal claim, a federal appeals court was weighing whether to reinstate 
it. Whatever the pleadings said, the suit became much more than arguments 
over what did or did not happen in a Little Rock hotel room on May 
8, 1991, when Mrs. Jones was a state clerical worker. It became inspiration 
for serious debate about social values and the relationship between 
a president's private behavior and public record _ but it also became 
comic grist for late-night talk shows. Following Mrs. Jones' press 
conference, Clinton denied the charges, saying he did not recall meeting 
her. ``He was never alone in a hotel with her,'' a spokesman said. 
(Later, that wording seemed most telling to people who accused the 
president of relying on nimble semantics as legal defense: Of course 
he and Paula Jones were never the only two people in a big hotel.) 
Clinton hired a lawyer, Robert Bennett, a power in Washington's legal 
and political circles, who called the case ``tabloid trash with a 
legal caption.'' The first week of May 1994 was crucial, said two 
of Mrs. Jones' early lawyers. The lawyers, Gilbert Davis and Joseph 
Cammarata of suburban Virginia, said on Friday that what they had 
wanted that May was a statement by Clinton clearing their client's 
name. A settlement seemed within reach, they said, so they delayed 
their suit. No such statement came from the White House, which, Davis 
and Cammarata said, tried to create the false impression that Mrs. 
Jones had hesitated on filing because she knew she had no case. Davis 
said on Friday he had known Bennett for some time and did not fault 
him for the White House tactics. ``I certainly believe you, Bob,'' 
Davis recalled telling the president's lawyer, ``but I don't much 
trust your client.'' So on May 6, 1994, just in time to meet a three-year 
statute of limitations, Mrs. Jones sued the president of the United 
States (and a state trooper who she said had conspired with Clinton 
to lure her into a liaison) in U.S. District Court in Little Rock. 
She insisted that her motive was not money, although she sought $700,000. 
She attracted more legal and financial support from conservative organizations. 
In October 1994, the American Civil Liberties Union urged the federal 
courts not to postpone the case until the president left office, as 
Clinton's legal team was urging. Judge Susan Webber Wright ruled that 
the trial could be postponed, but that pretrial questioning could 
proceed. The president was able to joke about the case on March 25, 
1995, at the Gridiron Club dinner in Washington. One of the speakers 
was William Bennett, a former official in the Reagan and Bush administrations 
and brother of the president's lawyer. ``He does something I can't,'' 
the president said of William Bennett. ``He can talk to his brother 
anytime he wants to for free.'' The jest told a truth: Clinton's legal 
bills were mounting into the hundreds of thousands of dollars. A defense 
fund was created. In January 1996, a federal appeals court disagreed 
with Wright, ruling that the suit could proceed while the president 
was in office. Clinton's legal team said it would appeal to the Supreme 
Court. When the president asserted that his status as commander in 
chief entitled him to immunity, some veterans derisively recalled 
how he had avoided military service in the Vietnam War, when he studied 
in Britain. With the election nearing, the commander-in-chief facet 
of Clinton's appeal was dropped. About a month after Clinton was re-elected, 
a cruel remark of murky origin began circulating: ``Drag a hundred 
dollars through a trailer park and there's no telling what you'll 
find.'' The remark, which offended Mrs. Jones and hurt prospects of 
settling the case, was attributed to James Carville, the president's 
dagger-tongued political strategist. But on Friday, Carville insisted 
that his remark, made at a Washington political-discussion breakfast, 
was directed not at Mrs. Jones but at Gennifer Flowers, who had said 
she had had an affair with Clinton. Carville said he defied anyone 
to listen to a tape of the breakfast meeting and find any mention 
of Mrs. Jones, but that the quotation has been misreported so often 
that it is accepted as fact. (Now, he said, he bears no ill will toward 
either Mrs. Flowers or Mrs. Jones. ``I hope the poor woman finds some 
peace in her life,'' he said of Mrs. Jones, adding that he still believes 
her suit was groundless and about ``money, money, money.'') 
</TEXT>
</DOC>