<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981114.0245 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
After playing even with the Flyers for the first two periods on Saturday, 
the Devils collapsed in the third, allowing five goals. It was the 
worst defeat of the season for the Devils, a 6-1 thrashing at the 
First Union Center that ended the Flyers' seven-game streak without 
a victory. Eric Lindros and John LeClair had two goals each against 
Martin Brodeur, while Keith Jones and Rod Brind'Amour also scored 
for the Flyers, who took 40 shots against Brodeur, 17 in the third 
period. Vadim Sharifijanov scored the only goal for the Devils against 
Ron Hextall, who faced just 18 shots and tied Bernie Parent for career 
victories with 232. Hextall was simply a spectator in the third period, 
facing only two shots. The loss was only the third in the last 11 
games for the Devils (9-6-0), while the victory ended the Flyers' 
futility against the Devils at six games and improved their record 
to 6-6-4. Coach Robbie Ftorek made one major strategic change: instead 
of using the usual checking line of center Bob Carpenter with wings 
Jay Pandolfo and Brian Rolston against Eric Lindros' line, Ftorek 
used center Bobby Holik and wings Sharifijanov and Randy McKay. The 
change by Ftorek might have been prompted by the fact that Lindros' 
line had a brand new right wing in Keith Jones, who was acquired from 
the Colorado Avalanche on Thursday. He made his debut tonight with 
Lindros and LeClair. The Devils kept the trio at bay in the first 
period, but LeClair opened the scoring just 19 seconds into the second 
period, when he collected a rebound of an Eric Desjardins shot, while 
the Devils were killing a penalty to Ken Daneyko, and beat Brodeur 
for his ninth goal of the season. The Devils had not allowed a power-play 
goal in the last 27 penalty-killing situations. They entered the game 
with the league's No. 3 penalty-killing unit, and LeClair's goal was 
only the seventh power-play goal the Devils had allowed in 60 manpower 
advantages. The Flyers dominated the first half of the second period 
and should have had more than one goal, but the Devils withstood the 
Flyers' flurry. They started to play the home team on equal terms 
and skated off at the end of the second period tied at 1-1. Sharifijanov 
tied it for the Devils at 9:40 of the second period, when he took 
a pass from McKay in the left circle and beat Hextall over the left 
shoulder. Sharfijanov had a marvelous opportunity to open the scoring 
during a 4-on-4 situation late in the first period, but he was denied 
by Hextall. The Devils seemed to lose their composure in the last 
period, allowing three goals before the session was 4:13 old. Jones 
started the onslaught with his first goal for Philadelphia and his 
third of the season, 45 seconds into the period. Lindros scored his 
fifth, at 2:54, and Brind'Amour got his seventh. Lindros added his 
second goal of the period at 10:11, and LeClair finished the scoring 
at 16:18. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>