<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981114.0086 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
In a small movie-and-noodle house on a side street in the Tibetan 
portion of this holy city, a pair of young monks in red robes were 
watching a Hong Kong kung fu movie and slurping bowls of the house 
special when the Dalai Lama's name came up. ``The Dalai Lama is everything,'' 
said one. Like most other Tibetans, this young monk worships the Dalai 
Lama, Tibet's exiled spiritual leader, like a god and a king. Despite 
years of Chinese efforts to discredit Tibet's religious leader and 
years of persecution of Tibetans who support him, Tibetans still express 
such fanatical devotion to the Dalai Lama that it is evident that 
China cannot ignore him. Visiting Washington last week, the Dalai 
Lama said he wanted to negotiate with Beijing for greater self-rule 
in Tibet, but warned that there is such a deep level of distrust between 
his exiled forces and Beijing that real talks may not be possible 
for some time. Chinese officials are so strongly opposed to the Dalai 
Lama precisely because he still has strong influence here, even though 
he fled in 1959. They portray him as the tool of foreign powers who 
want to undermine China's unity. There seems little room for a compromise 
that would satisfy both Chinese and Tibetans during the Dalai Lama's 
lifetime. All of this creates a dilemma for the Chinese when it comes 
to dealing with the issue of succession. When the Dalai Lama _ who 
is 63 and apparently in good health _ dies, a replacement must be 
chosen within Tibet, now controlled by China. Will Chinese leaders 
try to control the selection with their own candidate, whom Tibetans 
may or may not believe in, or will they try to prevent the selection 
of a replacement altogether? Tibetans cling to the ancient belief 
that their religious leader is reincarnated in a young boy somewhere 
on the Tibetan plateau, and he can be found only by a deeply mystical 
and secretive process that by its nature is open to manipulation and 
earthly interference, as it has been throughout centuries of Tibetan 
history. The last time Tibetans chose a Dalai Lama, in the 1930s, 
Tibetan elders traveled to a holy lake and waited to have visions, 
which apparently came in only the most obscure way, reflecting simple 
sounds _ ``ah,'' ``ka'' and ``ma'' _ that they later decided may have 
been a reference to the northern area of Amdo, and perhaps to the 
nearby monastery of Kumbum. Iffy as this may sound, the elders later 
explained their choice of a young boy in Amdo, saying that he had 
recognized a rosary that belonged to the previous Dalai Lama and claiming 
it to be his own. The boy also identified the home monastery of the 
senior elder among them, they said, despite their disguises as ordinary 
tradesmen. When the local warlord in the region heard that elders 
were looking for a reincarnation of an important Tibetan religious 
leader, he demanded fantastic bribes to let the child go. Devout Tibetans 
say the procedure produced a remarkably charismatic and graceful leader 
who now charms audiences around the world with his arguments for nonviolent 
change in his homeland. The Dalai Lama was awarded the Nobel Peace 
Prize in 1989, though a cynic might observe that it came months after 
the Tiananmen crackdown in Beijing, perhaps in part as a way to condemn 
that act, which was unrelated to Tibet. ``The succession issue of 
the Dalai Lama is filled with irony, contradiction, and paradox,'' 
said Cheng Li, a professor of Chinese politics at Hamilton College 
in New York who is studying Tibet. ``It seems that the parties most 
interested _ the Chinese authorities, Tibetan exiles and the Western 
world _ are all hypocritical and inconsistent.'' Chinese leaders had 
a dry run for the succession issue when the Panchen Lama, recognized 
as the second-most important Tibetan religious figure, died unexpectedly 
at the age of 50 in 1989. The results have been disastrous. Worried 
that exiled Tibetans might try to secretly name their own Panchen 
Lama, officials in Beijing authorized a search group to find a reincarnation 
whom they could control. They entrusted the abbot of Tashilumpo Monastery, 
the traditional seat of power for the Panchen Lama's sect of Tibetan 
Buddhism, to oversee the process. A boy was duly found, in quite the 
same mystical fashion that produced the Dalai Lama. But the boy's 
name was quietly passed to the Dalai Lama, who approved the choice 
before Beijing had a chance to announce it. Beijing was so angered 
that it denounced the boy, put his parents under detention, arrested 
the abbot who had been in charge of the process and announced that 
a new boy would be selected. Advised that past disagreements over 
the selection of a religious leader had sometimes been settled by 
drawing ivory lots from a holy golden urn, Beijing leaders chose this 
method. It was quite a spectacle: A senior official of the atheist 
Communist Party overseeing an elaborate religious ceremony in Tibet, 
declaring that only Beijing could be the final arbiter of any choice. 
A new Panchen Lama was proclaimed. But the damage was done. Today, 
most Tibetans seem to believe the first boy, who has disappeared, 
to be the true reincarnation of the Panchen Lama, and Beijing's second 
candidate to be a fake. Next time around, Chinese officials say, they 
may decide that they are better off blocking the choice of any lama 
at all. Ma Chongying, the deputy director of the Minority and Religious 
Affairs Bureau in Tibet, seemed to signal that as the preferred course 
recently when he said, ``When the Dalai Lama dies, he dies. There 
will be no replacement.'' 
</TEXT>
</DOC>