<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981114.0111 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
The first person to serve as a public watchdog over the Los Angeles 
Police Department resigned from the position last week, criticized 
her bosses for undercutting her authority and touched off concerns 
that the city's commitment to overhauling the police was wavering. 
The watchdog, Katherine Mader, who served as the department's inspector 
general for less than three years before resigning Tuesday, said her 
position had been ``bottled up'' by the city's board of police commissioners 
and the board's executive director. She said her lack of independence 
was a ``fraud on the voters'' who created the position by approving 
a ballot measure in 1995. In an interview Ms. Mader said interest 
in aggressive, independent oversight of the department was no longer 
welcome, particularly since the new, politically popular chief, Bernard 
Parks, took office last year. ``The politics have changed,'' Ms. Mader 
said. ``The power has changed. Right now, Los Angeles has a very popular 
police chief with a very low crime rate; there has not been a major 
Rodney King type of incident, so I think there is a lack of focus 
or a lack of interest in wanting to scrutinize the Police Department 
in the way that I thought the inspector general's office was supposed 
to scrutinize it.'' The inspector general position was one of the 
key recommendations of commission created in the aftermath of the 
1991 police beating of King, a black motorist, and the rioting that 
ensued. The commission _ led by Warren Christopher, who became U.S. 
secretary of state in 1993 _ proposed the position as one of several 
changes to better monitor citizen complaints against the police and 
oversee the discipline system by which officers are governed. But 
it has been more than seven years, two police chiefs and one mayor 
since the King incident, and there is concern that the city's institutional 
memory and its zeal for reining in police officers who abuse their 
power are fading. ``The one thing that has always been of concern 
is that the further away you get from the Rodney King beating, the 
less passionate everyone involved in this process would be about reform,'' 
said Paul Hoffman, a former legal director of the American Civil Liberties 
Union of Southern California. Ms. Mader's resignation came just weeks 
after the board's president, Edith Perez, in a letter to Parks, tried 
to significantly reduce Ms. Mader's ability to investigate complaints 
by giving her access to ``adjudicated'' cases only. The constraint 
was withdrawn after Mayor Richard Riordan said he did not want the 
inspector general limited. One of the central conflicts between Ms. 
Mader and the commission was whether she was to report to the commission's 
executive director or directly to the commission itself. The commission's 
executive director, Joe Gunn, has advocated that the inspector general 
should continue to report to him. Though the Christopher commission 
advocated a strong civilian watchdog, the report's wording was unclear 
on who would oversee the position; the language of the ballot initiative 
creating the inspector general made it subordinate to the executive 
director. Although Ms. Mader and the commission had agreed not to 
publicly attack each other, her subsequent criticisms have led to 
an unusually public bare-knuckle exchange. Gunn held a news conference 
outside Police Headquarters on Thursday saying Ms. Mader's work was 
``not up to our standards'' and that, before she quit, board members 
had wanted to dismiss her. Gunn said further that Ms. Mader had never 
been prevented from investigating anything or had her authority reduced, 
and the commission was committed to having a powerful inspector general. 
The issue appears to be headed for a charged public debate over the 
scope and authority of the inspector general position, which will 
be temporarily filled by a former member of the board of police commissioners, 
Deirdre Hill. A City Council hearing is scheduled for next month, 
and another hearing is expected before a commission that is revising 
the City Charter. Ms. Mader has vowed to become an outspoken public 
advocate in those hearings for a more autonomous inspector general. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>