<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981114.0114 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Saying that he is ``deeply troubled'' by the creation of part-human, 
part-cow embryonic stem cells, President Clinton has directed the 
National Bioethics Advisory Commission to consider the implications 
of the research at its meeting Tuesday in Miami and to report back 
to him ``as soon as possible''. In a letter sent Saturday to the chairman 
of the commission, Harold Shapiro of Princeton University, Clinton 
also asked for a review of embryonic stem-cell research in general, 
including the all-human embryonic stem cells whose isolation was reported 
earlier this month. These cells _ the primordial, all-purpose cells 
from which all tissues of the body develop _ were derived from very 
early embryos or blastocysts and from tissues of aborted fetuses. 
While the president signaled concern about the ``mingling of human 
and non-human species,'' he was more positive about the all-human 
embryonic stem cell research, noting that it ``may have real potential 
for treating such devastating illnesses as cancer, heart disease, 
diabetes and Parkinson's disease.'' But he also stressed the ethical 
concerns raised by the research, telling the commission that he wanted 
a ``thorough review, balancing all ethical and medical considerations.'' 
The letter was sent after the president had consulted with the White 
House Domestic Policy Council and the president's science adviser, 
Neal Lane, ``because he wanted the broadest views possible _ the policy 
people, medical ethicists, as well as the scientists,'' an administration 
official said. A political issue that lies in the background of the 
commission's deliberations is the ban on federal financing of fetal 
research. The ban, imposed by Congress, has created the situation 
that university scientists, who mostly depend on federal money, cannot 
work on the human embryonic stem cells whereas the private sector 
may conduct whatever research it pleases. A group of scientists and 
ethicists known as the Human Embryo Research Panel said in 1994 that 
research on human embryonic stem cells should be federally financed, 
provided that the cells were derived from excess pre-implantation 
embryos created for infertility treatments. This was the source of 
some of the human embryonic stem cells isolated earlier this month. 
In response to the panel's report, Clinton said in December 1994, 
``I do not believe that federal funds should be used to support the 
creation of human embryos for research purposes.'' The statement did 
not rule out research on excess embryos created in infertility clinics 
but subsequent action by Congress banned all research in which a human 
embryo is destroyed. Referring to this history, the president said 
in his letter Saturday that the ethical issues of human embryonic 
stem cell research had not diminished since his statement of 1994 
but that the benefits had become less hypothetical. Lane said the 
implications of human embryonic stem-cell research had been under 
review but news of the human-cow hybrid cells, reported last week, 
``clearly raised urgent ethical, medical and legal issues that the 
president wants addressed and that's why he asked for the commission 
to give it immediate attention.'' Human embryonic stem cells can develop 
into any of the body's 210 types of cells, a process that happens 
naturally during fetal development. Biologists at Geron, the company 
that supported the research, hope to grow the cells in the laboratory 
and guide them to develop into heart cells, blood cells and other 
tissues. The cells would then be injected into the patient and integrate 
with tissues under the control of local body signals. In principle, 
the method could address a range of otherwise untreatable degenerative 
diseases, as well as relieving the severe shortage of organs available 
for conventional transplants. Many serious technical problems remain 
to be resolved, including finding ways to guide the stem cells down 
desired paths of development and ways to prevent immune rejection. 
The ethical problems are also important because of the source of the 
embryonic stem cells. In one case the cells came from excess pre-implantation 
embryos created in infertility treatments, and in the other from aborted 
fetal tissue. Both sources were legal, but research using the first 
would have been ineligible for federal money. The human-cow hybrid 
cell also complied with all laws, said Michael West, chief executive 
of Advanced Cell Technology of Worcester, Mass., the company that 
supported the research. In the hybrid cell, the cow cell's nucleus 
is first removed and the cow proteins are expected to be rapidly replaced 
with human proteins as the human nucleus takes over the cell. Although 
the mingling of species raises many questions, scientists at Advanced 
Cell Technology regard the operation as one in which the cow egg is 
used simply to make the human cell's nucleus revert to its embryonic 
state. As the human cells can be provided by the patient himself, 
from blood or skin, there is no immune rejection when developed cells 
grown from his embryonic state cells are injected back into the body. 
Advanced Cell Technology performed its cow-human hybrid experiment 
only once, three years ago, and took the study only to a very preliminary 
stage. Other scientists say more evidence is needed to verify whether 
embryonic stem-like cells were created. West said he was announcing 
the research now to test its public acceptability before making further 
investments in the technique. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>