<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981114.0171 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Visitors to the ski regions of Vermont this winter will find more 
accommodations and _ for those considering the purchase of a newly 
built vacation home _ higher prices than ever before. Here in Stowe, 
a 235-year-old village with a red-brick town hall, whitewashed churches 
and the majestic Mount Mansfield for skiing, several of the 55 inns 
and hotels are adding a total of about 60 new rooms to their stock 
of 2,500, said Leland Darrow, the town's zoning administrator. While 
new homes are being developed at a slower pace than in the '80s, they 
are now larger and more luxurious. As a result, in the last three 
years alone, prices have risen to an average of $233,000, up from 
$170,000. The high end of the market is reaching ever more lofty terrain, 
with new-home prices as high as $5 million, Darrow said. On the other 
side of Mount Mansfield at Smuggler's Notch Resort, about 60 new condominium 
units _ both apartments and town houses _ have been developed or are 
near completion this year in six buildings, said Bill Stritzer, the 
owner of the resort. When not being used by their owners, many of 
the 400 units at the resort are rented out. ``This has been our best 
year for sales and rentals since 1985,'' Stritzer said. The real estate 
activity in Vermont reflects the pattern at ski resorts around the 
country, according to Stacy Gardner, spokeswoman for the National 
Ski Areas Association in Lakewood, Colo. Real estate investments rose 
to $136 million in the 1997/1998 ski season at 148 resorts across 
the country that were surveyed by the association, Ms. Gardner said. 
That was up from $49 million a year earlier, she said. This winter, 
investments are expected to reach $314 million, the association estimated. 
``As skiers get older, they are wealthier, have more free time and 
are bringing along children and grandchildren who are at the right 
entry age for skiing and snowboarding,'' said Ms. Gardner. In Vermont, 
Okemo and Killington are two family-friendly, pedestrian-oriented 
resorts that exemplify the effort by developers to capture this market. 
Okemo Mountain Inc., about 80 miles south of Stowe in the town of 
Ludlow, has developed 60 condominium apartments and town houses this 
year at a subdivision called Solitude Village, said Pam Cruickshank, 
spokeswoman for the development. All of these units, priced from $150,000 
to $350,000, have been sold. In addition, 19 one-acre single-family 
house lots are now being developed and will soon go on sale for $250,000 
to $500,000 each. Okemo is also investing $17.5 million to build an 
entire new section called the Jackson Gorge. It is to be a resort 
village with new ski lifts and trails, shops and a hotel with 200 
to 300 suites, all within walking distance, Ms. Cruickshank said. 
At Killington, about 20 miles north of Okemo, a major redesign is 
being planned by the owner, American Ski Co., based in Bethel, Maine. 
When first designed in the late '60s, the car was king at Killington. 
From their accommodations, skiers had to drive to stores and entertainment 
facilities. But on 1,000 acres that American Ski has acquired through 
a land swap with the state, it is planning a compact, pedestrian-oriented 
village with direct access to the mountain. Although still going through 
the state and local approval process, the project's total development 
cost is estimated at about $300 million, said Christpher Howard, American 
Ski's director of real estate operations. The company hopes to start 
construction in the spring of 2000 on the first $75 million phase 
of this project. It is likely to include a village core with 100 new 
hotel rooms added to an existing 203-room hotel, 200 hotel-style time-share 
units and about 100,000 square feet of retail space. The aim is to 
attract more skiers and convert Killington into a four-season resort, 
Howard said. In creating these villages, Okemo and Killington are 
striving to boost revenues by constructing the type of year-round 
resort town ambiance that has evolved in Stowe over a century. In 
the late 19th century, Stowe was a summer resort for affluent New 
Englanders and New Yorkers. In the late 1930s, it introduced skiing, 
and in the 1950s when foliage trips became popular, more people started 
heading there in the fall as well. Vacation-home development started 
in the '70s and by the '80s it was in full swing. About 400 condominiums 
and 500 single-family primary and vacation homes were built. In the 
peak year of 1987 alone, 99 single-family homes went up. Now, this 
town of 3,400 year-round residents has 1,200 single-family homes, 
600 vacation homes and about 500 condominium apartments, Darrow said. 
In the '90s, single-family-home development has predominated, with 
about 30 houses going up each year. At present, most new homes have 
a buyer before construction begins and buyers are tending to choose 
larger, more elaborate homes suitable for year-round use. When the 
owner isn't there, the homes are often rented out to vacationers by 
real estate brokers or by the resort of which they are a part. ``The 
new homes are custom built, loaded with gadgets and a lot more expensive,'' 
said Darrow. Million-dollar vacation getaways are no longer unusual 
but most new homes sell for $300,000 to $500,000. A state law that 
went into effect in June has raised property taxes for affluent communities 
in order to raise spending for education in poorer communities and 
offer tax relief to low-income households. In Stowe the effect has 
been to raise property taxes by about 30 percent. A house worth about 
$200,000 will now pay $3,200 a year instead of $2,360. The tax rate 
has not hampered resort expansion, however, according to Darrow. ``People 
come here to vacation or retire, they don't care about taxes and costs,'' 
he said. ``Also, compared with places they come from, like Boston 
or New York, real estate is relatively inexpensive.'' For instance, 
this fall W. Richard Leuck sold a $240,000 second home here that he 
had purchased for $190,000 a year and a half earlier. He is now building 
a $400,000, five-bedroom house on a nine-acre lot, hoping some day 
to live there six months a year. But at present he and his family 
retreat here for one week stays throughout the year. During the summer 
they stay for two months. ``There's so much going on here, I don't 
know who plans all the activities,'' said Leuck, an investment banker 
based in Parkland, Fla. On the other hand, he loves the solitude. 
``In Vermont, you have the freedom to just be with nature,'' he said. 
Preserving the environmental integrity of this region _ under the 
current battle cry of ``limiting sprawl'' _ has become a requirement 
of new developments statewide. To further the goal, Stowe has installed 
a new sewer line. The sewer line is vital for future development, 
said Robert Apple, planning director of Mount Mansfield Co., a division 
of American International Group. ``It allows us to create a compact 
core rather than spread out to install other types of wastewater facilities,'' 
he said. At its Stowe Mountain Resort, the company is now planning 
to improve ski facilities and develop perhaps 500 luxury hotel and 
residential units, at a cost of about $150 million. Several other 
inns and hotels are already building new accommodations. The 92-room 
Topnotch at Stowe Resort &AMP; Spa has completed site preparation 
on its grounds for six buildings with 18 new 2,000-square-foot condominiums 
priced at about $400,000. Construction is scheduled to start next 
spring. Despite higher taxes or a weaker stock market, Robert Boyle, 
the president of Topnotch, said he was confident that the project 
would find buyers. ``The resort lifestyle attracts people,'' he said. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>