<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981114.0138 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
For Paula Jones to agree to settle her sexual misconduct lawsuit against 
President Clinton, she had to be convinced that the best time to strike 
a deal was now. Her many advisers worked to make her realize that 
even if she went ahead with the lawsuit and won a jury verdict she 
would probably get only a small amount of money. For Clinton to agree 
to a settlement, there had to be no apology required of him, so he 
would still be able to deny her account of a coarse sexual proposition 
in 1991 in a Little Rock, Ark., hotel room. And the deal would have 
to exclude Abe Hirschfeld, a New York real estate executive who had 
said he would give her $1 million to settle with the president. In 
the past few days, lawyers for both parties satisfied those concerns. 
On Friday, they announced that Mrs. Jones would withdraw her lawsuit 
in exchange for a payment of $850,000 from Clinton. There would be 
no apology. Moreover, she agreed that she would not accept any money 
from Hirschfeld, though by the time the settlement was reached, no 
one in the Jones camp regarded Hirschfeld as reliable in anything 
but his ardor for publicity. After an elaborate televised ceremony 
in Washington on Oct. 31, in which he promised in writing to send 
$1 million to an escrow account, he did not do so. But the event that 
seemed to shock Mrs. Jones and make her more pliant about a settlement, 
one of her friends said, was the decision of the group of lawyers 
who represented her in court to withdraw from the case. ``Why don't 
they like me anymore?'' Mrs. Jones asked a friend after the lawyers 
told her they would leave her case in the next month or so. She had 
come to count on the team of lawyers from Dallas and Charlottesville, 
Va., who had stood at her side since September 1997, when her previous 
lawyers, impatient with her resistance to a settlement, withdrew. 
The Rutherford Institute, a conservative legal foundation in Charlottesville, 
stepped into the breach, saying it would pay her legal costs, and 
it recruited a Dallas firm to represent her. But Mrs. Jones' new lawyers 
became annoyed with her and even more with her husband, Stephen Jones. 
The Dallas law firm of Rader, Fisher, Campbell &AMP; Pyke had already 
spent an estimated $1.4 million in legal fees to help Mrs. Jones. 
John Whitehead, the president of the Rutherford Institute, had paid 
legal expenses exceeding $400,000. Moreover, the Rutherford Institute 
was paying to represent Stephen Jones in a separate lawsuit against 
Northwest Airlines, charging he was wrongfully dismissed. Mrs. Jones' 
lawyers were withdrawing, they said, because they were annoyed that 
she did not accept their advice to strike a deal with Clinton, accepting 
an amount between $500,000 and $1 million, and to forget about the 
Hirschfeld offer. The White House officials had said repeatedly they 
would not participate in any deal that involved Hirschfeld both because 
he is under indictment for tax fraud and any contribution by him could 
be seen questionable. Debra Katz, a Washington lawyer who specializes 
in sexual harassment law, said that if Mrs. Jones ultimately won her 
case she could probably count on receiving less than $100,000 in damages. 
``This was the right time for her to strike politically,'' Ms. Katz 
said recently. ``The president was eager to settle and give her more 
than she would get from even winning in court.'' Clinton had his own 
powerful motives for achieving a settlement. The case had been dismissed 
by a trial court judge in Little Rock, but a three-judge appeals panel 
was considering reinstating the case. The comments of the judges during 
oral arguments last month in St. Paul had convinced White House officials 
that the Jones case would go to trial. That would mean the president 
could be deposed again in detail about his sexual encounters. The 
last time he was deposed, on Jan. 17, he denied engaging in sexual 
relations with Monica Lewinsky, a statement he defended by saying 
the Jones lawyers did not ask questions that were sufficiently specific. 
In another deposition, Clinton could expect the questions to be very 
specific. White House officials were eager to settle, largely to help 
the president deal with Congress over impeachment proceedings. The 
House Judiciary Committee is considering whether Clinton's answers 
in the Jan. 17 deposition amounted to perjury and whether that constitutes 
an impeachable offense. While a settlement would not help Clinton 
in strictly legal terms, he and his advisers believed it would make 
it more difficult for Congress to move against him for behavior named 
in a lawsuit that no longer existed. They said that part of the argument 
against Clinton was that in giving misleading testimony about Ms. 
Lewinsky to the Jones lawyers, he deprived Mrs. Jones of a fair opportunity 
to make her sexual harassment case against him. One White House official, 
who spoke on the condition of anonymity, has said a settlement will 
allow the president's defenders to counter that Mrs. Jones was, in 
the end, not penalized but satisfied. A remaining issue for the Jones 
camp is how to divide the money. Mrs. Jones, her associates have said, 
would like to net $300,000 to $500,000 of the settlement herself, 
leaving the lawyers to divide up the rest. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>