<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981114.0116 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
The New York Times said in an editorial for Sunday, Nov. 15: Nearly 
40 years after Fidel Castro came to power and a decade after the end 
of the Cold War, a reconsideration of U.S. policy toward Cuba is overdue. 
President Clinton was recently given a surprising and irresistible 
invitation to do exactly that. It came from a bipartisan group of 
senators and an impressive roster of former Republican national security 
officials. He should respond promptly and positively. Since the 1960s, 
Washington has prohibited Americans from trading with Cuba, investing 
in its economy and traveling there as ordinary tourists. In recent 
years, Washington has irritated U.S. allies by trying to punish their 
commerce with Cuba as well. None of this has noticeably diminished 
Castro's autocratic rule or advanced U.S. interests. Arguments justifying 
the embargo on the basis of Castro's close military cooperation with 
the Soviet Union became obsolete a decade ago. The United States should 
end its embargo at the earliest possible date and move toward normal 
diplomatic relations. Increasing the presence of American diplomats, 
business people and tourists on the island will make it easier to 
promote desperately needed democratic change. But the 1996 Helms-Burton 
law makes it impossible to substantially ease the embargo without 
congressional approval. Any significant change in Cuba policy must 
include Congress as well. The senators, including Republican conservatives 
like Rick Santorum of Pennsylvania, Rod Grams of Minnesota, Mike Enzi 
of Wyoming and Pat Roberts of Kansas, do not endorse specific new 
policies. Instead, they urge Clinton to appoint a national commission 
to seek a new consensus. They recommend that it include foreign-policy 
and human-rights specialists, Cuban-Americans, business representatives 
and members of Congress. Over time, the views of Cubans in this country 
have become less monolithic. Opposition to Castro remains strong. 
But some younger Cuban-Americans question whether isolation is the 
best way to encourage democratic change. The presence of human rights 
leaders would assure that the concerns of Cuban political prisoners 
and opposition leaders are not overlooked. With Castro past 70 and 
in uncertain health, Cubans have begun to look toward the political 
future. The United States should be trying to influence their debates 
constructively, not isolating itself on the sidelines. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>