<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981114.0062 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
The reasoning goes like this: A team that finished with a record of 
32-5 last season and returns five starters should be great this season. 
Maybe even a national champion. Coach Jim Calhoun of CONNECTICUT does 
not argue with the logic, but he will argue that his team is not great 
yet. Calhoun is hoping that if the mind is conditioned for greatness, 
the body will follow. For the first time in his 12 years at UConn, 
Calhoun has enlisted a psychiatrist to counsel his players. He said 
the head games he plays to make his charges work harder can only go 
so far. A few of his players need to boost their self-esteem, he said, 
and all of them could use help on focusing through the blur of expectations. 
``I want them to understand the interdependence they have on each 
other,'' Calhoun said after the Huskies' public scrimmage at Hartford 
Civic Center last week. ``We do truly not just need our talent. We 
really need to be tight together. That's what made us so good last 
year.'' A crowd of 6,000 showed up at the Civic Center just to watch 
the Huskies play each other. Calhoun feels the love of his loyal following, 
but the flip side is never far away. UConn opens Sunday against Quinnipiac 
at Storrs, Conn., and the state is restless. Connecticut, the Big 
East's most prolific winner of the decade, has made the final eight 
of the national tournament three times but has never advanced to the 
Final Four. Calhoun said the Huskies got a bad break last season when 
they faced North Carolina and lost, 75-64, in a home game for the 
Tar Heels disguised as a regional final. The game was played in Greensboro, 
N.C. This time, UConn, picked No. 1 in several preseason rankings, 
is expected to create the bad breaks. The doctor is in. ``I don't 
really get down with people like that,'' said Richard Hamilton, last 
year's Big East player of the year. ``I'll have to go in another room.'' 
The Huskies will most likely forgive Hamilton's aversion to therapy, 
considering his scoring average of 21.5 points last season. A 6-foot-6-inch 
swingman, Hamilton can hurt opponents with a slash to the basket or 
a perimeter jump shot. A legitimate concern is whether Hamilton can 
avoid hurting himself. A deep thigh bruise hampered him his freshman 
season, and a broken right foot he sustained during training for the 
world championships in July has slowed his preparation. The sophomore 
point guard Khalid El-Amin (16 points and 4 assists a game), the Big 
East's rookie of the year, gives UConn energy and nerve. This is where 
the exclamation marks end and the question marks begin. The Huskies' 
other three starters _ forward Kevin Freeman (10.3 points, 6.6 rebounds), 
guard Ricky Moore (7.5 points) and center Jake Voskuhl (6.9 points, 
7.1 rebounds) _ must expand their supporting roles, Calhoun said. 
The swingman Rashamel Jones (4.4 points), the frontliner Souleymane 
Wane (1.9 points), forward Edmund Saunders and guard E.J. Harrison 
will vie for playing time in Calhoun's eight-man rotation. Can any 
team in the Big East stop the Huskies? ``I don't think anybody is 
going to mail them the trophy,'' Georgetown Coach John Thompson said. 
SYRACUSE, 26-9 and a round-of-16 qualifier last season, returns forward 
Ryan Blackwell (12.6 points, 8.2 rebounds), guard Jason Hart (10.2 
points) and perhaps the Big East's best center, Etan Thomas (11.3 
points, 6.6 rebounds). Mike Jarvis, the new coach at ST. JOHN'S, has 
the brashness of forward Ron Artest (11.6 points, 6.3 rebounds), the 
promise of the freshman point guard Erick Barkley and a bevy of role 
players. MIAMI, which squeezed into the 1998 national tournament with 
an 18-10 mark, will count on forward Tim James (16.8 points, 9.4 rebounds). 
PITTSBURGH is capable of breaking into the upper pack, but its ironman 
guard, Vonteego Cummings (19.5 points, 40.1 minutes a game), could 
use some comp time. GEORGETOWN has two capable guards in the newcomers 
Anthony Perry and Kevin Braswell, but the Hoyas looked weak under 
the basket in opening losses to Temple and Illinois. VILLANOVA, behind 
guard John Celestand (13.2 points), could crack .500. RUTGERS will 
need more production from guard Geoff Billet (13.9 points, 4.1 assists) 
and forward Rob Hodgson (13.2 points, 5.4 rebounds) to offset a shortage 
of big people who can score and muscle up. The swingman Jeff Greer 
(10 points) adds an athletic touch. WEST VIRGINIA, 24-9 last season, 
could suffer the most drastic fall in the conference, returning just 
the reserve forward Marcus Goree (8 points, 5.2 rebounds). Count on 
the Mountaineers to press and gamble. Tommy Amaker of SETON HALL has 
proved he can coach, squeezing 15 victories out of a marginal team 
last season. But can he recruit? Point guard Shaheen Holloway (15 
points, 6.5 assists) needs help immediately. Guard Gary Saunders, 
a transfer from Georgia Tech, should provide offensive punch. Duane 
Jordan (6.5 points, 6.7 points) is the best returning player from 
an uninspiring front line. The Hall lost early to Indiana (understandable) 
and to graduation-depleted Valparaiso (hmm). PROVIDENCE Coach Tim 
Welsh inherits his fellow New Yorker Jamel Thomas (18.5 points, 6.9 
rebounds) and not much else. At BOSTON COLLEGE, the unexpected departure 
of forward Kostas Maglos to the Greek professional league leaves the 
Eagles with one returning part-time starter, guard Kenny Harley (4.5 
points). NOTRE DAME no longer has Pat Garrity; it has center Phil 
Hickey (10.7 points, 8 rebounds), a promising point guard in Martin 
Ingelsby (6.6 points, 5.6 assists) and a cold winter. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>