<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981114.0234 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Faced with an imminent American military attack, President Saddam 
Hussein of Iraq made a show of backing down Saturday, saying in a 
letter to the United Nations that his government would resume full 
cooperation with international arms inspectors. But a two-page annex 
to the letter outlining Saddam's interpretation of what he would get 
in return raised immediate doubts about his sincerity. Within hours, 
the Clinton administration rejected the Iraqi offer as inadequate 
and unacceptable, and said American forces remained poised to strike. 
``In order for us to accept the proposition that there will be compliance, 
there has to be a clear, unequivocal statement to that effect by the 
Iraqis,'' Samuel R. Berger, the national security adviser, said at 
a news conference in Washington. ``What we have instead is a letter, 
and particularly an annex, that's got more holes than Swiss cheese.'' 
But according to American officials, the Iraqi move did avert military 
action at least for Saturday. Administration officials said they had 
canceled a plan to stage a military strike just hours before it was 
set to begin. As a further indication that the White House considered 
the crisis unresolved, President Clinton canceled his trip to Asia 
Saturday, sending Vice President Gore to Malaysia for an economic 
conference of leaders from Pacific rim countries. When the U.N. Security 
Council met here Saturday night, the majority of members took a different 
view of the Iraqi letter, saying they were prepared to take Saddam 
at his word. The council must now decide whether the Iraqi pledge 
is enough to review the economic sanctions against Iraq. But the British 
remained strong in support of the U.S. position. In London, Prime 
Minister Tony Blair said that until Iraq's compliance was ``unconditional,'' 
British forces were ``on alert to the possibility of military action 
at any time without further warning.'' The annex, which U.N. Secretary-General 
Kofi Annan's special envoy in Baghdad, Prakash Shah, described in 
an accompanying note as something the Iraqis did not want made public, 
restates demands by Iraq that have already been rejected by the United 
States, Britain and other council members. Intentionally or not, it 
could reopen divisions and foment distrust between Russia and the 
United States in the crucial next few days. Arriving for a Security 
Council meeting Saturday, Sergey Lavrov, the Russian representative, 
said the Iraqi conditions mentioned in the annex ``are beliefs that 
are going to have to be dealt with.'' Publicly, Iraq wrapped its announcement 
on Saturday in a cloak of statesmanship. Diplomats here and officials 
in Washington said that Saddam, isolated diplomatically by even his 
friends, had apparently decided to buy time and head off an American 
attack now. ``We offer this chance not out of fear of the aggressive 
American campaign and the threat to commit a new aggression against 
Iraq,'' the Iraqi leadership said in the letter to Annan, ``but as 
an expression of our feeling of responsibility and in response to 
your appeal and those of our friends.'' The letter was signed by Deputy 
Prime Minister Tariq Aziz. U.N. officials argued that the Iraqis were 
not hedging their decision to resume cooperation, and that the annex 
to their letter was no more than a wish list. ``Our understanding 
is that the annex to the letter does not constitute conditions,'' 
said Fred Eckhard, Annan's spokesman. But later in the day, Annan 
appeared to be less optimistic. Arriving at the United Nations late 
in the afternoon before the council meeting, he was asked if he was 
hopeful that the crisis had passed. ``I think it made at least a step 
in the right direction,'' he replied. Iraq's representative to the 
United Nations, Nizar Hamdoon, said: ``The annex that was delivered 
with the letter today contains the views and the preferences of the 
government of Iraq on the comprehensive review that has been agreed 
in principle by the Security Council before this recent crisis.'' 
Hamdoon said that the annex was merely a talking paper that Baghdad 
had shared with several other nations and that the nine points were 
not conditions for Iraqi compliance. The annex is a copy of Iraqi 
policy points as they were presented to Russia, China and France on 
Friday. The policy summary was mentioned in the letter as a description 
of what Iraq would consider a ``serious, fair and fruitful'' review. 
It asks that Baghdad be given direct assurances by the secretary-general 
or ``a delegation from the council'' that its demands, many of which 
have already been rejected, be taken into account now. The annex makes 
clear that Iraq wants to shift the burden of evidence to the U.N. 
Special Commission, known as Unscom, forcing it to prove what Iraq 
is supposed to be hiding rather than allowing the commission to continue 
compelling Baghdad to produce answers and missing documents. The Iraqis 
want a timetable _ ``a short period,'' they say _ for them to take 
whatever steps are necessary to close files on weapons programs. Inspectors 
fear that this will result in pro-forma inspections, after which the 
Iraqis could declare they had met all their obligations so the oil 
embargo could be lifted. The annex again raises questions about the 
future of Richard Butler, the executive chairman of Unscom, whom Iraq 
wants dismissed, and of the commission itself, which Iraq wants to 
make part of the U.N. system. It is now a free-standing creation of 
the Security Council. The Iraqis also reiterated their preference 
for a comprehensive review to be conducted under Annan's direction. 
The Security Council has already said it will run that review. In 
their public letter to the secretary-general, the Iraqis said the 
decision to resume cooperation was made Saturday at meetings of the 
president's Cabinet and party, with Saddam presiding. The meetings 
followed the receipt of a letter on Friday night from Annan reiterating 
the secretary-general's warning, in effect, that Iraq could never 
hope to have sanctions lifted unless it played by the rules, and by 
appeals from Russia, China and France, among others, the Iraqis said. 
Arguing against recent evidence, the letter states that ``the goal 
sought by Iraq was not to sever the relationship with Unscom and the 
IAEA,'' the two arms agencies monitoring Iraq. ``The leadership of 
Iraq decided to resume working with the Special Commission and the 
IAEA and to allow them to perform their normal duties,'' the Iraqi 
letter said. The first hint that Iraqi would back down came early 
today from an unidentified Iraqi official in Baghdad. A few hours 
later, Shah, Annan's special envoy in Iraq, said publicly that the 
Iraqis had agreed ``without conditions'' to resume cooperation, which 
was broken off by Saddam on Oct. 31. As Shah spoke, the secretary-general 
was meeting with Hamdoon at Annan's official residence in New York. 
There, Annan took a call from Aziz, and they discussed the letter. 
Annan made a last-minute appeal to Saddam in a letter on Friday night, 
after a meeting with the Security Council that lasted nearly five 
hours. The secretary-general, who had abruptly cut off a trip in North 
Africa on Wednesday to confront the crisis, said after the marathon 
session that ``events on the ground seem to be running away from us.'' 
By that time, the Iraqi president had been warned by virtually all 
his erstwhile friends _ Russia, France, China and the Arab nations 
_ that he would take the blame for bringing down American missiles 
on his country and people. Even governments that oppose the use of 
force to settle this crisis had made it clear that the Iraqis were 
isolated in their defiance this time and could not count on them for 
help. The present crisis with Iraq, which came on the heels of a year 
of confrontations, has its roots in a decision by Saddam on Aug. 5 
to curtail cooperation with inspectors from Unscom, which monitors 
biological, chemical and prohibited missile systems. They and their 
counterparts from the International Atomic Energy Agency, which watched 
nuclear developments, were forbidden to make new on-site searches 
and were restricted to using existing monitoring systems _ cameras 
and air, soil and water samplers _ and making routine inspection visits 
to previously agreed sites. That move set off alarms here for the 
short as well as long term, because the Security Council had intended 
the inspection system to keep functioning, with unannounced searches, 
even after sanctions were lifted. In early September, the council 
responded with a resolution that ended all further sanctions reviews, 
and therefore hopes of having the embargo lifted, until weapons inspections 
resumed. In the meantime, the Security Council and the secretary-general 
were working on plans for a comprehensive review of Iraq's relations 
with the United Nations, going back to the 1990 invasion of Kuwait, 
when sanctions were imposed. Iraq has also made demands about how 
the review should be conducted. On Oct. 30, the council laid out its 
plans for conducting a review. It did not promise more than a new 
look at sanctions after Iraq had met all its disarmament requirements. 
The next day, Saddam surprised everyone involved by shutting down 
the inspection system entirely. In the face of possible American bombing, 
all the inspectors have now been withdrawn from Iraq. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>