<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981114.0167 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
The $206 billion tobacco settlement that emerged Friday, designed 
to resolve state claims over health costs related to smoking, is a 
creation of state attorneys general, with no involvement by federal 
officials. As such, and unlike earlier efforts to craft a more comprehensive 
settlement, it does not deal with the issue that cigarette makers 
have feared most: regulation of their industry by the federal Food 
and Drug Administration. But precisely because it only involves state 
governments, the latest settlement proposal is also likely to return 
the focus of the nation's debate over smoking back where many people 
believe it belongs, to Congress and the White House. For all the talk 
that the latest proposal is a watered-down version of the earlier 
efforts and represents diminishing political will on the part of anti-smoking 
advocates, the White House and Congress in recent months have shown 
little political determination on the issue as well. Since the defeat 
last spring of a Senate bill that would have cost the industry $516 
billion, the Clinton administration, which supported the legislation, 
has done little more than use the tobacco industry as a convenient 
punching bag. The White House's recent gestures have been largely 
symbolic and empty. It warned producers, for example, that it will 
track sales to young smokers by brand (something that has been done 
for years by academics) and added that it would speed up the release 
of internal cigarette company documents over the Internet (many of 
those papers are already available). Many anti-smoking advocates believed 
that the proposed Senate bill would have brought about a sea change 
in the nation's war on smoking. But now, they appear to accept that 
change, as it has in the past, will come about incrementally. ``These 
are chapters,'' said Dr. David Kessler, the former FDA commissioner. 
``You don't solve huge public issues in a single swipe. This is going 
to take a series of steps.'' And anti-smoking groups say the next 
step should be by the White House. They hope that the Clinton administration, 
in light of a recent court ruling denying the FDA authority over tobacco, 
will move quickly to propose tobacco legislation when a new session 
of Congress convenes. The proposed $206 billion settlement, which 
could be announced on Monday, is also a stark reminder that every 
political idea has a half-life, a moment when its proponents can seize 
the stage and try to force change before the public's attention moves 
on. It was only a year ago that such a moment had arrived for smoking 
opponents. Seizing on the $368.5 billion settlement accord reached 
in June 1997 between cigarette makers and 40 state attorneys general, 
they helped fashion the $516 billion Senate bill. That measure would 
have sharply caused cigarette prices to rise, given the government 
regulatory power over tobacco, and denied the industry the reason 
it sought the June accord, legal protections in smoking-related lawsuits. 
But anti-smoking groups, in a fevered rush to vanquish a despised 
enemy, badly miscalculated their strength. Tobacco companies, long 
skilled at defeating legislation, unleashed a $50 million advertising 
blitz that quickly sank the bill. Since then, the tide has turned. 
The latest court rulings have consistently run in the industry's favor. 
And some anti-smoking groups appeared to have lost their focus. Last 
year, their message centered on saving the legions of under-age smokers 
who faced early deaths from horrible diseases like lung cancer and 
emphysema. These days, they are warning the public about a tie between 
smoking and impotence. By its nature, the impact of the new plan on 
youth smoking may be limited because its addresses the problem through 
social engineering, not science. Tobacco billboards will come down. 
Caps bearing brand logos will become collectors' items. Producers 
will promise to clean up their acts. And advertisements like the one 
being shown in Florida that depict cigarette makers as mass murderers 
may become common fare. (The proposal does contain $250 million to 
finance a foundation that will research why teen-agers find cigarettes 
so attractive and what can be done about it.) The proposed settlement 
will require the approval of most of the 46 states that either have 
lawsuits to recover smoking-related health care costs or have yet 
to sue. (Four states _ Florida, Minnesota, Mississippi and Texas _ 
have already settled their cases.) But the settlement's watered-down 
nature has prompted some anti-smoking advocates to urge the state 
officials to rethink their strategy. Stanton Glantz, a professor at 
the University of California at San Francisco and an anti-tobacco 
advocate, said that he believed that states could wring far more concessions 
from the tobacco industry by battling in court. ``Their strategy should 
go back to dealing with these lawsuits state by state,'' Glantz said. 
State attorneys general may choose not to heed such views. Many of 
them have spent litte time preparing their lawsuits and even those 
who have know that they are based on tested and novel legal theories. 
Even the case that advanced furthest in trial, Minnesota's lawsuit, 
was settled just as it went to the jury. As a result, most states, 
who will have about a week to consider the new deal, are expected 
to accept. A few that have worked hard to prepare their lawsuits, 
like Massachusetts, Maryland, Michigan and Wisconsin, may balk and 
bargain for stiffer terms. But for such officials, the decision between 
taking billions of dollars in free money for their states and rolling 
the dice against the industry in court may prove to be their last 
decision in this round of the tobacco wars. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>