<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981114.0101 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
The terrorist who calls himself Carlos has been on a hunger strike 
for 11 days, protesting his four years of solitary confinement in 
a French prison, where he is serving a life sentence for murder. Carlos, 
49, whose real name is Ilich Ramirez Sanchez, has been drinking water, 
and his life is not threatened, said officials at the Sante Prison. 
They said they had no intention of changing their treatment of him. 
In handwritten letters in French and English made available by his 
lawyers, Carlos says he is preparing for his death and has called 
on his supporters to kill one American or Israeli for every one of 
the 1,551 days he has been held in France. French agents acting on 
a tip from the CIA seized Carlos from a hospital room in Sudan in 
August 1994. He was brought here and tried for murder in shootings, 
bombings and other acts of terrorism that the authorities accused 
him of committing on French soil in the 1970s and against French institutions 
elsewhere in the 1980s. ``I love France, eternal France, and I would 
regard as personal betrayal any attack in my name on a French citizen,'' 
Carlos said in a declaration in French titled ``In case of my death,'' 
distributed by one of his lawyers, Isabelle Coutant-Peyre. ``By contrast, 
I ask as the last wish of a living martyr that a United States or 
Zionist enemy be executed for each day that I have spent in prison 
in France, and that's the duty of my comrades, of all mujahedeen and 
of all the revolutionaries of the world,'' he wrote, using the Arabic 
word for holy warriors and signing off with ``God is great,'' in the 
name of the Palestinian cause. The son of a Venezuelan Marxist lawyer, 
Carlos was named Ilich in honor of Vladimir Ilyich Lenin and was sent 
to Moscow to deepen his knowledge of Marxism. After being expelled 
as a troublemaker from Lumumba University in Moscow in 1970, he found 
his way to Beirut, Lebanon, and adopted his nom de guerre at the suggestion 
of a leader of the Popular Front for the Liberation of Palestine. 
Advocating violent struggle, the group gave Carlos the first vehicle 
for his anti-American revolutionary ambitions. After leading a series 
of spectacular actions that included the kidnapping of the oil ministers 
of the Organization of Petroleum Exporting Countries in Vienna in 
1975, he allied himself with the West German terrorist group Baader-Meinhof. 
For a few years during the Cold War, he was allowed to operate from 
East Berlin, Budapest and other Communist capitals in Eastern Europe. 
In a new book about him (``Jackal,'' published in London by Weidenfeld 
&AMP; Nicolson), John Follain, a British journalist, says Carlos sought 
refuge in Syria when the Communists tired of him. The Syrians, learning 
that the French were on his trail, tried to expel him to Libya in 
1991, but the authorities there did not want him, either. Eventually 
he wound up in Sudan, where he was recovering from an operation when 
French agents, with the tacit approval of the Sudanese authorities, 
pounced on him, wrapped him up in a burlap bag and flew him to Paris 
in an executive jet. He was convicted in Paris last Dec. 24 of the 
murder of two French police agents and a Lebanese informer in the 
Latin Quarter in 1975. On Nov. 3 he began his hunger strike, he said 
in an open letter to Justice Minister Elisabeth Guigou, after being 
accused of insulting a prison guard. The prison authorities disciplined 
Carlos with five days of stricter solitary confinement, saying he 
had cursed at and insulted the guard, who had interrupted a meeting 
with his lawyers. ``I do not know the professions of the mother of 
this individual, or his sexual inclinations, and I did not yell at 
him questioning his virility or his mother's morality,'' Carlos wrote. 
``On the other hand, I did criticize his lack of civil courage and 
disregard for his own origins shown by conducting himself like an 
agent of colonialism.'' The guard is of West Indian descent. He then 
vowed to refuse to take food or water to protest interference with 
his mailing privileges and to demand the right to receive visitors 
other than lawyers and take French lessons, Mrs. Coutant-Peyre said. 
The prison authorities said Carlos had partly broken his fast on Tuesday 
night by drinking nearly a gallon of mineral water. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>