<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981114.0104 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
To some, it may smack of flower-power idealism that in recent years 
two dozen U.S. cities have passed sanctions against foreign countries, 
roaring like local mice against the ruling regime of Nigeria or political 
repression in Tibet. But to a U.S. District Court judge here, a state-level 
move by Massachusetts to tilt at human rights abuses in Myanmar, formerly 
Burma, seemed not sweetly quixotic but downright unconstitutional. 
Judge Joseph Tauro ruled earlier this month that the Massachusetts 
Burma Law, which largely bars the state government from doing business 
with companies that trade with Myanmar, infringed on the federal government's 
exclusive control of U.S. foreign policy. He is expected to issue 
an order telling Massachusetts exactly what to do about the law this 
week. ``State interests, no matter how noble, do not trump the federal 
government's exclusive foreign affairs power,'' Tauro wrote. That 
decision, and the announcement last week that Massachusetts would 
appeal, set the stage for a legal battle that experts say could ultimately 
reach the U.S. Supreme Court and affect all such local sanctions _ 
from New York City's recent moves to shun Swiss banks unless they 
made restitution to Holocaust survivors, to Los Angeles' current consideration 
of whether to pass a Burma law of its own. At stake, advocates of 
such down-home involvement in foreign affairs say, is the kind of 
groundswell for divestment and sanctions that many believe helped 
end South Africa's system of racial separation. If such a ruling had 
come out a decade ago, said state Rep. Byron Rushing, who sponsored 
the Massachusetts law, ``Nelson Mandela might still be in prison today.'' 
Furthermore, Thomas Barnico, the assistant attorney general handling 
the case for Massachusetts, said: ``Our law is consistent with U.S. 
policy and second, our law isn't the conduct of foreign relations, 
it's the conduct of our own purchasing. We have a right to decide 
with whom we'll do business.'' But opponents argue that local sanctions 
not only violate the Constitution, but also fail to influence the 
countries they target. They say the sanctions' main effects are to 
hurt the ability of American businesses to compete abroad and to complicate 
the State Department's job. ``None of our companies, and certainly 
nor we, in any way apologize for the way the government of Burma operates,'' 
said Frank Kittredge, president of the National Foreign Trade Council, 
the lobbying group that successfully challenged the Massachusetts 
law. ``Nobody argues with the purpose or objective. We just argue 
with the means of accomplishing it, and we feel so strongly that these 
international sanctions do not work.'' In this global-market era, 
the opponents to local sanctions also include foreign governments, 
which complain that the sanctions violate international free-trade 
pacts signed by the United States. The European Union filed a brief 
opposing the Massachusetts law in federal court, and the European 
Union and Japan have brought a complaint about it to the World Trade 
Organization. The law that touched off all this local-state-federal-international 
fuss was passed by the state Legislature in 1996, making Massachusetts 
the only state with such an anti-Burma sanction. (A similar measure 
is pending in the New York state Legislature, however, and New York 
City already has one.) Called a selective purchasing law, it required 
the state government to refrain from buying from companies that did 
business with Myanmar, unless bids from those companies were at least 
10 percent cheaper than the closest comparable bids. The prospect 
of losing business with the state appears to have influenced some 
companies to pull out of Myanmar, Rushing said _ at least, he added, 
Apple Computer said as much when it left. But Rushing said he did 
not know of any case in which the state had actually rejected a bid 
from a vendor with ties to Myanmar. The military regime in Myanmar 
has violently repressed dissent, and human rights monitors accuse 
it of practicing torture, perpetuating slavery and trafficking in 
drugs. While divestment was the main local sanction applied against 
South Africa in the anti-apartheid movement, selective purchasing 
laws and ordinances now predominate in the movement to pressure Myanmar. 
According to a list maintained by the National Foreign Trade Council, 
cities from Berkeley, Calif., to Boulder, Colo., to Takoma Park, Md., 
and Cambridge, Mass. _ more than 20 in all _ have passed such selective 
purchasing measures against Myanmar. That is their right, argued Robert 
Stumberg, a professor of law at Georgetown University Law Center who 
advises the Free Burma Coalition, an umbrella group modeled after 
the anti-apartheid movement. ``It's a core principle of democracy 
that the federal government should not intrude on state powers to 
spend local tax dollars unless there's an overwhelming federal interest 
at stake,'' Stumberg said. ``Neither the text of the Constitution 
nor the politics of the situation reaches that level, and we think 
the Supreme Court will agree with us.'' Stumberg and other defenders 
of the Massachusetts law say they also have an important legal precedent 
to lean on: a decision by Maryland's highest court in 1989 that the 
city of Baltimore had the right to pass a statute that withdrew its 
investments from South Africa. But Tauro, in his decision, wrote that 
the Baltimore case did not apply because the city was seeking only 
to modify its own investment practices. Baltimore did not ``seek to 
influence individuals or companies in their private commercial activities,'' 
he said. He also cited a 1937 Supreme Court decision saying that power 
over international affairs ``cannot be subject to any curtailment 
or interference on the part of the several states.'' In the end, Tauro 
wrote: ``Massachusetts' concern for the welfare of the people of Myanmar, 
as manifested by this legislative enactment, may well be regarded 
as admirable. But, under the exclusive foreign affairs doctrine, the 
proper forum to raise such concerns is the United States Congress.'' 
In fact, Congress and President Clinton have spoken on Myanmar. Clinton 
issued an executive order in 1997 barring new U.S. investment in Myanmar, 
and Congress has backed similar sanctions. But that seems only to 
give more ammunition to both sides. Opponents of the Massachusetts 
law say it is pre-empted by Congress; supporters say that since Congress 
did not nullify the law, it should stand. On one thing, both sides 
agree. No such concerted challenge ever arose to the local pushes 
for divestment from South Africa, as college after college and city 
after city voted to divest. That could be because the Myanmar cause 
has less popular support, some say. Or it could be because the government 
has signed more free-trade agreements since then, obligating states 
and cities to keep their barriers down as well. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>