<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981114.0067 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Wesley Watkins IV, a 23-year-old Stanford University graduate from 
Oakland, Calif., was accepted to a doctoral program in music education 
in England. But, unable to afford the $17,000 annual fees at Reading 
University, he searched the World Wide Web for scholarship possibilities. 
Watkins chanced upon World Education Access, which vowed a ``scholarship 
for everyone.'' He ``joined'' the organization over the summer for 
$1,289. In exchange, he was told, his tuition would be covered. He 
flew to England last month. The money never came. Over the past six 
months, while a few individuals have received money from World Education 
Access, based in Dayton, Ohio, others _ or sometimes the colleges 
they had expected to attend _ received invalid checks, or no checks 
at all. Among the institutional victims are St. Leo's College in Florida; 
the University of Findlay in Findlay, Ohio; Franciscan University 
of Steubenville, Ohio, and Geneva College in Beaver Falls, Pa. Federal 
and Ohio state authorities are investigating, but they declined to 
characterize the operation. As the cost of a college education rises, 
and the cost of not having one soars in an increasingly competitive 
society, scholarship brokers have proliferated, many on the Internet. 
The Federal Trade Commission and other watchdog groups say the sometimes 
desperate quest for scholarship money has produced new victims for 
con artists. ``Scholarship scams are increasing,'' said Dana Lesemann, 
a lawyer with the Federal Trade Commission. ``We have recently filed 
eight lawsuits against companies engaged in activities we consider 
fraudulent. There were some 19,000 victims.'' Ms. Lesemann said many 
were mail-based schemes involving the use of picture postcards portraying 
smiling young graduates and a promise that for a fee, often around 
$80, scholarships are guaranteed. Last month, the FTC shut down an 
operation in Maryland that assured students that for a fee of $10 
to $100, they would win grants for $2,500 to $7,500. More than 50,000 
people sent checks to the organization, which used 10 different names. 
In most cases, after the fee was paid, the organization was never 
heard from again, the commission said. ``The latest schemes involve 
so-called personalized seminars for students who meet counselors at 
airport hotels in exchange for several hundred dollars,'' Ms. Lesemann 
said. ``The offer says the counselor will find the appropriate financial 
aid program and fill out all the forms for you. Some people are even 
giving out details of their checking accounts for direct withdrawals, 
a good way to be robbed.'' Mark Kantrowitz, the publisher of a Web 
site, finaid.org, estimates that there are 150 dishonest scholarship 
schemes a year. ``The total loss is something like $100 million a 
year,'' said Kantrowitz, whose Web site offers a range of possible 
sources for aid and alerts consumers to fraud. The schemes operate 
worldwide and sometimes include poor countries, where an American 
or European college education is seen as the best guarantor of long-term 
employment. Even within the United States, the search for scholarship 
money has taken on something of a desperate nature as the federal 
government has reduced its support and college costs have risen. John 
Joyce of the College Board said there had long been schemes asking 
parents to pay for services they could have gotten free. ``Back in 
the 1970s when I started in this, there was a concern over commercial 
scholarship search groups that would have parents or students pay 
for services that gave them nothing more than they could have gotten 
themselves,'' he said. ``After putting up the money, the student would 
be told to apply for loans at banks or to the federal government. 
What is happening on an increasing basis today is that operations 
similar to that now exist on the World Wide Web.'' The founder and 
president of World Education Access, Simon Kapenda, acknowledged in 
an interview having sent checks with insufficient money in the account. 
He said he was in temporary financial difficulty and would make up 
for failed promises when his troubles cleared. Kapenda, 28, a Namibian 
immigrant, has made a special effort to appeal to foreign students, 
many of them from Africa and other poor areas, and many of them religious. 
He says he has done so because of the scant opportunities in Africa. 
Ruth Muroki, a Kenyan national and Pentecostal missionary who lives 
in Brackenridge, Pa., paid World Education Access $700 on behalf of 
her church, Hope Ministry International, and was told by Kapenda that 
he would pay for 10 students from Kenya, including her daughter, Caroline, 
to attend Geneva College in Beaver Falls, Pa. The checks promised 
by Kapenda either failed to arrive or bounced, Mrs. Muroki said. ``I 
keep thinking to myself, `What is he doing with the $700 I sent?' 
'' Mrs. Muroki said. ``Why doesn't he return the money? He disappeared.'' 
Kapenda's office telephone is often not answered. But, reached by 
e-mail and then by telephone at his home, he vowed that he would make 
good on his word. He said he was waiting for $300,000 of his money 
to arrive from Angola, where, he said, it was being improperly held. 
``I'll have enough money to cover it,'' he said. ``It was not my intention 
for this to happen. I will try to fix whatever is messed up. Maybe 
someone out there could send some money to the colleges for these 
students.'' Kapenda said that his money came from other ventures, 
which he declined to specify, and that his only aim was to help those 
in need. He has made good on a few promises, paying a handful of students, 
like Gregory Head, who is studying at Brescia University in Owensboro, 
Ky. Head said he had paid Kapenda $700 and had received nearly $1,700. 
Head said he had been skeptical of World Education Access and had 
tried to check it out. Like many of those interviewed for this article, 
he said he had spoken directly with Kapenda, checked with the Better 
Business Bureau, which had no record of complaints, and after praying, 
decided to send in his money. Karen Watkins, mother of Wesley, who 
flew to England expecting his tuition to be paid, said she had spent 
a long time on the telephone with Kapenda trying to understand how 
the scholarship system worked. Even though she was suspicious, she 
decided her son should give it a try. ``I feel so stupid now,'' she 
said. Her son has begun his studies, and the family is looking for 
other sources of money. Kapenda said his new plan was for his Web 
site to investigate and give a seal of approval to other Web sites, 
which would list themselves with his site for a fee. He also hopes 
to become a clearinghouse for educational assistance. ``There are 
plenty of people out there with plenty of money who don't know what 
to do with it,'' Kapenda said. ``I'm trying to make a difference but 
it isn't easy.'' State and federal authorities say they can not tell 
whether Kapenda is dishonest or in over his head with a big, faulty 
idea. Without clear criminal intent, it can be hard for the authorities 
to force the closure of Web sites, although Ms. Lesemann, of the trade 
commission, said any promise not backed up was illegal. Last month, 
Kapenda changed his rules. No up-front fee from applicants is required 
now and a promise of success is no longer found on his Web site. But 
he said he had not given up on the operation. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>