<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981114.0089 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
At one time, Barclay's Bank here was losing 36 of its 1,600 employees 
a year, 10 times the death rate at most U.S. companies. At the private 
Minbank Clinic, where the senior managers of Zambia's biggest mining 
houses, banks and industrial companies are treated, about half of 
all appointments are AIDS-related. In nearby Zimbabwe, a personnel 
officer confesses that he has hired three people for each semiskilled 
job, expecting two to die in training. Half the executives at another 
company refuse promotions because an HIV test is required. In the 
mines, where one sick driller can cripple a whole crew, some South 
African shafts are reporting 25 percent HIV infection rates, and even 
higher rates of tuberculosis, which blooms in weakened immune systems. 
As the AIDS epidemic sweeps the continent, the underpinnings of many 
already shaky economies are becoming riddled with cracks. As one economist 
put it, the problems right now are merely insidious, ``but one day 
you'll wake up and they'll be catastrophic.'' In Africa, the disease 
attacks educated urban professionals _ the backbone of economic expansion 
_ first. The loss of those people can rob the continent of much of 
its potential. The damage is immeasurable, economists say, because 
it appears in ways that cannot be seen _ businesses that will never 
be founded, ideas that will never be pitched, university departments 
that will never be created. In eastern and southern Africa, where 
the epidemic is worst, the economically strongest countries _ South 
Africa, Botswana, Zimbabwe, Kenya, Uganda and Zambia _ have infection 
rates between 10 percent and 25 percent. Virtually all of those infected 
will die within 10 years. West Africa's strongest economies, like 
those of Nigeria, Ghana and the Ivory Coast, have lower, but still 
scary, infection rates. AIDS here, spread mostly by heterosexual encounters, 
hits the economically productive hardest. ``It's men who may come 
from poor areas, but now have social mobility, can travel, can afford 
prostitutes,'' said Wayne Myslik, chief consultant for Lifeworks, 
a South African AIDS-management consultancy, who has studied the problem 
at companies all over Africa. A well-known 1987 study in Rwanda showed 
that a pregnant woman had a 9 percent chance of infection if her husband 
was a farmer, a 22 percent chance if he was a soldier, a 32 percent 
chance if he was a white-collar worker and a 38 percent chance if 
he was a government official. Companies and governments may find ways 
to avoid bankruptcy, but the choices they make to survive will be 
cruel _ laying off the sick, sending others home to die. For Westerners 
used to a system in which insurers and governments pay for top-quality 
medical care, it is hard to grasp the kinds of cuts already being 
made here. Never mind $15,000 AIDS cocktails and costly cures for 
rare brain infections. Companies that once calmly paid for coffins, 
hearses and funeral meals for employees are now begrudging even that. 
Accurately gauging the impact of the epidemic is difficult. Few companies 
know how many of their workers are infected. And no one admits having 
AIDS, so experts must guess how many of the deaths of young working 
people from tuberculosis, malaria and vague complaints like ``bad 
chest'' are really AIDS-related. But the indications are that the 
disease is devastating to family finances, widely variable in the 
damage it inflicts on individual companies and government health budgets, 
and _ so far, anyway _ surprisingly minor in its statistical effects 
on national economies. But because so many industries in Africa rely 
on cheap unskilled labor from the almost limitless pools of the unemployed, 
damage to overall economies may be relatively slight, economists said. 
In one of the cruel ironies of epidemiology, the survivors may benefit 
economically, just as the survivors of the 14th-century bubonic plague 
did when wages skyrocketed and farmland became free. The damage at 
the family level is easy to grasp. The typical breadwinner in Africa 
has 10 dependents, and outside South Africa there are no welfare systems. 
Poor families are devastated even by a child's death, because the 
cost of medicine and a funeral means they often have to eat less, 
sell land or cattle, or take healthy children out of school. That 
returns a once-ambitious family directly into the hopeless cycle of 
poverty at its nadir _ illiterate, ill-nourished children hoeing small 
plots of corn to avoid starvation. Health Systems Strained Budgets 
Bring Rationing The next greatest threat is to medical budgets, both 
public and private. Most African countries have annual health budgets 
of less than $6 per citizen. Zimbabwe, for example, allocated $3.68 
per person in 1995, while the hospitalization of a privately insured 
AIDS patient that year cost $18,000. Faced with bankruptcy, governments 
respond by rationing. The $15,000-a-year protease-inhibitor ``cocktails'' 
that prolong so many American lives are out of the question _ the 
World Bank estimates that one patient's dosage would keep 400 children 
in school for a year. Most patients get the most common malaria drugs, 
TB drugs and antibiotics. When their immune systems are so weak that 
those stop working, they simply die. Even relatively rich South Africa 
says it cannot afford to offer $80 courses of AZT routinely to pregnant 
and nursing women to prevent transmission to their children. Workers 
for corporations face similar rationing, but the more generous employers 
buy them more months of life. Worker health insurance is rare; far 
more common are clinics on the grounds of the mine, factory or farm. 
They offer as much as the company decides it can afford. Small companies 
cope by simply dismissing sick workers; rich ones cap their health 
benefits. Even Eskom, the South African power company known for its 
generous benefits, recently cut its medical benefits for HIV-infected 
employees from $18,000 a year to $2,600. ``The employees didn't scream,'' 
said Liz Thebe, Eskom's AIDS-education administrator. Since South 
Africa's press is unsophisticated about AIDS, protease-inhibitor ``cocktails'' 
are seldom mentioned and few people are aware of them. Only a handful 
of Eskom workers, most of them white, take them, Ms. Thebe said. Others, 
who have heard that such treatment involves 60 pills a day and harsh 
side effects, simply declined. Some ``prefer to go to traditional 
healers,'' she said. Insurance companies react to the disease's heavy 
toll by writing policies that require repeated blood tests. If a country 
outlaws such requirements, they stop doing business there. In dirt-poor 
Malawi, Myslik said, there are only two insurers left: the state-owned 
National Insurance Co., which is insolvent, and Old Mutual, which 
insures only expatriate workers, not Malawians. The Companies Some 
Cut Costs, Others Stress Help The third-greatest economic damage done 
by AIDS is to corporate profits. Few companies will talk about AIDS 
in their work force and some hide the problem even from their shareholders, 
so analyses of losses are relatively rare. At Indeni, Zambia's only 
oil refinery, AIDS costs doubled from 1991 to 1993 and surpassed the 
company's meager profits the next year. A study of Botswana Diamond 
Valuing Co., whose 525 highly trained sorters pick diamonds off conveyor 
belts full of mine gravel, estimated that AIDS cost it $237 per employee, 
or 6 percent of profits, in 1994. The Botswana Meat Commission, which 
slaughters the country's beef, its second-biggest export after diamonds, 
was losing $268 per employee, or 8 percent of profits. At Muhoroni 
Sugar, a huge sugar plantation in Kenya, costs in 1994 were only $49 
per employee, but they were expected to double while the company kept 
losing money. (To keep this in perspective, one must remember how 
low wages are in Africa. A typical Muhoroni worker earned about $1,200 
a year.) AIDS bleeds profits from companies in many ways: medical 
and death expenses, funeral payments, the costs of recruiting and 
training new employees; work hours lost because employees are off 
sick. Interestingly, in companies that keep statistics, more work-hours 
are lost to funeral attendance than to illness. Since most Africans 
are buried in their rural home villages, attending a relative's funeral 
means asking for up to a week off. ``In my tradition, I can have three 
or four mothers,'' said Mulenga Kapwepwe, an executive at Project 
Concern, an AIDS-monitoring group here, explaining that Africans consider 
aunts, uncles and cousins to be immediate family. ``Before the epidemic, 
things were loose _ I could go bury anyone in my extended family. 
Now companies are tightening up.'' And there are the potentially huge 
costs of accidents. ``I had a guy collapse at the airport the other 
day,'' said an executive who spoke on condition his company not be 
named. ``What if he'd been driving his truck and hit a 727?'' With 
brutally hard-nosed management, some companies can contain costs. 
Although 20 to 25 of the 900 employees of Chilanga Cement die each 
year, the effect on the bottom line is ``almost negligible,'' said 
chief executive Patrick Gorman. The disease does not even rate a mention 
in the annual report. The Lusaka-area company, which owns Zambia's 
biggest cement plant, was sold by the government to Britain's Commonwealth 
Development Corp. in 1994. Most of its deaths are among laborers, 
who are easily replaced, and the company is laying men off anyway, 
Gorman said. ``To put it callously, it's achieving what we want,'' 
he said. ``Natural wastage is letting us reach our manning levels.'' 
Absenteeism for funerals had increased 15-fold between 1992 and 1995, 
but ``we've stamped on that,'' he added. A worker may leave only for 
the funeral of a wife, parent or child without losing the day's pay. 
White-collar deaths are ``surprisingly low,'' Gorman said, though 
he had to hire back a marketing director because the two successors 
he hired have both died. At the company's on-site clinic, costs are 
``down to about $15 per head per annum,'' he said. ``We draw the line 
at AZT and all these high-powered expensive drugs.'' For each worker 
who died, the company used to pay for the coffin, hearse, buses for 
mourners, food for the funeral meal and a cash grant to the family. 
``When I first got here, I tried to do away with the whole thing and 
ended up in a three-month firefight with the union,'' Gorman said. 
Ultimately, they settled for a grant worth about $200. At the other 
end of the spectrum in Zambia is Barclay's Bank, the country's biggest. 
Its employees are overwhelmingly white-collar and high school or college 
graduates. With subsidiaries across Africa, Barclay's is widely admired 
for its AIDS plans, of which Zambia's was the first. The bank has 
never calculated exactly how much the disease costs it, said Bright 
Nyirenda, who started the program. But its startling wake-up call 
came in the late 1980s when it was legal to give blood tests to job 
applicants: eight of the 10 interviewed in the small city of Kabwe 
proved HIV-positive. Meanwhile, inside the company's ranks, ``young 
men ready for promotion were dying,'' said Sylvester Mubengwa, Nyirenda's 
successor as health and safety manager. Between 1987 and 1992, the 
bank's annual mortality rate rose from 0.4 percent to 2.23 percent. 
In the United States about 0.25 percent is typical. It has since leveled 
off a bit lower, with 85 percent of the deaths AIDS-related. Making 
matters worse, many are middle managers. The typical death comes after 
six years of service; the bank lost eight supervisory or managerial 
rank employees last year and 11 in 1996. Others who have been hard-hit 
are the secretaries to those men. ``The managers travel a lot, and 
so are ... exposed to temptation,'' said Nyirenda, straining to speak 
delicately. ``Back at work, they prevail over their juniors, and get 
favors from them. With secretaries, it can turn out quite viciously.'' 
The bank has a sexual-harassment policy, he said, but workers in impoverished 
Zambia are desperate to keep their jobs. Because the bank pays relatively 
well, it can fill its depleted ranks by raiding other companies. Small 
firms cannot compete for executive talent. Barclay's does not merely 
offer health lectures and free condoms, as some companies do. ``It's 
bank policy to show compassion,'' Mubengwa said, sitting under a poster 
of the Barclay's eagle with a red AIDS ribbon on its wing. When an 
employee begins to show signs of sickness _ slackening concentration, 
growing absenteeism _ Mubengwa tries to work out a plan that eases 
the work burden, oversees medical care and suggests disability retirement. 
Employees are prodded to prolong their lives by living in healthy 
ways _ quitting smoking, taking vitamins, avoiding new infections. 
However, as is frequently the case here, the employees often deny 
they are sick, refuse HIV tests and try to work until they die. In 
a legacy of mining-based economies, African companies typically pay 
two to four times annual salary to the family of a worker who dies 
on the job, while disability retirements are pittances. The Economies 
Loss So Far Slight, but Potential Fades Perhaps surprisingly enough, 
the least catastrophic damage from the epidemic is at the macroeconomic 
level. Most of the 610 million people in Africa south of the Sahara 
are subsistence farmers, herders or fishermen. Those with formal jobs 
are usually laborers, crop pickers or miners. Although they suffer 
and die, the economy marches on indifferently. There are so many desperate 
job-seekers that they are quickly replaced. Mead Over, a World Bank 
economist, estimates that in Africa's 10 worst-hit countries, through 
the year 2025, the disease will reduce growth of gross domestic product 
per capita by only 0.3 percent. Although total GDP goes down when 
the sick do not grow crops or produce goods, he explained, so many 
people die that those who are left own greater slices of the economic 
pie. And he is quick to point out that an 0.3 percent drop in growth 
is significant in countries struggling to grow even 1 percent a year. 
Some economists almost apologetically compare AIDS in Africa to the 
14th century's Black Death. That great scythe of bubonic plague killed 
nearly a third of Europe's people in three years, but from a cold-bloodedly 
financial point of view, the survivors did nicely. With labor scarce, 
wages climbed, and ``a lot of people suddenly had a lot more land,'' 
Over said. And, as Alan Whiteside, an economist at the University 
of Natal, in South Africa, noted, many African economies are shrinking, 
while governments are selling state enterprises and trimming public 
payrolls. ``Being cynical about it,'' he said, ``They think, `If you're 
going to lose people anyway, do you mind how they go?''' The impact 
of deaths in the civil service has yet to be calculated. Business 
in Africa is intertwined with government, which usually owns the telephone 
system and electric company. Infection rates in the civil service 
are high _ in South Africa, as many as one in seven are thought to 
be infected. In some countries, civil servants, who have job security, 
may legally be home sick for a year before being replaced. That is 
a crisis in the making, said Whiteside. ``You can't run a company 
without electricity,'' he said. ``If the power company loses its technicians, 
you can't generate electricity.'' Although most companies have been 
slow to respond, or are still in denial, a few prescient ones saw 
the problem coming. That did not always help. Jenny Rogers runs South 
Africa's best-known AIDS program for the Billiton aluminum company 
in the province of KwaZulu-Natal. It hands out condoms and brochures 
in every bathroom, gives health lectures and aggressively treats workers 
for venereal diseases, which increase the risk of HIV infection. Mrs. 
Rogers even took a whole museum exhibit on AIDS from Pretoria to Richards 
Bay, the little city around the smelters, and found friendly HIV-infected 
guides to take 20,000 visitors through and talk to them about their 
fears of the disease. In a way, she was lucky. AIDS came late to South 
Africa because anti-apartheid sanctions kept the borders closed _ 
though not airtight _ until 1990. She might have had time to head 
off the disease. But, she said, ``for years, the unions blocked it.'' 
``There was a belief that the disease didn't exist, because no one 
had seen it. And some feeling that it was a plot by the old government 
or the United States to keep the black population down by getting 
people to use condoms. And there were objections that condoms aren't 
part of African culture. And there are traditional practices here 
that spread the disease _ such as when a man dies, his wives become 
his brother's property so the land isn't split up, and he is expected 
to sleep with them.'' She slowly overcame a lot of that resistance, 
she said. Shop stewards now double as AIDS educators, and the company 
hands out so many condoms that at one point employees were taking 
an average of 6.2 per day each. ``I think I'm supporting a lot of 
small entrepreneurs,'' she said, laughing. Nonetheless, it may all 
be too late. The infection rate in surrounding KwaZulu-Natal is now 
30 percent, higher even than in Zimbabwe or Botswana, Africa's worst-hit 
countries. Those deaths are yet to come. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>