<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981114.0096 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Less than a week before he is scheduled to testify before the House 
Judiciary Committee, Independent Counsel Kenneth Starr has apparently 
abandoned his inquiry into President Clinton's sex life, the portion 
of his investigation that repulsed most Americans. But Starr has refused 
to give up. He has aggressively returned to his original mission, 
the Clintons' failed real-estate venture named Whitewater, whose complexities 
baffled and bored most Americans. Friday afternoon, Starr sent some 
remnants of his sex-and-cover-up inquiry to the Judiciary Committee. 
The evidence, contained in two boxes, related to Clinton's dealings 
with former White House volunteer Kathleen Willey, who accused the 
president of groping her just outside the Oval Office in 1993. But 
this time Starr did not argue, as he had in his September referral 
regarding the president's affair with Monica Lewinsky, that Clinton's 
actions involving Ms. Willey constituted impeachable offenses. He 
left that question up to the Judiciary Committee. But Democratic members 
and critics of Starr chided his silence as an acknowledgment that 
his sex-and-lies inquiry had run out of gas. In a sign that he was 
not retreating, within an hour after the boxes were sent to Capitol 
Hill, Starr forged ahead on his Whitewater inquiry, which was his 
mandate when he was appointed in August 1994. A federal grand jury 
here returned a 15-count indictment against Webster Hubbell, a longtime 
friend of Clinton and Hillary Rodham Clinton. In a case headed by 
Starr's prosecutors, the grand jury charged Hubbell with fraud, perjury 
and impeding the inquiries of federal banking regulators who had investigated 
many of the original Whitewater accusations. Until then, it had appeared 
that the Whitewater inquiry was winding down. But Starr remains especially 
interested in the role that Hubbell and Mrs. Clinton played in a land 
transaction that helped lead to the collapse of a savings and loan 
institution in Arkansas. Mrs. Clinton is referred to in the indictment 
only as Hubbell's ``billing partner'' for work she had done on the 
land deal while at the Rose law firm. In 1996, Mrs. Clinton appeared 
before Starr's grand jury to answer questions about her work at the 
firm. Mrs. Clinton's spokeswoman, Marsha Berry, said Saturday that 
the first lady would not comment on Starr's actions. The two maneuvers 
Friday surprised and confounded Starr's allies and adversaries on 
Capitol Hill and at the White House. Both sides had spent much of 
the week preparing for his appearance before the Judiciary Committee 
on Thursday. When told that the Willey matter had been sent to Congress 
without an impeachment referral, one of Starr's most outspoken allies 
expressed astonishment. ``How can they do that?'' the ally finally 
said. ``That's crazy.'' A Democratic strategist gloated over Starr's 
most recent decisions, predicting that they would further alienate 
him from a majority of Americans, who have expressed distaste for 
the impeachment inquiry in polls and the Nov. 3 midterm congressional 
elections, in which Democrats did surprisingly well. ``This is Starr 
telling the world: `I'm alive. I'm still here. I'm still important,''' 
the strategist said. ``It seems to mean that he is not going anywhere 
for a long time.'' If last week was a guide, Starr's testimony will 
provide a portrait of the divided and partisan Judiciary Committee. 
Republicans hope to keep the proceedings focused on the accusations 
of misdeeds by Clinton, while Democrats hope to portray Starr as overzealous 
and politically motivated. In a preview of the partisanship, a Republican 
committee aide said that the chairman, Rep. Henry Hyde, R-Ill., planned 
to limit questions by Democrats to the president's conduct and block 
all efforts to attack Starr. ``If that happens,'' one Democratic strategist 
said, ``I think there will be nuclear warfare.'' Starr's decision 
to send documents regarding Ms. Willey to the House without a referral 
was a departure from the September referral on the Lewinsky matter. 
In that 445-page referral, Starr argued that the president had committed 
11 impeachable offenses of perjury, obstruction of justice, witness 
tampering and abuse of authority. But many Americans criticized the 
Starr report as unnecessarily lurid in its details of the president's 
affair with Ms. Lewinsky. Several opponents of Starr said they believed 
that some of his prosecutors were angry that the report did not persuade 
a majority of Americans that Clinton should be impeached. When Starr 
is sworn in Thursday to testify as the Judiciary Committee's first 
_ and perhaps only _ witness, he will undoubtedly be asked to explain 
his office's recent moves and its plans. Although Starr's allies say 
he looks forward to the opportunity to explain and defend himself, 
they also say he will not reveal any information about his office's 
continuing criminal inquiries. Starr huddled in his office last week 
with senior aides, drafting an opening statement. His testimony, which 
will be televised, and the public's reaction to it, could have as 
lasting an impact on Congress' handling of the impeachment question 
as Clinton's Aug. 17 grand jury testimony. And Thursday, Starr will 
switch roles when he is confronted with hostile questions from Democratic 
committee members who intend to challenge his office's methods and 
motives. More likely, Starr's appearance will have a limited impact 
on the impeachment process, which has been nearly crippled by polls 
and the Democrats' surprisingly strong showing in the midterm elections. 
Committee Republicans are divided on what they want to hear from Starr. 
Rep. Lindsey Graham, R-S.C., a committee member, said: ``It's going 
to be a good forum for him to explain his actions, and how did he 
start in Whitewater and end up in the Paula Jones case.'' But Rep. 
Charles Canady, R-Fla., a committee member, said it would be a ``wild 
goose chase'' to review how Starr ended up pursuing the Lewinsky matter. 
``I hope his presentation will focus on the central issues concerning 
whether the president obstructed justice and lied under oath,'' Canady 
said. Some Republican committee members hope that Starr's performance 
re-energizes the impeachment proceedings, which many lawmakers believe 
are doomed to fail when the full House votes on articles of impeachment. 
To help the members, Republican staff members distributed a memorandum 
of ``positive points'' about Starr. Aides said last week that committee 
members also planned to quiz Starr about other aspects of his four-year-old 
investigation. Despite the indictment of Hubbell on Friday, Starr 
has not provided his conclusions in his examination of the ties between 
the Clintons and the corrupt savings and loan association in Arkansas 
that was owned and operated by James and Susan McDougal, the Clintons' 
business partners in the Whitewater land deal in the 1980s. Hubbell 
has accused Starr of prosecuting him in an effort to get him to lie 
about the president and Mrs. Clinton. Friday, Hubbell told reporters, 
``I don't know of any wrongdoing on behalf of the first lady or the 
president, and nothing the independent counsel can do to me is going 
to make me lie about that.'' Earlier this month, Julie Hiatt Steele, 
a former friend of Ms. Willey, was informed that she was a target 
of Starr's inquiry. Ms. Steele had initially confirmed aspects of 
Ms. Willey's account but later disavowed it and has testified that 
Ms. Willey asked her to lie about the incident involving Clinton. 
Nancy Luque, Ms. Steele's lawyer, said Friday that prosecutors had 
tried to pressure Ms. Steele to change her story. ``They thought they 
could terrorize her to go along with the program,'' Ms. Luque said. 
One issue likely to be raised with Starr is the accusation that Starr's 
office received, through intermediaries, a tip about Linda R. Tripp 
before she officially contacted the independent counsel's office on 
Jan. 12 to disclose Ms. Lewinsky's involvement with the president. 
At a hearing last month before a U.S. Court of Appeals, Starr bristled 
at criticism of his office. He appeared uncharacteristically combative 
as he defended its handling of the Hubbell tax case. ``I'm doing exactly 
now what I did in 1994 and not a peep was raised,'' Starr told the 
three-judge panel. ``I shouldn't say me. I'm getting personal. The 
independent counsel.'' 
</TEXT>
</DOC>