<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981114.0084 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Faced with a huge student protest and a wild outbreak of rioting and 
arson, President B.J. Habibie said Saturday that he would take ``firm 
action'' to curb what he called subversive movements that threaten 
the country's stability. On the day after soldiers killed at least 
eight demonstrators and wounded more than 100 others, tens of thousands 
of students and poor people filled a highway Saturday in front of 
the parliament building in what seemed an unfocused and unguided outpouring 
of discontent. Their protests were supported by an unlikely ally: 
former President Suharto. ``I resigned from my position to avoid bloodshed,'' 
Suharto was quoted by his half-brother, Probosutedjo, as saying. ``Why 
does the government now cause bloodshed?'' He said Habibie's government 
should apologize and listen to the demands of the protesters. Later 
Saturday, in an echo of the riots that helped shake Suharto from office 
in May, residents of poor neighborhoods attacked shopping malls, banks, 
car dealerships, police stations and Chinese-owned shops in a surge 
of looting and vandalism. One police officer was reported to have 
been beaten to death. But in contrast with the riots six months ago, 
troops and fire engines took action to quell the riots and douse the 
flames. Their ability to bring the first outbreaks of violence under 
control Saturday appeared to confirm suspicions that the earlier riots 
had been allowed and even instigated by elements of the military. 
In a statement to the nation, Habibie took a tough line against the 
demonstrators who had protested against a parliamentary session he 
had organized last week and had called for his resignation. In a response 
that recalled the attitudes of his mentor, Suharto, he said the protests 
had revealed the presence of ``subversive movements and actions that 
are endangering the unity and cohesion and the fundamentals of the 
life of the nation and state.'' He said he had ordered the military 
to ``immediately take firm action.'' Soon afterward, the governor 
of Jakarta, Sutiyoso, announced a curfew over the weekend for the 
capital city from 10 p.m. until dawn. A Western diplomat said it was 
unclear what groups Habibie might have in mind, or whether he or his 
military advisers were using accusations of subversion, as Suharto 
did, as an excuse for a crackdown. Throughout Saturday, the military 
calmed the growing crowds of demonstrators with a tactfulness that 
contrasted with the sheer rage the soldiers had exhibited when they 
gunned down students Friday night. The key element, Indonesians said, 
was that most of the crowd control was handed over Saturday to the 
marines in their pink berets, a seasoned force that enjoys unique 
respect among the people. ``Hooray for the marines,'' the students 
shouted Saturday morning, along with, ``Down with Habibie.'' The crowd 
of students and supporters swelled to as many as 50,000 during the 
day and was permitted to fill a highway outside the front gates of 
the now-empty parliament building. They sang and chanted into the 
night as the marines stood guard between them and the gates. Even 
as they gathered there shortly after noon, plumes of black smoke were 
rising above the city's northern Chinatown and other poor areas. Ethnic 
Chinese residents and their shops and homes were particular targets 
of the May riots, in which nearly 1,200 people died and hundreds of 
buildings were looted, burned and vandalized. The rioting Saturday 
was less widespread, but at times the mobs of looters were so large 
that soldiers could only stand by and watch. Military tents were burned 
in a park near the parliament building and an army truck was burned 
near the University of Indonesia. At the Atrium shopping center, young 
men hurled rocks through the building's glass walls from a nearby 
highway overpass, which carried a red and white neon exhortation reading, 
``National Discipline.'' They smashed the windows and lobby of the 
Atrium Hotel at the back of the shopping center, forcing the evacuation 
of dozens of foreign guests. ``This is a warning to Habibie about 
what could happen when the masses are angry,'' said Hariono, 19, a 
local resident, standing among a row of trees that had been uprooted 
from a median by rioters. But it was at the Atrium that the contrast 
with last May was particularly noticeable. A cordon of marines moved 
through the crowd, clearing the area around the building, and a military 
jeep patrolled the newly empty streets urging people to return home. 
``It's time for prayer,'' repeated a soldier with a megaphone, as 
dusk fell. ``Go home and don't cause any more damage. You know it 
will cost a lot and will take a long time to rebuild.'' 
</TEXT>
</DOC>