<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981114.0075 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
It was not supposed to turn out this way. Tough sanctions linked to 
aggressive arms inspections were intended to keep Saddam Hussein boxed 
in, not to drive the United States into a corner. But time and again 
Washington has had to turn to military action or the threat of war 
to beat down a challenge from the Iraqi leader, whose continued intention 
is to possess an armory of the world's most lethal weapons. When the 
confrontation ends, Iraq goes back into the box, but it is a container 
that gets flimsier with each showdown. For more than a year, it has 
been evident to governments in every region of the world that the 
Clinton administration's policy of sanctions forever has run its course. 
Saddam won power by terror and depleted Iraq's resources in war and 
ostentation even before he unwisely strayed into Kuwait in 1990, and 
if he ever intended to cooperate with arms inspections, he very clearly 
decided within the last year that he had played the game long enough. 
For months, foreign and domestic critics of the U.S. policy on Iraq 
have urged the administration to show some creativity or flexibility 
_ or even naked muscle _ to steer away from a dead end. At one extreme 
are those who think the time is overdue to remove the president of 
Iraq by marching on Baghdad. At the other are those like France, Russia, 
some large developing countries and most Arab nations who say they 
no longer see a direct military threat. They essentially urge United 
States to let Saddam sell oil while policing Iraq from afar, but they 
are also willing to stand back and let America bomb. In between, other 
ideas lie in wait. The administration has found one option particularly 
appealing: sporadic bombing aimed at knocking out specific sites or 
generally intimidating Saddam, but not removing him from power. The 
problem would be Saddam's survival, which would guarantee continued 
trouble and, if many ordinary Iraqis were killed, a loss of support 
around the world. A full-scale attack on Iraq and, perhaps, an occupation 
of Baghdad is a course that the Bush administration ruled out in 1991 
and the Clinton administration is not likely to choose. It has a growing 
number of supporters on the conservative side of politics in the United 
States, but virtually no backers abroad. Iraq was greatly weakened 
by the Persian Gulf war, but Saddam still has the power to force every 
Iraqi adult into military service and he has been allowed to keep 
a formidable defensive arsenal. Joshua Muravchik, a scholar at the 
American Enterprise Institute in Washington, said that even leaving 
aside the material and political costs of assembling a huge army and 
persuading the public to accept casualties, U.S. leaders have apparently 
concluded that there is little point in ousting Saddam; the rationale 
is that responsible, democratic government doesn't seem to work in 
the region. But Muravchik, the author of ``Exporting Democracy,'' 
argues that's no excuse. ``The lessons learned in the 1930s about 
aggressors led us to get rid of them,'' he said. ``We occupied Germany 
and Japan to insure that there would be more benign governments. That 
clearly was what would have been necessary in Iraq, but we didn't 
have the courage to do it.'' Now, he said, it is up to dissidents 
to overthrow him. Arab diplomats respond that a U.S.occupation of 
Iraq _ in the heart of a region that still harbors resentment of the 
British occupation after the fall of the Ottoman Empire following 
World War I _ would be a calamity. The Iraqis under Saddam are especially 
sensitive on this issue, but they are not alone. ``It would be preposterous,'' 
said Clovis Maksoud, a former U.N. representative of the Arab League 
who now directs American University's Center for the Global South 
in Washington. The Arab world has two major popular causes: the completion 
of the Mideast peace agreement and the end of suffering for the people 
of Iraq. A military occupation would inflame a region where the United 
States has little power of persuasion and little presence. From Pakistan 
almost to the Mediterranean, the United States has either no functioning 
U.S. embassies _ the case in Afghanistan, Iran and Iraq _ or uneasy 
relations, as in Syria and Lebanon. The dearth of U.S. leverage in 
the gulf has prompted some officials, including Secretary of State 
Madeleine Albright, to rethink the ``dual containment'' of Iraq and 
Iran and make overtures to the Iranians under a more open president, 
Mohammed Khatami. But sharp political differences within Iran between 
Khatami's supporters and the ultra-conservative religious leadership 
make any hope of using Iran as a counterweight to Iraq problematic 
at best. While the U.S. overture to Iran was taking shape, Saddam 
was getting bolder, not more hesitant. There are those who would turn 
over the job of deposing Saddam to his most opportunistic enemies. 
Congress has authorized $97 million for military help to opposition 
groups like the Iraqi National Congress and two Kurdish resistance 
organizations. It is hard to find an expert on the region who thinks 
this course has any hope of succeeding. Similar judgments are made 
about hopes that Saddam's army, or elements of it, will turn against 
him. A diplomat in Baghdad said in an interview early this year that 
the Iraqi president has layers upon intersecting layers of intelligence 
operations and more cells of informers than anyone can count. A hint 
of trouble can wipe out not only the plotter but his whole family. 
The same fear attends the professional middle class and virtually 
all government employees, who have also taken the hardest hit from 
sanctions, and are increasingly bitter about what they see as a U.S. 
policy indifferent to their fate. Suggestions from outside the administration 
that sanctions be redrawn or at least tinkered with to free the middle 
class from restrictions on travel and a range of foreign contacts 
have apparently been ignored. U.S. officials say they cannot trust 
the Iraqi leadership not to use such openings for its own purposes. 
A U.S. expert with years of experience in the region said that perhaps 
only the manipulation of tribal differences in the Iraqi heartland, 
where Saddam and his Tikriti clan are quietly loathed, would have 
a hope of bringing down the regime from within. But the United States 
appears to have no handle on these internal divisions. And other scholars 
of the region, as well as many Iraqi exiles, worry about who would 
take Saddam's place. His sons, Uday and Qusay, described by many Iraqis 
as even more corrupt and ruthless than him, wait in the wings. The 
argument over what to do about sanctions raises several questions. 
Should sanctions _ above all the embargo on Iraqi oil sales _ be withdrawn, 
leaving Saddam with no more propaganda mileage to be made from his 
suffering people? Should this be done before there is a strong, fail-safe 
arms-monitoring process in place to keep an eye on Saddam? Or should 
the arms inspection system, which Saddam has turned into his most 
effective pressure point against the United Nations and the United 
States, be abandoned while sanctions stay in place? ``No inspections 
_ and sanctions _ is much worse than full inspections and diminished 
sanctions,'' said David Albright of the independent Institute for 
Science and International Security in Washington. His views are widely 
shared by experts wary of those who believe that standard intelligence 
methods would be as effective as inspectors who, as Clinton says, 
have destroyed more Iraqi arms that the gulf war did. But what if 
the world just abandoned both sanctions and inspections? There are 
those who believe that Iraq is no longer an immediate military threat 
and that the penalties being paid by the Iraqi people are too high 
to justify for much longer. The Clinton administration will never 
let this happen, officials say. And within the United Nations, diplomats 
from many regions fear the precedent it would set. ``You don't bargain 
with the Security Council,'' a Scandinavian diplomat said last week, 
a day before the Nordic countries joined in warning Saddam to get 
back in line. The sanctions-with-inspections program created for Iraq 
was once seen as a useful model for dealing with tyrants in a world 
no longer eager to mount peacekeeping missions. Many diplomats do 
not want to see it tossed out because of Iraq. All of this leaves 
still one more alternative, and it may well be the one that becomes 
reality. This option assumes that the United States manages to keep 
sanctions in place indefinitely, but with dwindling support from other 
nations. The sanctions are already eroding. Hardly a week goes by 
when the press in India, an old ally of Iraq, doesn't trumpet a new 
agreement with Baghdad. Indians are selling Iraqis food and computers, 
and high-level visits have resumed. Turkey is trading through the 
Kurdish regions of northern Iraq, recent visitors say, and illicit 
commerce through Iranian coastal waters is flourishing again. Last 
week, a new ferry service from Dubai linked Iraq to the gulf nations 
by sea for the first time since 1991. When Sfouq Rashid, an Iraqi 
passenger, disembarked at the Iraqi port of Umm Qasr on Tuesday, he 
told a Reuters reporter proudly: ``This service extends a ray of hope 
for the Iraqi people. God willing, it will break the siege on Iraq.'' 
</TEXT>
</DOC>