<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981114.0001 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Although he has been a Ranger for only a few months, John MacLean 
enjoyed a dignitary's treatment Friday night before his team played 
the Boston Bruins at Madison Square Garden. His new teammates presented 
him with a silver stick, in honor of MacLean's having played 1,000 
games, most of them with the Devils, over 15 National Hockey League 
seasons. A player who seems to smile more than most people, MacLean 
showed joy on his face and maybe a little moisture in his eyes when 
greeted on the ice by family members to the polite applause from the 
capacity crowd. Once the game began, MacLean showed why he has stayed 
in the league for so long and why the Rangers signed him to a three-year, 
$7.2-million contract last summer as a free agent. He scored twice 
_ once on the power play, once at even strength. That was the happy 
part of a game that ended with disappointment for the Rangers. They 
squandered a 3-1 lead in the final seven minutes of regulation time 
and settled for a 3-3 tie. Niklas Sundstrom got the other Ranger goal, 
also on the power play, in an interesting and well-played match. Kyle 
MacLaren, Steve Heinze and Dmitri Khristich scored for Boston. Khristich 
got his with a deflection from in front with 1:02 remaining in regulation. 
Despite the late fade, it was an encouraging performance for the Rangers, 
who got an effective effort from their three top lines. Also playing 
well was another right wing, Aleksei Kovalev, who assisted on one 
goal, set up another and put several shots on goal. The Bruins led 
by 1-0 after one period, but the Rangers led by 2-1 after two. Scoring 
the game's first goal was McLaren, on the power play, at 16:01, beating 
Mike Richter on a big rebound near the crease after a long shot by 
Ray Bourque. The Rangers tied it, also on the power play, at 13:23 
of the second. MacLean got credit for the goal after Brian Leetch's 
shot hit both MacLean and and Don Sweeney before getting past Byron 
Dafoe, the Boston goalie. The Rangers took a 2-1 lead at even strength 
at 16:31 on MacLean's second of the night and sixth of the season. 
During an aggressive shift by his line, MacLean took a left-to-right 
pass from Leetch and wristed the puck from the inside edge of the 
left circle. Although he did not get an assist on the play, Kevin 
Stevens was instrumental in the goal because he delivered a hard check 
to start the play and continued by going to the slot to take up space 
and create havoc. Even before Sundstrom's third-period goal, the Rangers 
got several effective shifts from him and his linemates Wayne Gretzky 
and Kovalev. Kovalev, playing his second game since returning from 
a shoulder injury, was back on the right wing, after centering the 
fourth line in the previous game. He worked the right point on some 
power-play shifts and created the play on MacLean's first goal by 
carrying the puck into the Boston zone. Todd Harvey, usually the most 
rambunctious of Rangers, threw many hard hits, particularly early 
in the game. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>