<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981114.0083 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
I am a product of America's cities. For the first 40 years of my life, 
I had never been to anything like Price Club. Dairy Queen was a once-a-year 
pit stop on vacations. I had never car-pooled to a soccer game. In 
fact, but for a brief period a decade ago, my husband and I never 
owned a car. Then, a year ago, we moved to China _ and somehow ended 
up in middle America. Let me describe a typical Saturday here in Beijing, 
within marching distance of the Great Hall of the People. We begin 
by all piling into the sport-utility vehicle (a Chinese-made Jeep) 
to get the kids to soccer. But wait: It's our turn to bring halftime 
snacks! No problem; we'll just stop at the Dunkin' Donuts for donut 
holes. In the People's Republic of China, I have become a soccer mom. 
After the game, if the weather is warm, we might head to the pool 
for a swim. Other families drive to stables for horseback riding, 
still others to one of the many miniature golf courses for a bit more 
sport. Later, there's a stop at the new Price Smart, Beijing's latest 
cavernous, members-only supermarket, where we can buy 24 rolls of 
toilet paper and vast containers of Tootsie Rolls. It's easy to find, 
right next to a huge bowling alley and down the ring road from a mall. 
Hungry? There are over 40 McDonald's. There's Dairy Queen and Baskin-Robbins 
and the gleaming new Haagen-Dazs parlor that this summer sprang up 
from the gritty pavement off Jian Guo Men Wai Avenue. So this is what 
the Communist Party means by ``socialism with Chinese characteristics''! 
But isn't this what it's like in Des Moines? Now, in case the skeptical 
among you think that what I'm describing is just the lifestyle of 
homesick American executives, diplomats and journalists, guess again. 
True, the soccer game was mostly for Western kids. But the most jarring 
thing about urban China is that it is the Chinese _ albeit better-off 
Chinese _ who are packing the Pizza Huts, the Ikeas, the Putt Putt 
miniature golf courses and the Clarins skin-care salons. Although 
most people here have never voted and the Communist Party maintains 
a tight grip on politics, the market provides plenty of choice in 
many spheres, to the small but growing number of Chinese with disposable 
income. And they are making these choices with the gusto of Bedouins 
who suddenly happen on a vast reservoir. There are many reasons why 
the fruit of middle America has been quick to catch on in Beijing. 
The Chinese have seen it on imported TV shows and longed for it for 
years. Middle America is relentlessly clean and modern _ appealing 
in a country with a lot of ancient relics but a shortage of functioning 
flush toilets. And middlebrow Americana suits the still-limited budgets 
of Chinese consumers. Thus this year millions of Chinese paid $8 a 
head to see ``Titanic,'' but few were willing to shell out $60 (two 
weeks' salary for a teacher here) to see a much-praised production 
of Puccini's ``Turandot'' staged in the Forbidden City. It is probably 
not a coincidence that the first joint-venture hotel in Beijing, the 
Jian Guo _ which caters to both Chinese and foreigners _ was modeled 
after a Holiday Inn in Arizona, not the Plaza in New York. Of course, 
most of the city is still quintessentially Chinese, with bicycles 
and pedicabs vying for position with horse-drawn carts bearing high 
stacks of watermelons and cabbages. At dawn, the parks are still full 
of old men in Mao suits doing tai chi exercises, and the narrow alleys 
are jammed with vendors selling Chinese pancakes and odd boiled eggs 
that taste like salt. The juxtaposition of such scenes with American-style 
bowling alleys and indoor playgrounds gives Beijing its extraordinary 
character. And the Chinese add their distinctive veneer to what would 
otherwise be predictably American establishments. In addition to Frosted 
Flakes, the Price Smart sells frozen jiaoze and fresh dou miao, the 
dumplings and bean sprouts that are staples of Beijing cuisine. The 
riding stables are staffed by former officers of the People's Liberation 
Army and offer surly horses that respond only to Chinese. At McDonald's, 
workers teach children elaborate dance routines that defy Western 
neurons. Grandmas, or nai nais, who would never touch a burger nevertheless 
go to McDonald's to watch their precious grandchildren scarf down 
Happy Meals. In the United States, I mostly dreaded trips to fun emporiums 
like Chuck E. Cheese. But somehow here I don't mind the cacophony 
of Fundazzle, an indoor playground sometimes flocked with whole schools 
full of Chinese children, with a climbing maze the size of a football 
field and a ball pit the size of a large swimming pool. I like the 
sign there that reminds Chinese to put diapers on infants. (Most Chinese 
toddlers pee right onto the street through a perpetually gaping front-to-back 
slit in their pants.) I like the elaborate charts explaining to education-obsessed 
Chinese parents why the games are a scientific method of improving 
your one and only child's hand-eye coordination, sequencing skills 
or attention span. As the kids play, I sometimes chat about this and 
that with the other parents, who I know by their age must have spent 
childhoods separated from their families or living as peasants in 
the countryside during the madness of the Cultural Revolution. We've 
come from such different places to be here. I'm perpetually surprised 
that so many Chinese can afford such outings, with tickets to Fundazzle 
going for $5 per child in a city where the average monthly income 
is officially $100. Even more that so many flock to the new Haagen 
Dazs, where we hesitate to go because the sundaes can set you back 
more than $10. But there are now Beijing residents whose spending 
power far outstrips mine. They would not be caught dead owning our 
tinny Beijing Jeep, for example, which we bought because high import 
duties precluded an imported car. Some have even joined expatriate 
corporate executives in whitewashed villa complexes in the suburbs 
of Beijing, places with names like Celebrity Gardens and Capital Paradise, 
with detached 4 bedroom homes, backyards and guards. We won't follow, 
even though I hate the city's pollution and traffic. The suburban 
developments of Beijing feel too much like the suburbs of St. Louis 
or Phoenix. You could be anywhere. Still, I'm grateful that moving 
someplace exotic gave me license to get behind Price Smart's enormous 
orange shopping carts. Member shopping is cheap and convenient. And, 
Manhattanites, if you're too proud to do it close to home, come to 
China and check it out. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>