<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981114.0134 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
He will tell you that the expectations will not bother him, that he 
can handle the burden placed on his slender shoulders, shoulders that, 
up close, are clearly those of a freshman. But when Erick Barkley 
launched his first shot of the basketball preseason, his first as 
a starting point guard for the St. John's Red Storm, the 3-point attempt 
left his hands a bit too quickly, even though no defender was near 
him. As the ball dropped a good foot short of the rim, Barkley's shoulders 
dropped, too. He would end the game making 2 of 9 from 3-point range, 
would miss on an attempt to win the game in the final seconds of regulation 
and would endure the first of what figure to be many learning experiences. 
``Nerves,'' Barkley said, scanning the box score after that exhibition 
game two weeks ago, in which Barkley compiled 17 points, 6 assists 
and 5 steals. Then he repeated it in a way that made you believe that 
the lack of composure might last. ``Nerves.'' If Barkley felt them 
that day, then Mike Jarvis should, too. His hopes in his inaugural 
season as head coach of St. John's hinge greatly on Barkley's ability 
to acclimate quickly to the rigors of Big East basketball. Jarvis 
has handed the ball to the highly touted point guard and insisted 
from the first day of practice that he had no fear that Barkley was 
up to the task. Last Tuesday, in the Red Storm's second and final 
exhibition game, Barkley turned the ball over seven times, sometimes 
trying to dribble through traffic or force a pass into a sliver of 
space that even he, with his uncanny accuracy, could not find. If 
those moments are the things that will keep Jarvis awake at night, 
then images will also flash through of plays like the 3-on-2 fast 
break he ran, dribbling up the middle of the floor at full speed, 
swooping into the heart of the defense and then deftly slipping the 
ball around the back of one defender to find Bootsy Thornton for an 
easy layup. ``Erick is obviously one of the building blocks of the 
program,'' Jarvis said after that game. ``Erick Barkley is going to 
be a great point guard, but Erick Barkley is a freshman. Tonight, 
at times, he played like one and, at times, he played like a senior.'' 
Barkley said, ``I'm only human and I'm going to make mistakes, but 
that's part of me learning as a freshman.'' It will take a lot of 
teaching and even more patience. The team that Barkley will lead has 
little more experience than he does. Felipe Lopez and Zendon Hamilton, 
the stars of last year's team that earned a National Collegiate Athletic 
Association tournament berth, are gone. Ron Artest, the Big East rookie 
of the year last season, must score more as well as man the inside 
at times for the undersized Red Storm. Tyrone Grant and Lavor Postell, 
bit players a year ago, are being pushed into the spotlight, along 
with Thornton, a junior college transfer whose early tenure in the 
Big East may consist of trying to score enough to make up for his 
defensive failings. Another junior college transfer, Albert Richardson, 
will probably start at center. It is Barkley who is being asked to 
hold the team together, using his familiarity with the players from 
their days on the playgrounds of New York, from the heated contests 
of the summer leagues and the afternoon sessions at Alumni Hall. But 
the grace period is limited for a player chosen by Big East coaches 
as the preseason co-rookie of the year, along with Georgetown's Anthony 
Perry. ``I read the clippings, but I try not to let that put pressure 
on me,'' Barkley said. ``I just try to relax and just play how I normally 
play.'' Barkley, a child of the city, has grown up seeing New York 
legends like Kenny Anderson and Stephon Marbury live and die through 
large-type headlines. ``Sometimes I try not to read it,'' he said. 
``I really don't like it. A freshman should not be exposed to the 
public like that. But exposure is good. I know it can help me or break 
me.'' Grant, his roommate and a senior co-captain, said: ``I believe 
Erick deserves everything he's getting because he's as good as advertised. 
Sooner or later, you're all going to get the opportunity to experience 
what I've been experiencing the last couple of years.'' The youngest 
of nine children who grew up nearby in the Farragut section of Brooklyn, 
Barkley starred at Christ the King High School before going to Maine 
Central Institute last year, a prep school, as much to refine his 
study skills as his playmaking abilities. Now he is back home, with 
friends and family crowding the stands at Alumni Hall. There is the 
pressure of being a freshman trying to guide a big-time program as 
well as the pressure of doing it in your hometown. ``My head is pretty 
much on straight now,'' Barkley said. ``I don't think nothing can 
stop me from what I'm striving for.'' Jarvis added: ``I hope he doesn't 
change. I hope fans, people telling him he's not scoring enough or 
not doing this and doing that, don't change him. He doesn't have to 
change for anybody. He's got the package. The only thing he doesn't 
have is the college experience. He's going to get it.'' 
</TEXT>
</DOC>