<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981114.0077 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Lean has not made Jessie Tuggle mean. His last 11 seasons as middle 
linebacker for the Atlanta Falcons have been so lean. A mere 58 Falcons' 
victories, a lousy 113 Falcons' defeats. The playoffs? Two seasons 
in, nine seasons out. And, please, do no mention the San Francisco 
49ers. In the last six seasons alone, Tuggle has struggled with his 
Falcons dropping 10 games to San Francisco and winning only two. We 
are talking terrible defeats. The San Francisco offense in those 10 
victories helped the 49ers average 40.9 points scored. In 1994, the 
49ers hit the Falcons for 50 points. In 1992, they toasted them for 
56 points. ``Over the years, they have really brought some firepower 
at us,'' said Tuggle, now in his 12th Atlanta season. ``This game 
is all about confidence. It is all about believing what you can do. 
When the 49ers play Green Bay, they know they are in trouble. They 
know that Green Bay hurts them. And they have fallen apart against 
Green Bay. The 49ers for years have used that same confidence thing 
and turned it on teams like the Rams and Saints.'' On teams like the 
Falcons. ``But when we have beaten them, we've been determined,'' 
Tuggle said. ``I remember Christmas Eve, 1995. It's the last game 
of the regular season. We have to win just to make the playoffs and 
they have to win to get home-field advantage through the entire playoffs. 
We win at the end, on Terrance Mathis' great catch and run for the 
touchdown, 28-27. That was determination. But you know what? It's 
a lot easier to look back than it is to look forward.'' So, let's 
look forward. San Francisco vs. Atlanta Sunday afternoon in the Georgia 
Dome. Both teams own 7-2 records. The winner stands alone in first 
place in the National Football Conference West division. Seldom have 
the Atlanta Falcons seen this much hype. They have never been 7-2 
before. Last season they played before a home crowd as few as 36,000. 
Sunday the Georgia Dome will be pumping with more than 70,000, the 
team's first sellout in three years. Just last year, the Falcons started 
1-7. But look at this current streak: Atlanta is winner of 2 straight, 
5 of 6, 7 of 9, 12 of 15 and 13 of 17. They have won six straight 
overall. They have won six straight at the Georgia Dome. They are 
tied with San Francisco for the second-best record in the NFC, behind 
Minnesota's 8-1. And Jessie Tuggle is right in the middle of it. He 
is the NFL's leading active tackler with 1,638 tackles. He has led 
the Falcons in tackles for nine consecutive seasons. He has helped 
the Falcons defense rise leaguewide to first in fumble recoveries, 
second in take-aways and second in rushing defense. Tuggle, 33, grew 
up 40 miles south of Atlanta in Griffin, Ga. He is 5-foot-11, 230 
pounds, a small linebacker by NFL standards. Tuggle, however, sets 
his own standards. Throughout all of the tough years and embarrassing 
Atlanta losses, Tuggle remained classy and persistent. When all around 
him appeared to be crumbling, he remained focused, worked hard and 
kept building. The Falcons coaching staff trusts Tuggle. They realize 
what kind of leader he is. His peers respect him. His small size but 
tremendous gifts of speed, quickness, technique and desire have made 
him a Pro Bowl player in four of the last six years. Not bad for a 
guy who as a senior high school linebacker was 5-10, 180 pounds. The 
49ers know they must account for a small giant. Again. ``I'm big on 
setting goals,'' Tuggle said. ``I had my jersey retired at Griffin 
High three weeks ago and I was walking on the field and getting flashbacks. 
I never imagined in my wildest dreams that I could accomplish so much 
in football. I was a small linebacker who went to a small college, 
Valdosta State. They said I was too short to play pro football. But 
now I can look in the mirror and hold my head high, regardless of 
everything.'' Dan Reeves, the Falcons head coach, looks for Tuggle 
to lead in the locker room and beyond. He expects that Tuggle will 
lead the emotion and spirit that his defense should exhibit Sunday 
against the 49ers. ``Coach Reeves came in here and took care of the 
little things,'' Tuggle said. ``In practice, no sitting on your helmet. 
In meetings, no caps. The weight room, everybody participates on the 
same program. Little things that mean a lot and build a team. My parents 
were like that. They had rules and they worked hard but they never 
complained. They did all of the little things.'' It is easier for 
Tuggle to look forward now. Looking backward, he sees how the 49ers 
on Sept. 27th in San Francisco handled the Falcons once again, by 
31-20. ``There is a fire burning inside this team,'' Tuggle said. 
``We are not going to let the 49ers come into our own backyard and 
intimidate us. This game is different. This year is different.'' 
</TEXT>
</DOC>