<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981114.0066 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Leaving much unfinished business, President Clinton planned to fly 
late Saturday to a country he is not eager to visit for an economic 
conference his aides expect will produce few results. The annual summit 
meeting of nations touching the Pacific Ocean was Clinton's own invention, 
a meeting meant to face the new challenges of a global economic interdependence 
rather than the old challenges of arms and dictators. This year, though, 
it falls in the middle of Clinton's preparations for a possible attack 
on Iraq, and in the middle of what Clinton calls the ``biggest challenge 
to the global economy in half a century.'' If that is not complicated 
enough, the meeting convenes in Malaysia, where Prime Minister Mahathir 
Mohamad has scorned American prescriptions for recovery, closed off 
his economy and jailed his Western-trained finance minister, Anwar 
Ibrahim, on what the administration regards as trumped-up charges. 
It was possible that the Iraq crisis would force the president to 
cancel or curtail the trip, which includes subsequent stops in Japan, 
South Korea and Guam for meetings that are long on ceremony and may 
prove short on substance. But Clinton's economic team said he had 
excellent reasons to go, one of them a desire to encourage Asian countries 
to continue opening their economies. The global crisis has fueled 
calls throughout Asia to rethink just how open these countries want 
to leave their borders to investments, which can flow out far faster 
than they flowed in, leaving economic and political chaos in their 
wake. While most nations in Asia have publicly repeated their commitment 
to ever-freer markets, they are also watching Mahathir's approach 
for signs of success. Clinton has other business to conduct, including 
a meeting Monday morning in Kuala Lumpur, Malaysia, with President 
Jiang Zemin of China, at a time of growing worry about China's economic 
troubles. There is also concern about Beijing's backsliding on human 
rights. ``The early signs are in the wrong direction,'' Clinton's 
trade representative, Charlene Barshefsky, said in a recent interview, 
``inconsistent with China's pronouncements of its ostensible desire 
to move to an economy more open to the world.'' As in meetings in 
South Korea and Japan, Clinton also plans to discuss the United States' 
growing concerns about North Korea, which is resisting American demands 
to allow inspection of a vast new site that the CIA believes could 
be a nuclear weapons plant in the making. In Japan, Clinton is scheduled 
to hold a televised ``town hall'' meeting _ an American-style event 
that is likely to strike his audience as unusual. This is part of 
an effort to reach around government officials and spread his plea 
for economic liberalization countrywide. From a political standpoint, 
the timing of Clinton's trip is not bad at all, his aides acknowledged. 
On Friday, Kenneth Starr, the independent counsel, sent more information 
about the president's conduct to Congress, and Clinton agreed to pay 
Paula Corbin Jones $850,000 to settle her 4-year-old sexual misconduct 
complaint against him. Next Thursday, Starr is scheduled to testify 
before the House Judiciary Committee, which is conducting impeachment 
hearings. The trip, Clinton's aides said, will show him focused on 
his job as Republicans in Congress once again focus on his scandals. 
And while detailed trade discussions may not make for riveting television, 
one senior administration official said, ``simply seeing him on the 
job on this, even if people don't fully follow all of it, is going 
to be enough.'' But the administration has made little effort to raise 
expectations for what Clinton will accomplish. The focus of the summit 
meeting will be how to deal with the region's banks, which are drowning 
in hundreds of billions of dollars in unrecoverable debts, much of 
it in real estate deals that went sour when the Asian boom went bust. 
The United States has been tinkering for weeks with plans based on 
the lessons learned during the savings and loan crisis of the 1980s. 
But carrying out the program will take money _ and Washington is not 
ready to provide any. So it is broadly hinting that Japan should help 
pay for the program, using $30 billion in aid to Southeast Asia that 
Japan's finance minister, Kiichi Miyazawa, announced last month. ``It's 
typically American,'' one Japanese diplomat complained last week. 
``Washington's ideas and our money.'' That will not be the only conflict 
with Japan at the meeting. The chief accomplishment sought by the 
United States is a declaration that tariffs will be lowered in nine 
industrial sectors that involve $1.5 billion in trade each year. But 
Japan has balked at lowering tariffs for fish and wood products, both 
long protected by Japan's governing Liberal Democratic Party. So far 
Japan has refused to budge, leading Ms. Barshefsky to snap on Friday 
that ``token participation at the end of the day by the world's second-largest 
economy doesn't cut it.'' Fireworks may erupt in the face-off between 
Clinton and Mahathir, who has said that currency traders and American-style 
capitalism are to blame for Asia's woes. The United States is already 
struggling over how to deal with the jailing of Anwar, a friend of 
Treasury Secretary Robert Rubin and other administration officials. 
Few doubt that Anwar was jailed for challenging Mahathir. Anwar's 
trial, on charges of corruption and illicit sex, has been suspended 
for the duration of the conference. But last week Anwar embarrassed 
Mahathir by forcing the government to reveal at least one year-old 
police document suggesting that the sex charges had been cooked up 
by political enemies. To register his protest, the president will 
not meet one-on-one with Mahathir. Secretary of State Madeleine Albright 
also plans to meet with Azizah Ismail, Anwar's wife, despite official 
warnings against ``interference,'' and Clinton seems likely to make 
sharp remarks about human rights. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>