<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981114.0043 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
The player they call Meek has apparently inherited another women's 
college basketball season. And if the locked-out men's professionals 
ever inspire David Stern to open his doors, there will, according 
to the leading indicators, be an abbreviated return engagement by 
the marketing machine named Mike. Rack up those No. 23 jerseys. Mike 
and Meek, a mutual admiration society of two, are looking for another 
run. ``Yo, Meek,'' said Mike, picking Chamique Holdsclaw right out 
of a crowd of Tennessee Lady Vols last winter in Chicago, when basketball's 
first lady accompanied her teammates to a prearranged audience with 
the sport's leading man. At the White House last Monday, President 
Clinton demonstrated how, these days, one morning briefing is enough 
to become an instant basketball expert, popular with men and women 
voters. While honoring Tennessee's national champions, he noted that 
Holdsclaw was her team's leading scorer and her sport's player of 
the year. ``Incidentally,'' the president added, ``she was wearing 
No. 23. Like Michael Jordan, she dominated every game of the season.'' 
It was stylish, yet predictable, which, it seems to me, is one significant 
reason beyond the resentment of the rank-and-file rich man why so 
few fans claim to not miss Jordan and his supporting cast of 300-plus. 
People have seen the movie already, and know how it ends. I suspected 
last spring that Holdsclaw would come to a similar conclusion and 
forgo her senior season, after three national titles, and with Stern's 
women's league ready to offer Madison Square Garden in her native 
New York. Holdsclaw could have pocketed at least a couple of hundred 
grand and been back in Knoxville by now, finishing her degree. Somehow, 
against such impeccable logic, Pat Summitt lured back her star, which 
gives you an idea of her persuasive powers, and what the rest of the 
women's game is typically up against. There is nothing shy or retiring 
about Holdsclaw and her catchy cast of supporting Meeks _ Tamika Catchings 
and Semeka Randall _ but here's hoping that a challenge can at least 
be mounted to Summitt's Lady Vols as they work toward their fourth 
straight national championship and Summitt works on her third consecutive 
as-told-to book. Otherwise, this promises to be another one-note season, 
even if the note happens to be about as high as collegiate women have 
played. The women have more visibility than ever and two professional 
leagues to audition for, but their Final Four showcase last spring 
was a one-sided snooze. On a qualitative scale, they are where the 
men's game was back when John Wooden's UCLA teams knew they could 
only be beaten by an outbreak of academic ineligibility. Until more 
schools win national championships, as in the more balanced men's 
college game, the women will be tenuous everywhere but in isolated 
hotbeds like Tennessee and Connecticut. ``We can't do any better, 
obviously,'' said Summitt, referring to Tennessee's run of 39 straight 
victories last season, by an average of more than 30 points. That's 
because, she admitted, there is no mathematical possibility of playing 
as many games. Road trips to Connecticut, Louisiana Tech and Old Dominion 
may present serious obstacles to another perfect season, but Summitt 
said her goal is merely ``reaching the final game,'' and obviously 
winning it as comfortably as Tennessee did when it crushed La Tech 
by 18 last spring. ``No, never, never,'' she said when asked if winning 
gets boring, but there certainly can be a numbing effect to Same Story 
Syndrome. That's what the National Basketball Association is suffering 
from, no matter what deal Stern eventually cuts with the union. Or 
maybe the owners have agreed they have ridden the Jordan/Bulls story 
line as far as they can, and, with no compelling alternatives, they 
are willing to junk the season altogether, teach these players a lesson, 
once and for all. I keep hearing how the NBA is playing with fire, 
risking Jordan's retirement wrath, which I know for a fact makes most 
owners laugh. They already have what they wanted from Jordan's ratings 
popularity, their four-year, $2.4 billion network television package. 
By the time they begin negotiating their next deal in three years, 
they will need a new set of stars to sell. The longer Jordan stays 
around with a championship cast, the harder it is to get people to 
pay positive attention to anyone else. To the contrary of the consensus 
opinion that the NBA will sink without Jordan, two years after he's 
gone, it won't look like a league filled so many failures anymore. 
It is not healthy for any sport to live off one player, one team, 
one theme. With all due respect to Mike and Meek, there is a limit 
to how many seasons we can take that read like a script. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>