<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981114.0137 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
The United States had prepared to begin a massive campaign of air 
strikes on Iraq on Saturday but called off the mission after a last-minute 
flurry of diplomatic activity brought an Iraqi announcement that it 
would allow U.N. weapons inspectors to resume their work, Clinton 
administration officials said. Officials insisted Saturday that American 
air strikes over the weekend were still being actively considered. 
But they said the first wave of air strikes authorized by President 
Clinton, which had been due to occur Saturday evening Iraq time, or 
during Washington's day, had been called off. The strikes would have 
involved cruise missile attacks and the bombing of Iraqi targets by 
jet fighters stationed aboard the aircraft carrier Dwight D. Eisenhower. 
The attack was called off, officials said, because of a last-ditch 
plea to Iraq issued Friday night by U.N. Secretary-General Kofi Annan 
and Iraq's announcement hours later that it would allow U.N. weapons 
inspectors to resume their ``normal work'' in Iraq. ``It was almost 
as if he knew,'' said a Pentagon official who spoke on the condition 
of anonymity, referring to the timing of Iraqi President Saddam Hussein's 
apparent decision to back down from a confrontation with the United 
States. ``It was real close.'' Administration officials said that 
Clinton had been urged by senior advisers to begin the air strikes 
earlier last week, if only to avoid the situation that is now unfolding, 
with the United States left once again in the awkward position of 
rushing a massive military force to the Persian Gulf to confront Iraq, 
only to have the Iraqis back down at the last minute. Officials said 
they feared that the administration, which had largely abandoned hope 
that the U.N. weapons program would be allowed to resume its work 
in any meaningful way, was left with the worst of all scenarios: an 
ineffective inspection program, Hussein still fully in charge, and 
a massive American military force in the Persian Gulf without a clear 
mission. They said that Iraq's announcement that it would resume cooperation 
with the United Nations in the hunt for stockpiles of weapons of mass 
destruction would make it difficult for Clinton to order an attack 
without allowing Annan at least a little more time to try to hammer 
out a deal with Iraq. Administration officials also noted that Clinton 
has scheduled a 10-day trip to Asia, and that it would be difficult 
for him to order a major military strike and deal with the diplomatic 
aftermath while out of the country. His senior national security advisers 
_ including Defense Secretary William Cohen, national security adviser 
Sandy Berger, Gen. Hugh Shelton, chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, 
and CIA director George Tenet _ met at the White House on Saturday 
to discuss how to respond to the Iraq announcement. The initial White 
House reaction was one of cynicism. ``There is a very high degree 
of skepticism about Iraqi intentions,'' said David Leavy, a spokesman 
for the National Security Council. ``The president's national-security 
team is reviewing the latest developments in a very prudent and deliberate 
way and will make a recommendation on what the appropriate next steps 
are.'' The decision by administration officials to disclose details 
of the military's plans to attack Iraq on Saturday appeared to be 
an effort to convince both the American public and the Iraqi government 
that Clinton had been prepared to act decisively after years of criticism 
that he had been too timid in confronting Iraq. ``There were many 
people in the administration who wanted _ and expected _ that we would 
significantly weaken Saddam with a heavy, sustained bombing campaign,'' 
said an administration official who was eager for an attack and spoke 
on the condition of anonymity. ``But once again, we've hitched our 
wagon with UNSCOM, even though UNSCOM doesn't work anymore.'' UNSCOM 
is the acronym for the U.N. Special Commission, which oversees the 
disarmament program imposed on Iraq after the 1991 Gulf War. The current 
crisis began last August when the Iraqis ordered the United Nations 
to end most weapons inspections until crippling economic sanctions 
on Iraq were lifted. American officials now fear that the Iraqis will 
once again play for time. And then, once the world's attention has 
turned away from Iraq and the United States has withdrawn much of 
its naval fleet and air armada from the region, Iraq could begin _ 
once again _ to interfere with the arms inspections, sparking yet 
another crisis requiring an American military buildup. ``It's a rerun,'' 
said another administration official involved in Iraq policy who also 
spoke on the condition of anonymity. The situation unfolding Saturday 
was similar in many ways to that played out late last year and earlier 
this year, when Iraq tried to expel Americans from the U.N. arms inspection 
teams, prompting Clinton to threaten air strikes against Iraq and 
to order warships and planes to the region. The crisis ended when 
the Iraqi government blinked at the eleventh hour, but not before 
the United States spent billions of dollars to beef up its military 
forces near Iraq, disrupting American military planning around the 
world for months thereafter. The American military force now surrounding 
Iraq was expected to grow markedly more powerful over the weekend 
as a wave of six B-52 bombers loaded with air-launched cruise missiles 
departed for the Gulf on Saturday from Barksdale Air Force Base, La. 
The Air Force said the heavy bombers were to be followed by a additional 
fleet of F-15 and F-16 jet fighters and B-1 bombers. The aircraft 
carrier Enterprise, with about 75 jet fighters, is also en route to 
the gulf, and is expected to arrive on Nov. 23. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>