<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981114.0177 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
The clinic in the sky is coming down closer to earth. For decades 
the Union Health Center has occupied six floors near the top of the 
27-story building at 275 Seventh Ave., between 25th and 26th streets, 
in an area that is at the confluence of the Garment District and Chelsea. 
The center provides health care for 31,000 active members of the main 
clothing workers union and 60,000 retirees in the New York area. But 
it has gone without remodeling for more than 30 years and was designed 
for a type of assembly-line medicine not in keeping with modern practice. 
Meanwhile, office tenants being squeezed out of midtown by rising 
rents are looking at locations in Chelsea and other areas of south 
of midtown. ``With its eclectic mix of former industrial and back-office/loft 
properties, Chelsea now boasts an availability rate of 2.1 percent, 
down from 15.8 percent a year ago, and a rental rate of $31.81 per 
square foot, a year-over-year increase of 94.3 percent,'' according 
to a recent report by Newmark &AMP; Company Real Estate. At 25th Street, 
275 Seventh is a little north of the heart of Chelsea, but the trends 
in the neighborhood are clear. An old Veterans Administration ambulatory 
care center at the southwest corner of Seventh Avenue and 25th Street 
is being converted into housing. So Union Health is going to vacate 
the 21st through 26th floors of the building. The space will be gutted 
and offered to commercial customers who are willing to pay for fine 
views of the Empire State Building to the east and the Hudson River 
to the west. The center might have been moved elsewhere, but the current 
location is close to the subway lines that can bring patients in from 
their working-class neighborhoods in Brooklyn, Queens, the Bronx and 
the West Side of Manhattan. Besides, the labor organization the center 
is affiliated with, the Union of Needletrades, Industrial and Textile 
Employees, owns the building, and the clinic's medical services are 
closely aligned with the union's social programs. The health center 
is operated as an independent, nonprofit corporation, said Paul Cheng 
Jr., the chief financial officer. ``We are a tenant of the union and 
we pay rent,'' Cheng said. Moving from the upper to the lower floors 
will trim the rent bill somewhat, said Darrell Halverson, the chief 
executive of the center. Halverson added that because of the union 
ownership the rent is already somewhat below the market rate, which 
he said ranges from about $20 to about $28 a square foot in the neighborhood. 
When renovations are complete, the center will occupy the fourth, 
fifth and part of the sixth floors of the building. Because of the 
wedding cake design of the building, the center will occupy about 
the same 68,000 square feet it had on five floors in the tower. The 
$14 million project is being financed by the New York State Dormitory 
Authority, which is authorized to back nonprofit ventures in addition 
to dormitories. ``Starting in January 1999 we will have a big mortgage 
we will have to pay back,'' Cheng said. ``As a nonprofit we could 
have never afforded conventional financing.'' The lower floors are 
being gutted to adapt a manufacturing building, which was once known 
as the Lefcourt Clothing Center, to the demands of modern medicine. 
The fourth floor is about one-third taller than others in the building, 
suggesting it was built as showroom space. In addition to new quarters, 
the leaders of the clinic are using the interior design to install 
a new approach to delivering medical care. ``We are adding services, 
like obstetrics and gynecology and pediatrics,'' Halverson said, ``and 
that affects the architectural plan.'' He said that the clinic, which 
dates back to 1911 and claims to be the oldest union-affiliated health 
center in the country, provides care for people who might fall through 
the cracks of the city's medical establishment. Just as at the turn 
of the century, its patients are largely immigrants, with the difference 
that today's immigrants are from Latin America and Asia, rather than 
from Italy and Eastern Europe. ``We provide health care through thick 
and thin for people who could not afford it otherwise,'' Halverson 
said. Indeed, he said, the drug-resistant tuberculosis of today is 
reminiscent of the turn of the century TB outbreaks that led to the 
founding of the health center. The new floors are being designed to 
accommodate a system of medical care that emphasizes prevention rather 
then cure. ``The old system was based on a conveyor-belt mentality,'' 
Halverson said. ``We'd load 40 people on a bus, bring them here and 
run everybody through the same series of tests. That was a misapplication 
of resources.'' He said it is now clear that a 28-year-old Latino 
male is likely to have different medical needs than a 50-year-old 
Asian woman who has been working for years in a noisy environment 
where hazardous chemicals are used. ``We used to have the annual physical 
by the union doctor,'' he said, ``and many immigrants thought this 
was good health care.'' He said the new approach was much more individual, 
with a lot more emphasis on family history and medicines taken and 
lifestyle. After conducting these interviews, primary care doctors 
can order tests based on each person's likely condition. Taking personal 
histories and asking questions is a complicated undertaking given 
the number of languages spoken by the recent immigrants. All signs 
and printed materials in the health centers are in English, Spanish 
and Chinese. ``Almost everybody in primary care is bilingual or trilingual,'' 
Halverson said. ``But even so, I employ 25 translators.'' He admits 
that using translators is less than ideal, even if it is necessary. 
``With three people in the room, something gets lost in translation.'' 
The medical space will have two of its own elevators to separate the 
patients from the rest of the tenants, a task now more or less performed 
by lobby guards. The fourth floor will have a block long waiting room 
facing on Seventh Avenue and will be dedicated to primary care. Two 
sets of examining rooms are farther back in the building with a secure 
area for doctors' offices at the far eastern area. Each of the examining 
rooms with be equipped with a computer terminal on which information 
on patients, their ailments and treatments will be displayed. The 
display will include a picture of the patient to minimize confusion 
among patients with similar names. ``We want to make sure that the 
Mrs. Yen that's in the room is the right Mrs. Yen,'' Halverson said. 
Nevertheless, the new design has had to provide room for 30,000 paper 
charts because of the prohibitive cost of entering the old data into 
the new system. ``We have tried to move away from paper, '' Cheng 
said, ``but paper, like nicotine, is addictive.'' All new charts, 
however, will be electronic. The system is designed to reduce delays 
in moving people through. If the primary care doctor prescribes medicine, 
the system alerts the pharmacy so that medicines will be ready as 
the patient is walking out. The fifth floor, which is connected to 
the fourth by a steel and glass staircase (the infirm can always take 
an elevator) is devoted to specialty medicine, including a big gym 
near the offices of orthopedic specialists and other doctors concentrating 
on muscle-skeletal disorders. This is a big area for workers in an 
industry where they operate machinery that often requires moving the 
hands and arms in the same motion over and over. This type of work 
often leads to repetitive motion disorders. ``We are putting physical 
therapy where it belongs,'' Halverson said of the gym's location near 
the doctors' offices. Because of the scope of the problem, Halverson 
said the union would often order therapy for workers, even when insurance 
coverage was in dispute. ``The union takes people in so they get therapy 
and fix the problem,'' he said. ``Afterward they will go after the 
employer's insurance. They don't always get paid, but the union considers 
that part of its social mission.'' This attitude and the union's history 
of helping immigrants adapt to a new land helps in staffing the specialists' 
offices. Unlike the primary care doctors, who are on salary, the specialists 
have independent practices where they can probably make more money 
than devoting part of the time to the health center. ``Many of our 
specialists are the sons and daughters of immigrants, whose parents 
were members of the union,'' Halverson said. ``They have a lot of 
loyalty to the union.'' He said the basic objective of the new facility 
was to give the working poor something higher-income people take for 
granted: good medical care in reasonably pleasant surroundings. ``We 
are building a medical home for people who never had one before,'' 
Halverson said. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>