<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981114.0100 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
After an all-night session in Buenos Aires, negotiators from more 
than 150 countries early Saturday set a deadline of two years for 
adopting operational rules for cutting emissions of waste industrial 
gases that are believed to cause global warming. With that, proponents 
of the Kyoto Protocol, a treaty under which the reductions are to 
be made, declared victory in the two-week round of talks. Expectations 
were low going in: U.N. officials, American diplomats and environmentalists 
said at the outset that they would consider the Buenos Aires meeting 
a success if it adopted a work program for fleshing out the Kyoto 
Protocol. That was done. But beyond that, the treaty's backers said 
the conference revealed a shift in the worldwide debate on how to 
deal with the possibility of disruptive climate change brought about 
by emissions of heat-trapping greenhouse gases, mainly carbon dioxide, 
which is produced by the burning of oil, coal, wood and natural gas. 
Buenos Aires made clear, they said, that both industry and developing 
countries were becoming more engaged in the effort to control emissions 
and in trying to make the Kyoto Protocol eventually work. Under the 
protocol, negotiated last December in Japan, industrialized countries 
agreed to accept legally binding reductions in greenhouse gases averaging 
about 5 percent below 1990 levels in the period 2008 to 2012. The 
protocol set up a number of mechanisms that was said to achieve the 
cuts most effectively and at least cost. Chief among them was a plan 
to allow countries to trade in emission rights, and another plan, 
called the clean development mechanism, to allow rich countries to 
invest in emissions-reducing enterprises in developing nations. Last 
Wednesday, Argentina became the first developing country to announce 
that it would assume binding targets and timetables for controlling 
emissions. Kazakhstan followed. Honduras led a Latin American proposal 
to speed up introduction of the advent of the clean-development mechanism. 
Some African nations expressed interest in becoming more involved. 
All of this led Stuart Eizenstat, the chief American negotiator, to 
declare a ``sea change in attitude'' after the talks concluded. At 
the same time, he said, many businesses have abandoned a posture of 
hard opposition to emissions reduction in favor of being actively 
constructive. A number of big companies, including General Motors, 
Monsanto, Shell and British Petroleum, have recently adopted such 
a stance, and Eizenstat said Saturday that their representatives seemed 
to outnumber fossil-fuel industry hard-liners in Buenos Aires. Any 
such shifts should not be overstated, however. As Eizenstat pointed 
out, there was still considerable opposition to the Kyoto Protocol 
in the ranks of industry. The two biggest and most influential developing 
countries, China and India, continued to take a hard line against 
any sort of specific emissions reduction targets for poor nations 
until rich ones are actually reducing theirs. And not everyone agreed 
with the Eizenstat assessment. ``I don't think the business community 
is split,'' William O'Keefe, a spokesman for the American Petroleum 
Institute, said this week. While a number of companies are indeed 
taking a constructive course, he said, few support the Kyoto Protocol. 
In general, the fossil-fuel industry and conservative American politicians 
continue to portray the protocol as a misbegotten instrument that 
will not work and will be too costly to the American economy. Sen. 
Chuck Hagel, R-Neb., said in Buenos Aires, as he has for the last 
year, that the protocol will never be ratified by the U.S. Senate. 
Under the rules of ratification adopted in Kyoto, the protocol cannot 
go into effect if the United States does not approve it. Hagel also 
minimized the significance of the actions in Buenos Aires by Argentina 
and Kazakhstan, noting that there were 132 other developing countries. 
Now that countries are coming to grips with what was decided in Kyoto, 
he said, ``the cold stone wall of fact and reality has set in, and 
I think from here on it gets pretty tough.'' Eizenstat agreed. ``There 
are still very, very daunting challenges,'' he said. Nevertheless, 
proponents hailed the modest achievements of Buenos Aires. The agreement 
on a deadline for fleshing out the protocol ``insures that the nations 
of the world will continue moving forward against the threat of global 
warming,'' Vice President Al Gore said in a statement. Fred Krupp, 
executive director of the Environmental Defense Fund, said the talks 
had resulted in ``forward progress'' and ``major strides.'' He said 
the decisions made in Buenos Aires ``have shown that governments are 
beginning to roll up their sleeves and get down to the serious business 
of reducing greenhouse gases.'' He also said that the talks marked 
the start of ``a whole new phase'' in which people are beginning to 
understand the value of market mechanisms in reducing emissions. The 
two main Kyoto mechanisms, the clean development mechanism and emissions 
trading, rely on the market to achieve reductions. In the former, 
private companies in the industrialized world would invest, for example, 
in high-efficiency power plants in poor countries, which would thereby 
reap both environmental and economic benefits. The two countries would 
share credit for the emissions reductions. In emissions trading, a 
country or private company would be able to achieve part of its emissions 
reduction by purchasing reductions from a country or company that 
has reduced its emissions more than required. In theory, this achieves 
overall global reductions faster and at less cost. In Buenos Aires, 
the conferees set late 2000 as the deadline for adopting rules and 
regulations necessary for putting these mechanisms and other features 
of the Kyoto Protocol into effect. The clean development mechanism 
was given highest priority, but the two-year deadline applies to all 
the features. Devising the rules will be no simple task. For example, 
the European Union and some developing countries want to place specific 
limits on the amount of a country's reductions that can be achieved 
through emissions trading. The United States and other industrialized 
countries argue that this would rob the free-market mechanism of its 
effectiveness. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>