<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981114.0102 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Here, along Russia's southern border, where refugees from a crumbling 
empire have settled in the ruins of the local economy, it does not 
take much to disturb the festering sores of Russian nationalism. All 
it takes is an enemy. For Nikolai Kondratenko, a Communist-Nationalist 
elected governor of the Krasnodar region in 1996, that enemy is Zionism 
_ or rather what he calls ``zionacrats,'' using a new code word for 
Jews in government, finance and the news media. According to Kondratenko 
and like-minded Russians, these Jews are part of a sinister worldwide 
conspiracy to bring Russia to its knees. For local Cossacks, descendants 
of the swashbuckling czarist horsemen who have been assigned by Kondratenko 
to help police the region, the enemy can be Armenians, Turks, Chechens 
_ any nonethnic Russians who have had the temerity to move here, laying 
themselves open to charges they are responsible for crimes ranging 
from rape to epidemics of head lice. The Cossacks patrol regularly, 
checking documents to see who has complied with the region's arcane 
residency requirements, specially written to ward off unwanted strangers. 
International human rights groups have put Krasnodar and neighboring 
Stavropol on a watch list, a move that local atamans, or Cossack chieftains, 
shrug off with a hearty laugh. ``I have had a hundred human rights 
complaints registered against me personally,'' said Ivan Bezugly, 
a radical ataman whose Tamansky Division is spread over eight districts, 
his booming voice ricocheting off the walls of an office covered in 
Cossack flags. ``What do you want me to tell you _ that I personally 
burned down the homes of Turks because of their outrageous behavior? 
Even if I didn't, I have 44,000 Cossacks at my command who would.'' 
Kondratenko, for his part, has chosen a more distant scapegoat, albeit 
one historically favored by Russian nationalists. Like his fellow 
anti-Semites in Moscow, whose recent diatribes have set off a national 
scandal, Kondratenko attacks ``yids'' _ the word is a Russian slur 
for Jew _ with total impunity, despite laws that forbid the fomenting 
of racist hatred. The local Jewish population, now only 1,500 after 
a decade of steady emigration to Israel, fears that unless someone 
steps in to halt the governor's regular rantings about dark Zionist 
plots, the words will eventually spread to action. ``Now, we don't 
feel anything _ not at work, in the schools or on the streets,'' said 
Alexander Kaplan, deputy head of Shalom, a cultural organization. 
``But these things happen in stages. German nationalism started 15 
years before Hitler came to power.'' At the heart of Kondratenko's 
conspiracy theory is the prominent positions held by a number of Russian 
Jews, some of whom were architects of Russia's recent economic reforms, 
others the so-called oligarchs who have amassed fortunes and political 
influence since 1991. Two weeks ago, at a local ceremony honoring 
the 80th anniversary of the now-defunct Communist Youth league, Kondratenko 
let loose again. ``Why haven't we revolted against that scum, a bunch 
of people for whom Russia, Russians, patriotism, the land of Russia 
is something alien?'' he said. ``Their policy is the losing one, and 
those who will continue torturing Russian will burn more than just 
their tongues.'' Kondratenko's stated convictions are shared by members 
of his team, which was elected by more than 80 percent of the vote 
in a region of five million people. If nothing else, their shared 
conspiracy theory _ rooted in czarist-era paranoia about imagined 
Judeo-Masonic cults, and Communist-era labeling of Jews as a distinct 
nationality _ serves as a simple-minded explanation of why one of 
the richest agricultural regions in Russia has suffered so badly during 
Russia's seven-year experiment with economic reform. ``What is the 
result of Zionism?'' asked Deputy Governor Nikolai Kharchenko. ``The 
result is the collapse of Russia. Native Russians never would have 
allowed all these reforms to happen. Of course, it is all coordinated.'' 
The litany of economic failure here, particularly after this year's 
drought-stricken grain harvest, is echoed across much of Russia. Industry 
is in a slump and agricultural production has dropped so low that 
Krasnodar, fearing more hardship this winter, has taken the legally 
dubious step of blocking farmers who have not paid back credits to 
the local government from ``exporting'' their grain beyond the region's 
borders. The region also feels the strain of the migrations that began 
in the late 1980s as the Soviet Union was collapsing. By official 
reckoning, about half a million new residents, most of them ethnic 
Russians, have moved here, drawn by Krasnodar's moderate climate and 
its rich black earth. To stem the influx, the region has instituted 
stringent residency requirements, skirting a recent ruling by the 
Russian Constitutional Court that bars residency permits within the 
Russian federation. Various nationalities here have fallen under varying 
sets of rules: ethnic Russians, for instance, can be registered provided 
they find a place to live _ a requirement that tens of thousands of 
ethnic Russian refugees from the war in Chechnya say they do not have 
the cash to meet. Of all the groups that have drifted into Krasnodar 
in the last decade, the Meskhetian Turks are the most unfortunate. 
Deported en masse from their homes in Soviet Georgia by Stalin during 
World War II, they were deposited in Central Asia where, in 1989, 
they were forced to flee from a pogrom by Uzbek nationalists. Russia 
has pressed Georgia to take them back, but it has refused. As one 
of the 13,000 Meskhetian Turks in Krasnodar, Tamal Miradov is a regular 
target for local police and Cossack vigilantes. Without Russian citizenship, 
or permanent residence, he cannot find work and cannot even legally 
sell the house he bought when he moved here nine years ago. To keep 
his documents in order, Miradov must either register as a ``guest'' 
every 45 days at a cost of 180 rubles (about $12), or pay a fine of 
400 rubles each time he is caught by police or Cossack patrols. ``They 
don't let us go, they don't let us stay,'' said Miradov, who recently 
made a quick dash up the local highway to visit his parents in a neighboring 
village, his eyes peeled for Cossack patrols. ``If I see the police, 
or the Cossacks, I have to hide.'' But some local officials are clearly 
fed up with the kind of ``help'' they get from the Cossacks, who strut 
the street in camouflage uniforms adorned by the odd 19th-century 
accessory. ``There are 78 nationalities living in our district,'' 
said a police official in the Krymsky district, where Bezugly has 
his headquarters. ``And crimes are committed by everyone _ Armenians, 
Turks, Greeks and Cossacks. We work with the Cossacks, but now they 
walk around, with handcuffs and nightsticks, and extort money, claiming 
to be a security service.'' In Anapa, a down-at-heel resort town on 
the Black Sea, local Cossacks like to boast about how they administer 
their own justice against an Armenian population, whom they blame 
for 70 percent of local crimes, including six rapes that they say 
were never prosecuted because of corruption. Nikolai Nesterenko, who 
gave up his job as an archeologist to become a deputy ataman in Anapa, 
is happy to show off the plaited leather whips that he says his volunteers 
have used against offending Armenians. ``These are the traditional 
methods of our grandfathers,'' he said proudly. But a local police 
official, who declined to give his name, refuted the Cossacks' claims 
that Armenians commit most of the crime. ``You think I don't know 
who is spreading these rumors,'' he said. ``For the most part, these 
things are not confirmed.'' 
</TEXT>
</DOC>