<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981114.0164 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Lisa Smart's presence on the operating table at Beth Israel Medical 
Center on a Friday afternoon last November began in an utterly unremarkable 
way. Mrs. Smart, a 30-year-old financial analyst, had found the doctor 
performing the procedure, Robert Klinger, the way many busy, young 
and healthy people do _ by breezing through her HMO's book of approved 
doctors and choosing one who was convenient and recommended by her 
primary care physician. Her only real medical problem was as common 
as it was benign: She suffered from fibroid tumors in her uterus, 
and was at Beth Israel to have them removed, a procedure that thousands 
of women undergo every year, with 90 percent walking out of the hospital 
the same day. Her doctor and his assistant, Dr. Marc Sklar, were also 
a routine presence, well known and well liked among their patients 
and medical peers. They were two-thirds of a bustling obstetrics and 
gynecology practice that delivered more babies at Beth Israel than 
any other physician group. Even the presence of a medical equipment 
salesman from Johnson &AMP; Johnson was not a novelty in the operating 
room, since representatives of medical supply companies often observe 
surgical procedures and give tips about equipment. By evening, though, 
Mrs. Smart was dead. And this month, after a yearlong investigation, 
state health officials reported that her death was the result of two 
hours of botched surgery that violated a host of medical standards; 
Beth Israel received the maximum fine, $30,000. In many ways, the 
incident was isolated, if horrific: one bad outcome among thousands 
of good ones at a respected hospital. But more than two dozen interviews 
with doctors, hospital administrators, patients of Klinger and Sklar 
and relatives of Mrs. Smart, along with the state's report, show that 
behind the backdrop of normality that November day was a deeply troubled 
medical practice and a hospital that allowed some medical policies 
to be flouted all too easily. The practice, on Park Avenue, was roiled 
by rising tension among the doctors. The patient load was tremendous: 
The three doctors delivered roughly twice as many babies a year as 
an average practice of its size. And both Sklar and the third member 
of the practice, Steven Swersky, were on probation for professional 
misconduct, something Ms. Smart could not have known without calling 
the state Health Department or checking its Web site. Beth Israel, 
by its administrators' own admission, fell down on certain basic standards 
of care. The process of policing equipment and visitors had enough 
cracks that, in violation of hospital policy, the medical-supply salesman 
was able to roll an unauthorized piece of equipment into the hospital, 
and then to operate a part of it during surgery. Mrs. Smart was never 
told that the equipment being used was new to the doctors; in fact, 
they were neither trained in its use nor authorized to operate it. 
And the monitoring of fluids, so important during an operation, was 
so lax that Mrs. Smart became perilously bloated, even though nurses 
repeatedly warned the doctors. The case has been a blow to Beth Israel, 
a well-regarded hospital that in recent years has been trying to raise 
its stature among world-renowned New York medical centers. ``We have 
a well-deserved reputation for providing outstanding care, but obviously 
we did not give it in this incident,'' Morton Hyman, Beth Israel's 
chairman, said in an interview last week. ``We accept full responsibility 
and because of these violations, we have significantly strengthened 
our oversight and policies of policing procedures so that these violations 
cannot happen again.'' Since the death, Sklar and Swersky have lost 
their privileges at Beth Israel, and Klinger must be supervised at 
all times. Mrs. Smart's husband, Anderson Smart, a New York City police 
officer, has sued almost every party involved in the case. And many 
of the doctors' patients are expressing dismay about a case that underscores 
how little patients frequently know about the doctors who treat them. 
In retrospect, it is perhaps not surprising that Mrs. Smart, an obsessive 
researcher of all things related to home decorating, landscaping and 
accounting, did not spend weeks looking for a doctor. She was, her 
husband recalled, in excellent shape and extremely healthy. But painful 
menstrual periods had sent her in search of medical help, said her 
sister, Pamela Thomas, and although she was frightened of surgery, 
she knew fibroids could interfere with having children. ``She was 
very much into family and very much into having children,'' Ms. Thomas 
said. ``I would say that summed her up.'' Lisa and Anderson Smart 
met as 15-year-olds working at a Kentucky Fried Chicken in Queens. 
She would go to Long Island University; he joined the police force. 
They were married on July 4, 1992, and by 1995 had built a home in 
Highland Mills, in Orange County, N.Y. Since 1989, she had been a 
financial analyst at Chase Manhattan Bank, often working late into 
the evening on deals. ``I was used to it,'' Smart said. ``Lisa was 
a go-getter. She didn't like to waste time.'' In fact, she was in 
the middle of tests to become a certified public accountant, and dreamed 
of starting her own accounting firm. But the fibroids were a painful 
obstacle, and so she went to Klinger to see what could be done. What 
Mrs. Smart found was a midtown office that drew from several walks 
of life: Hasidic women, women who liked its use of midwives and a 
polyglot mix of people from the many managed care plans it honored. 
The practice also had an office in Brooklyn. Peers at Beth Israel 
spoke highly of the three doctors. ``They have an excellent reputation 
and had a great commitment to women in labor,'' said one Beth Israel 
obstetrician, who, like other doctors, agreed to talk on the condition 
of anonymity. Sklar was particularly liked by patients for his warm 
manner and quick mind. While waiting with patients in labor, he would 
watch the game show ``Jeopardy'' and whiz through the questions with 
ease. And the doctors were busy: They delivered 900 babies a year, 
far above the national average of about 432 for a three-person practice. 
Long waits for appointments were common. Whether the practice was 
overextended is unclear. But it was in trouble with the state Department 
of Health. In June 1997, Sklar was put on five years' probation. The 
charges included botched labors and failing to perform Caesarean sections 
when they were medically necessary, resulting in the deaths of two 
babies, the state says. Roger Solymosy, Sklar's lawyer, said he would 
not comment. The lawyer for Klinger, Paul Walker, did not return repeated 
phone calls. Six months after Sklar was disciplined, Swersky, who 
founded the practice a decade ago, was placed on four years' probation. 
The charges were poor record-keeping and incomplete prenatal care, 
including failing to do the standard diabetes test in pregnant women. 
Swersky insists that he became a target because of his ties to Sklar, 
and that most of the complaints can be chalked up to bad record-keeping. 
``They reviewed old charts,'' he said, referring to the Health Department, 
which indeed cited cases going back several years. ``Since we got 
computerized, my records have been very good. I've changed my life.'' 
Having two of three doctors in a practice on probation was vexing 
to Beth Israel; out of 2,000 doctors, fewer than five are on probation, 
administrators say. But the hospital took no action. As a result of 
the probation, Sklar had to be supervised by a Beth Israel doctor 
during deliveries, but not for surgical procedures like Ms. Smart's. 
``With the benefit of hindsight,'' Hyman said, ``we would have made 
a different decision about Sklar,'' intimating that the hospital would 
have severed its relationship with the doctor sooner. As for whether 
similarly disciplined doctors would be allowed to practice at Beth 
Israel in the future, he added: ``The bar has been significantly raised.'' 
No one but those present in the operating room at Beth Israel's Phillips 
Ambulatory Care Center last Nov. 20 will probably ever know the full 
details of how routine surgery took such a terrible turn. But the 
events that led to Mrs. Smart's death began a day earlier, when David 
Myers, the medical supply salesman, convinced Sklar and Klinger, the 
head surgeon on the case, that he had obtained authorization from 
Beth Israel to bring in his Versapoint Bipolar Hysteroscopy Electrosurgery 
System for use in the hysteroscopic myomectomy, or removal of fibroid 
tumors. This much seems clear: Beth Israel had never approved the 
use of the equipment, and Myers himself rolled it into the building 
and up to bioengineering for technical clearance on the day of the 
surgery, basically a sound check for equipment, said Gail Donovan, 
Beth Israel's chief operating officer. The doctors performed the procedure, 
using the machine to fill Mrs. Smart with saline solution and then 
vaporizing the tumor. But nurses soon noted with alarm that fluid 
was not draining from Mrs. Smart. The doctors pressed on, and when 
the lights came on, it was clear that Mrs. Smart was dangerously bloated, 
the Department of Health report said. Smart was told his wife needed 
to be taken to the hospital's emergency room. Frightened, he took 
a quick glance at her. What he saw, he said, was too awful to describe. 
The Versapoint used saline, which gives it a great advantage over 
older machines because of the ease with which the body can drain saline. 
The Versapoint is intended to make this already safe procedure for 
removing the tumor almost foolproof, experts say. But state records 
indicate that Mrs. Smart was pumped with 9,000 cubic centimeters _ 
or about nine liters _ of saline. That is more than twice what is 
generally used, said Dr. Martin Weisberg, clinical associate professor 
of obstetrics and gynecology at Thomas Jefferson University in Philadelphia. 
``I would suspect there are no fatalities with this device,'' said 
Weisberg, who has used the machine. ``By virtue of the fact it works 
with saline it makes it safer. The amount was the issue. Normally 
we stop at three liters. Maybe I would go to four.'' Mrs. Smart had 
entered the operating room at about 2 p.m. By 8:30, after suffering 
cardiac arrest from a fluid imbalance, she was dead. When the state 
first released its report two weeks ago, Beth Israel officials made 
few public comments. But the hospital had already made extensive policy 
changes. ``We are determined to do everything necessary to make sure 
it never happens again,'' said Matthew Fink, the hospital's president. 
Equipment that is not authorized for use rarely makes its way into 
the operating room, administrators insist, but now it is even more 
difficult. New equipment now must make its way through more channels, 
and the supervising nurse in the operating room has had equipment 
added to a list of things she must account for. While Beth Israel 
insists that medical supply company representatives were never allowed 
to touch equipment during procedures, their presence in the operating 
room will be more closely monitored now. Salesman and other company 
representatives are not uncommon in the operating room. ``Generally 
when sales people are present in the O.R. it is usually a positive 
thing,'' said Weisberg of Thomas Jefferson. ``You are using new equipment 
that sometimes behaves in a way you are not familiar with, and it 
is a real advantage when you get someone from the company to take 
you through. They obviously should never be doing procedure or helping,'' 
he added. In recent years, experts said, salesman have become more 
visible in medical settings as competition for sales has increased, 
in part because of cost-conscious hospitals' aggressive pursuit of 
volume discounts. A spokeswoman for Ethicon Inc., Susan Odenphal, 
the unit of Johnson &AMP; Johnson that makes the Versapoint, maintains 
that Myers never touched the equipment during surgery, and was authorized 
to have the machine in the hospital. There also have been changes 
in the way fluid is managed in operations. Now, as is standard practice 
at many hospitals, fluid inputs and outputs must be recorded every 
15 minutes, and any time input exceeds 1,500 cc or more, the surgeons 
must be notified and the procedure halted. Although it would likely 
have had little bearing on the outcome, Beth Israel is in agreement 
with the Health Department that the rights of patients are violated 
when they are not informed about who will be in the operating room 
and what equipment will be used. As such, it has tightened its consent 
procedures. But some of these changes trouble some doctors at Beth 
Israel. ``If you are using a new brand of stapler to sew them up, 
do you tell them?'' said one Beth Israel doctor. ``If you're just 
using a different machine but basically doing the same thing, do you 
need to tell people then? Where is the line of informed consent?'' 
Many of the people involved with the case have been disciplined as 
well. Sklar lost his privileges at the hospital, and he recently left 
the Park Avenue practice. Klinger, who was at first given two weeks' 
probation, last week was put on 100 percent restriction, meaning that 
a Beth Israel attending doctor must be with him on all cases. The 
delay in this disciplinary action was caused by a lack of full information 
about the case, Beth Israel executives said. One nurse was dismissed 
and two were temporarily suspended, because, hospital administrators 
say, they failed to report their concerns to their superiors at the 
hospital. And though its action was not specifically related to the 
Smart case, the hospital last week pressed Swersky into resigning 
his privileges; Beth Israel said it had been dissatisfied with his 
work during his probation. Information about whether a doctor in New 
York has been disciplined by the state can be obtained from the state 
Department of Health's Web site (www.health.state.ny.us). In the index, 
click on the ``Information for Consumers'' link, and follow the prompt 
to the section on ``Professional Misconduct and Physician Discipline.'' 
</TEXT>
</DOC>