<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981114.0212 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Tennessee had waited 42 years for someone to call it No. 1, and it 
did not want to risk waiting that long again. The Volunteers overcame 
a poor start, many mental and physical mistakes and the belligerent 
Arkansas Razorbacks Saturday to give 106,365 boisterous fans at Neyland 
Stadium a come-from-behind, 28-24 victory that probably preserved 
their No. 1 position in the Bowl Championship Series standing. Tennessee, 
which trailed for more than 59 of the 60 minutes and by as much as 
21-3 in the first half, got the chance for its winning drive when 
Arkansas quarterback Clint Stoerner stumbled and fumbled without being 
touched on the Razorbacks' 43-yard line with 1 minute 45 seconds left 
and his team ahead by 24-22. Tennessee's Billy Ratliff recovered and 
with 28 seconds remaining, halfback Travis Henry dove over the left 
side of a goal-line pileup to keep the Volunteers' hopes alive for 
their first national championship since 1951. Tennessee was briefly 
ranked No. 1 in 1956. By maintaining its unbeaten record (9-0), Tennessee 
remained on track in the bowl ranking, which will send the top two 
teams to the Fiesta Bowl in January to determine a national champion. 
In last week's bowl ranking, the Volunteers were slightly ahead of 
UCLA, which defeated Washington Saturday, 36-24, and Kansas State, 
which defeated Nebraska by 40-30. Tennessee was No. 1 in the Associated 
Press poll, tied with Kansas State for No. 1 in the USA Today/ESPN 
coaches poll and second in the New York Times computer ranking. Before 
the Volunteers play for a national championship, though, they will 
probably have to play Arkansas again in the Southeastern Conference 
championship game on Dec. 5, and the Razorbacks are likely to be looking 
forward to that possible rematch. After playing superbly for most 
of the way, the Razorbacks, ranked seventh in the bowl standing, enabled 
the Volunteers to pull within 24-22 when their long snapper, Benji 
Mahan, sent the ball over the head of punter Steadman Campbell with 
2:56 remaining. With Tennessee defenders charging toward him, Campbell 
wisely kicked the ball out of the end zone from the Arkansas 15-yard 
line, giving the Volunteers a safety rather than a potential touchdown. 
Then, after stopping Tennessee on the ensuing possession, Stoerner 
gave the ball right back. For most of the game, Tennessee looked like 
anything but the top-ranked team in America. The Volunteers scored 
a touchdown moments before halftime to move within 21-10, but got 
in more trouble less than two minutes into the third quarter. After 
Tennessee forced Arkansas to punt from deep within its own territory, 
the returner Jermaine Copeland lost the ball and watched the Razorbacks' 
Jeromy Flowers land on it at the Volunteers' 34-yard line. Though 
unable to score a touchdown, Arkansas managed a 33-yard field goal 
that put it comfortably ahead, 24-10. The defense's stand must have 
galvanized the Volunteers because the rest of the third quarter belonged 
to them. With Henry running with the power of a tank and the shiftiness 
of a sports car, Tennessee marched 69 yards in 7 plays for a touchdown. 
Henry carried 6 times for 58 yards, including gains of 21 and 17 yards, 
in the drive. When quarterback Tee Martin scored only the third rushing 
touchdown of the season against Arkansas' Southeastern Conference-leading 
run defense on a four-yard bootleg to pull the Volunteers within a 
touchdown, the stadium began rocking. With more than a quarter and 
a half left and the momentum clearly with the home team, it seemed 
possible that Tennessee would overcome its horrible start. When the 
Volunteers forced Arkansas to punt after three plays and then drove 
for a 21-yard field goal by Jeff Hall, cutting the deficit to 24-20, 
it seemed definite. Arkansas built a 14-0 lead before Tennessee showed 
intentions of fighting for its No. 1 ranking. With the Volunteers 
committing numerous mental and physical mistakes, tackling as if they 
did not have arms and being juked out of their socks, the Razorbacks 
took command and silenced the vaunted Tennessee crowd. Minutes after 
blowing an opportunity to score on their second possession when a 
roughing the kicker penalty gave them a first down at the Volunteers' 
34-yard line, the Razorbacks capitalized on a jarring hit by Zac Painter 
that forced Travis Stephens to fumble at Tennessee's 24. Four plays 
after D.J. Cooper pounced on the loose ball, Arkansas went ahead, 
7-0. The score came when Stoerner found the flanker Emanuel Smith 
open but not far from two defenders in the flats. But what should 
have been only a short gain became Stoerner's school-record 19th touchdown 
pass of the season when Smith spun out of the arms of Dwayne Goodrich, 
shook his hips to avoid Deon Grant and pranced 14 yards into the end 
zone at 5:24 of the first. On the opening play of the second quarter, 
the deficit was increased to two touchdowns. Dropping back from his 
own 39, Stoerner put up a bomb for Anthony Lucas, who was streaking 
down the sidelines with cornerback Steve Johnson at his side. When 
the ball arrived, though, Johnson stumbled, allowing Lucas to catch 
it easily and sprint untouched for the 61-yard score. What was supposed 
to be a party with more than 100,000 guests was quickly becoming a 
funeral, and Hall's 41-yard field goal six minutes before halftime 
did little to change that sentiment. Especially when Stoerner and 
Lucas struck again three minutes later to put Lucas in the record 
books. The 8-yard scoring pass that Stoerner drilled between two defenders 
made Lucas, a junior split end, the Razorbacks' career (17) and season 
(9) leader in touchdown receptions. Finally, down by 21-3, the Volunteers 
came alive, driving 80 yards in 1:12 to score their first touchdown. 
Martin provided the spark, hitting Copeland for an 18-yard reception 
and chalking on another 15 yards when a Razorback roughed him up after 
the play was dead. On the next play, Martin completed a 36-yard fly 
pattern to Peerless Price to make it 21-10. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>