<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981114.0072 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Zorba the Greek taught a young man to dance. Red the Coach taught 
New York fans to chant ``Dee-fense! Dee-fense!'' He was the golden 
age of New York professional basketball, wrapped into one self-contained 
package. He won the only two championships the Knicks have won in 
their half century, and he did it without arrogance or self-promotion. 
He never needed the extra buzz. He waited to light his victory cigar 
in private, when he got home to Long Island and had dinner with Selma. 
He coached two terms for the Knicks, and then he retired to his seat 
a few rows above the court, far from the Knick bench, blending in, 
an older New York guy with white hair now. It was a sad day when his 
ailing wife stopped coming to the games with him a few years back, 
and last summer Selma died. There is no professional basketball this 
fall, and Red Holzman did not have time to wait. He died Friday night 
of leukemia at age 78. Holzman did not look good two weeks ago at 
a friend's wedding. Somebody said it was good that Red was getting 
out again, despite his mourning of Selma, but he was not looking well, 
and he was sad. His old boys named Reed and DeBusschere and Monroe 
stopped to greet him, honoring the man who had pulled them together, 
taught them to dance as a unit, with their hands up and their elbows 
out. His old boys respected him. The hardest thing in the rivalry 
between the Chicago Bulls and the Knicks was that Phil Jackson could 
not often speak of what Holzman had taught him in those sessions 30 
years ago, and Holzman could not openly chortle about the gangly kid 
who had obviously been paying attention. The tributes from basketball 
people will address his coaching genius, but I can remember an autumn 
when he seemed like just another assistant coach. Holzman did not 
want the top job. That was the impression he gave in the fall of 1967. 
The Knicks were at some obscure training camp, and Red seemed quite 
content to be an assistant to Dick McGuire. Holzman did not give off 
any burning lust to be a head coach again. Years later, when Rick 
Pitino and Mike Fratello were working for the Knicks, they would have 
this burning lust to them that said, it's either going to be here 
or somewhere, but it's going to happen. But Red Holzman, this 47-year-old 
man with traces of red in his hair, sat around and schmoozed, a No. 
2 guy if ever there was one. He had been a head coach once, in Milwaukee 
and St. Louis, and he did not need it. Between the humble McGuire 
and the low-key Holzman, there was a decided absence of ego, just 
two basketball lifers starting another season. Deceptive. Red Holzman 
was deceptive. When the Knicks faltered early in the season, and the 
saintly McGuire had to go, Holzman was summoned into the musty front 
offices at Madison Square Garden and forced to take the position. 
He did not want to undermine McGuire, and beyond that, he did not 
want to disrupt his routine, going home at night and having dinner 
with Selma. Every clipping about Red for the next 30 years would talk 
about Selma, and the steak, and the Scotch, his stable priorities. 
But something did change. When he took over the Knicks, he immediately 
installed a more aggressive defense that must have come from somewhere. 
Had the sly old dog been plotting defenses while hanging around the 
gym? He also showed a quiet passion that he had never allowed to surface. 
Within months, fellow coaches noticed that life had just become tougher. 
Alex Hannum, another winning coach, said: ``Red has pure dedication, 
Holzman dedication. I was enthralled watching him and hearing him 
over the crowd noise from the other end of the court, screaming instructions 
to his team while he was on his knees. That's dedication.'' The dedication 
helped win two titles, but Holzman never took on airs, and he never 
showed fear. He was once asked by Paul Horowitz of The Newark News, 
now defunct, why he did not seem worried. ``Paul,'' Holzman said, 
``you should have known my father. He was a great man. He said a lot 
of great things. He used to say: `If I'm alive, we'll go Saturday. 
If not, we'll go Sunday.' '' He never seemed to take himself seriously, 
but the players and the fans learned to do that. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>