<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981114.0176 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Sam Oglesby had worked overseas in economic development for the United 
Nations for 25 years, living in Thailand, Burma, Indonesia, Bhutan 
and Bangladesh. In 1989, he was back in New York, working at the headquarters 
and living in a studio apartment on the Upper West Side. Because he 
liked walking, he spent hours roaming through the city's neighborhoods 
and found himself charmed by brownstones. He decided he had to have 
one of his own. With the eyes of a stranger, he visited places like 
Brooklyn Heights, Park Slope, Carroll Gardens and Boerum Hill. But 
he had only $200,000 to spend, and even five years ago, when he really 
began his search for a house, they were out of reach. He wanted something 
architecturally interesting, and no more than 30 minutes from midtown. 
Relatively quickly, he became enamored of Harlem, attracted to its 
atmosphere and its history. But he had no luck. Maybe it was timing. 
Maybe he wasn't decisive enough. In 1996, he almost bought a house 
in Morningside Valley for $90,000, but while he was worrying that 
it would be too complicated to untangle its problematic certificate 
of occupancy, someone else bought the house. Frustrated and disappointed, 
he gave up. But after a while, reinvigorated by an article that described 
the Mount Morris area in Harlem, he began exploring there. One day 
about six months ago, walking on Fifth Avenue near 125th Street, he 
approached a man sitting on a stoop and asked him if he knew of any 
houses for sale in the neighborhood. The man said no, but he did know 
of a landmarked block in the South Bronx with a house for sale. The 
man, it turned out, was a real estate broker, and he arranged to show 
Oglesby the house at 419 E. 140th St. in the Mott Haven section, where 
most of the residents are Spanish-speaking. On the day of their appointment, 
Oglesby took the Lexington Avenue subway to 138th Street, which is 
only 15 minutes from midtown. He found himself in a place far different 
from, say, midtown. ``The shops are very simple, and poor,'' he said, 
``with big plantains and yams and mangoes, not plastic tomatoes. The 
little Mexican grocery store has music blaring out, and there are 
people hanging out on the street. There is one kind of toothpaste, 
not 10.'' He had liked the idea of living in Harlem, but never quite 
felt accepted. In Mott Haven, he said, he felt like he had come home. 
When he reached East 140th Street, which is lined with well-tended 
houses of different colors, ``it was suddenly like a 1950s sitcom,'' 
he said, adding, ``People were tending their gardens and smiling and 
talking.'' It was not at all like the Upper West Side. ``There you're 
lucky if you get a hello in the elevator,'' he said. In fact, in an 
elevator once, making what he considered neighborly conversation, 
someone told him that he ``overshares.'' When he arrived at 419 E. 
140th St., he found a three-story brick town house built in 1897, 
with three fireplaces, a solid staircase, appealing woodwork, a pretty 
little garden in front and a yard in the back. It was structurally 
sound, with obvious but fixable flaws. All of the wood floors were 
covered with linoleum that seemed to have been applied with glue the 
strength of steel, and the walls were obscured with plastic paneling. 
The ceilings had been lowered and surfaced with panels. Like most 
people who live in New York, however, he associated the South Bronx 
with devastation, with gangs and knifings and burned-out housing, 
even though that image had nothing to do with what he was seeing. 
So he went to the local police station and asked, ``If I were your 
uncle, would you tell me to live in this neighborhood?'' They gave 
him mixed advice. ``One said it's a good block,'' he recalled. ``Another 
said, `Don't do it.''' He chose to believe in the believers. Oglesby 
bought the house for $113,000, which was $6,000 less than the asking 
price. He had retired from the United Nations at the beginning of 
1997 when he was 58, but was able to get a mortgage from the credit 
agency there, and when the house was appraised it was valued at $140,000. 
The taxes are only $595 a year. It is a landmarked block, and some 
of the houses, he said, are elaborate, with marble floors and lavish 
moldings. He closed in July, and since then has been working with 
friends, many of them from Indonesia, to renovate the building. He 
has also hired an Indonesian contractor who is putting in a new kitchen 
on the ground floor. On the main floor, he has exposed gracious 12-foot 
ceilings. The center room, once a bathroom, will be his library, and 
is now being supplemented with books about the Bronx. In the living 
room, he ripped out a closet and discovered a graceful arched opening 
that makes the perfect backdrop for his carved day bed from Thailand. 
Like all of the furniture collected during his years in Asia, it can 
go into a small van, because it is made from panels. ``These pieces 
were built before nails,'' he said. On the top floor, he has turned 
the front room into his bedroom, furnishing it with a grand four-poster 
bed that looks as though it must have come from his travels, but turns 
out to have been recently bought at Macy's. The back room, a guest 
bedroom, has, like the main bedroom, large closets. There is so much 
space he doesn't know what to do with it. Not counting the value of 
his own labor, or the contributions of his friends, he figures it 
will cost about $15,000 to renovate the house. He will try to fix 
the outside, which is cracking and crumbling, with a grant from the 
New York City Landmarks Preservation Commission, which gives up to 
$15,000 per homeowner to help people of modest means preserve landmarked 
buildings. Although he sometimes lectures on Asian culture and international 
relations as an adjunct professor at schools like Fordham and New 
York University, his retirement is giving him time to take singing 
lessons and prepare for a cabaret performance. When he's out at night, 
he never takes a cab because he knows too many people who have been 
in accidents. Instead he takes a bus that lets him off half a block 
away or the subway. Even at night, he says, ``it's not a menacing 
place.'' And it is quiet. In Mott Haven, he hears church bells on 
Sunday, and an occasional rooster. But his friends from Manhattan 
are dubious. ``The South Bronx is the kiss of death to them,'' he 
said. ``The area still has a horrible stigma.'' He has quickly become 
a part of the neighborhood, getting to know its quirks, like its profusion 
of stores selling beepers. Around the corner, he can buy a good cup 
of coffee for less than a dollar. He has met a lot of people, like 
the couple down the street who have lived there for 50 years. When 
he dropped off some old clothes at the church up the street, the pastor 
reciprocated by giving him a funky lamp with pink and green glass, 
which now shares a room with his lacquered chest from Burma and clay 
jars from Indonesia. The beat policeman who is legendary for his good 
relations with residents stopped by to introduce himself and spent 
a half hour touring the house. When he walks around the neighborhood 
with a visitor, showing off the antique shops on Bruckner Boulevard, 
the new houses selling for $300,000, and the recently sandblasted 
facades, people know him and say hello. ``In this neighborhood,'' 
he said, ``oversharing is a virtue.'' 
</TEXT>
</DOC>