<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981114.0098 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Faced with preparations for an American military attack, President 
Saddam Hussein of Iraq appeared to back down Saturday and said that 
his government would resume cooperating with international arms inspectors. 
Iraq cloaked its climb-down in statesmanship. But diplomats here and 
officials in Washington said that Saddam, isolated diplomatically 
by even his friends, apparently decided not to provoke an American 
attack now. ``We offer this chance not out of fear of the aggressive 
American campaign and the threat to commit a new aggression against 
Iraq,'' the Iraqi leadership said in a letter to Secretary-General 
Kofi Annan, ``but as an expression of our feeling of responsibility 
and in response to your appeal and those of our friends.'' But Clinton 
administration officials remained skeptical and said that the United 
States would press ahead with preparations for a possible air strike 
against Iraq. ``Public commitment by Iraq must be followed by concrete 
and demonstrable actions,'' David Leavy, spokesman for the National 
Security Council, said Saturday before the Iraqi statement was made 
public. The Iraqi letter did appear to contain potential traps. It 
made clear that Iraq expects or at least hopes for a speedy lifting 
of the oil embargo imposed in 1990 after Iraq's invasion of Kuwait. 
The United States has already dismissed that hope. The Iraqis also 
said that in return they expected a comprehensive review of their 
relations with the United Nations in ``a very short time'' after inspections 
resume. In letters on Friday to China, France and Russia, the Iraqis 
said that would be ``within seven days'' of the resumption of cooperation. 
The United States has suggested four to six weeks might be more realistic. 
The Iraqis also reiterated their preference for the review to be carried 
out under the direction of Annan. The Security Council has already 
said that it will run the review. In the letter, the Iraqis said that 
their decision was made at meetings Saturday of the president's Cabinet 
and party, led by Saddam. The meetings followed the receipt of a letter 
Friday night from Annan reiterating the secretary-general's warning, 
in effect, that Iraq could never hope to have sanctions lifted unless 
it played by the rules, and by appeals from Russia, China, France 
and Brazil, among others, the Iraqis said. The letter from the Iraqi 
leadership said that it was ready to resume working with the U.N. 
Special Commission, and the International Atomic Energy Agency, the 
two arms agencies monitoring Iraq. ``The leadership of Iraq decided 
to resume working with the Special Commission and the IAEA and to 
allow them to perform their normal duties,'' the Iraqi letter, signed 
by Deputy Prime Minister Tariq Aziz, said. An unofficial translation 
of the letter was obtained by The New York Times. The first hint that 
Iraq would back down came from an unnamed official on Saturday in 
Baghdad. A few hours later, Annan's special envoy in Iraq, Prakash 
Shah, said publicly that the Iraqis had agreed to resume cooperation 
``without conditions'' with arms inspections, broken off by Saddam 
on Oct. 31. As Shah spoke, the secretary-general was meeting with 
Iraq's representative at the United Nations, Nizar Hamdoon, at Annan's 
official residence in New York. There, Annan took a call from Aziz, 
and they discussed the letter. Once again, a last-ditch diplomatic 
gesture by the secretary-general backed up by the considerable military 
might of the United States and Britain appeared at least temporarily 
to have averted an attack. Aides to Annan say they have learned by 
now that when Saddam puts himself out on a limb, he needs a fig leaf 
to cover a reversal _ or, as some describe it, ``a ladder to climb 
down on.'' The secretary-general provided that with his trip to Baghdad 
in February, when the United States last lined up a force in the Persian 
Gulf to attack Iraq. At a news conference in the Iraqi capital then, 
Annan made the point, though, that the military force assembled in 
the region had made his mission possible, a message the Iraqis did 
not really want to hear. This time, Annan made his last-minute appeal 
to Saddam in a letter on Friday night, after a meeting with the Security 
Council that lasted nearly five hours. The secretary-general, who 
had abruptly cut off a trip in North Africa on Wednesday to confront 
the crisis, said after the marathon session that ``events on the ground 
seem to be running away from us.'' By that time, the Iraqi president 
had been warned by virtually all his erstwhile friends _ Russia, France, 
China and the Arab countries _ that he would take the blame for bringing 
down American missiles on his nation and people. Even governments 
that oppose the use of force to settle this crisis had made it clear 
that the Iraqis were isolated in their defiance this time and could 
not count on help from them. The present crisis with Iraq, which came 
on the heels of a year of confrontations, has its roots in a decision 
by Saddam on Aug. 5 to curtail cooperation with U.N. inspectors, who 
monitor biological, chemical and prohibited missile systems. They 
and their counterparts from the International Atomic Energy Agency, 
which watched nuclear developments, were forbidden to make new, on-site 
searches and were restricted to using existing monitoring systems 
_ cameras and air, soil and water samplers _ and to making routine 
inspection visits to previously agreed sites. This set off alarms 
here for the short as well as long term, because the Security Council 
had intended the inspection system to keep functioning, with unannounced 
searches, even after sanctions were lifted. In the meantime, the Security 
Council and the secretary-general were working on plans for a comprehensive 
review of Iraq's relations with the United Nations, going back to 
the 1990 invasion of Kuwait, when sanctions were imposed. Iraq responded 
by making demands about how the review should be conducted and what, 
in advance, it should conclude. Baghdad reiterated its insistence 
that sanctions be lifted and that Richard Butler, the executive chairman 
of the U.N. Special Commission be replaced. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>