<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981114.0184 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
The five victories that Rutgers brought into Saturday's game against 
West Virginia helped erase the stigma of last year's season without 
a victory. But as the Scarlet Knights were driving toward the Mountaineers' 
end zone in the final minutes of the third quarter, with a tie score 
just 13 yards away, the fans at Rutgers Stadium were beginning to 
believe what only those in the locker room had believed before. With 
representatives from the Liberty Bowl in attendance, Rutgers had more 
than just the game on the line when sophomore quarterback Mike McMahon 
dropped back to pass. But a misread of the defense, the sort of error 
that comes with inexperience, led McMahon to fire a ball to the goal 
line for Andy Holland with West Virginia free safety Jerry Porter 
lurking nearby. And when Holland headed toward the goalpost and McMahon 
threw it behind the slant, Porter picked off the pass. The interception 
ended the threat, and when subsequent drives ended with a sack and 
then a fumble, Rutgers was shaken back to reality as West Virginia 
won, 28-14. Amos Zereoue pounded the ball on the ground, finishing 
with 35 carries for 228 yards rushing for 3,801 career rushing yards. 
While West Virginia's players and coaches spoke afterward of sub-par 
efforts, Rutgers (5-5) was left with the sad realization that for 
all of the improvement, the season would likely end without a Bowl 
bid. The Scarlet Knights will finish the season next week at Virginia 
Tech. ``We proved we can compete,'' said Pete Donnelly, a senior offensive 
lineman. ``I hate that that is where we're at. But we proved that 
we're scrappers, that we fight. Some people need a bowl ring to be 
happy. But I'm proud. ``At no point did I believe we weren't going 
to win. I didn't look at the rankings. One thing we've focused on 
is improving to be able to compete in these type of games. I think 
we're on the verge of being able to win.'' Rutgers lost to a team 
that has spent much of the season in the Top 25. And Zereoue's 228 
yards were the most by any player at the new Rutgers Stadium and the 
most against the Scarlet Knights since 1990 when Michigan State's 
Tico Duckett ran for 229. ``Rutgers played their hearts out,'' said 
Zereoue, a Long Island native. ``This game could have made their season 
very successful. It was an ugly win, but we'll take an ugly win over 
a loss any day.'' Rutgers Coach Terry Shea said: ``We played a team 
that at this point in our growth is at a different level. We knew 
it coming in. But I'm proud of our effort. Maybe we're not mature 
enough to beat them, but that's the level we're going to build to.'' 
West Virginia jumped out to a 14-0 first-quarter lead, navigating 
the field with ease as quarterback Marc Bulger completed 5-of-5 passes 
and fullback Anthony Green bulled in from 1 yard out on the opening 
drive. Bulger connected with Shawn Foreman on a 20-yard touchdown 
pass on the second drive of the day. Rutgers closed the gap to 14-7 
with a 10-yard touchdown pass from McMahon to Jermaine Robinson with 
6 minutes 44 seconds to play in the first half. West Virginia answered 
right back with a seven-play, 68-yard drive as Zereoue burst through 
from 8 yards out for a 21-7 advantage. Then Rutgers was driving in 
Mountaineer territory when McMahon was picked off by Gary Thompkins 
in the final minute of the half. In the second half, Rutgers scored 
on the first play from scrimmage, with McMahon finding Tosh Riddick 
on a short hitch along the left sideline. Riddick turned the 8-yard 
pass into a 65-yard run as he dodged a tackle by linebacker Chris 
Edmonds and outran three West Virginia defenders to the end zone to 
pull within 21-14. Rutgers then drove from their own 48-yard line 
to the West Virginia 13, with McMahon connecting on passes of 14 and 
15 yards on third-down conversions. But he then misfired with the 
interception and West Virginia was able to put the game out of reach 
thanks to a 46-yard run by Zereoue that set up a 6-yard scoring pass 
from Bulger to Anthony Becht. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>