<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981114.0186 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
When the 1.3-million-square-foot mall now rising on a former landfill 
in Elizabeth, N.J., is completed next October, it will be the first 
in New Jersey to combine manufacturers' outlet stores and large discount 
retailers, as well as traditional large mall stores, with entertainment. 
Set in an old industrial section of this Union County city, what is 
officially called the Jersey Gardens Value Megamall will also become 
the state's eighth-largest shopping center and, its developers as 
well as city officials hope, a tourist attraction. It is to include 
more than 100 outlet stores, 33 large traditional mall stores, a 10,000-square-foot 
food court in a two-story building and parking space for 5,528 cars 
off Exit 13A of the New Jersey Turnpike. So far, the entertainment 
portion has signed on six restaurants and Jeepers, a 25,000-square-foot 
family recreation center, including rides for children 12 and younger. 
And Loews Cineplex Entertainment, created in May by the merger of 
Sony/Loews Theaters and Cineplex Odeon Corp., will open its newest 
theater format, a 108,000-square-foot, 22-screen theater with 5,000 
seats plus a lounge area and special reserved seats for those paying 
a premium on their tickets. There will also be an as-yet undetermined 
sports component where some retailers will offer ``reality-based shopping,'' 
which means customers will be able to test out their purchases. Road 
and traffic improvements, from ramps to an elevated roadway, are now 
under way to connect the 130-acre development site to the Turnpike. 
The developer is Glimcher Realty Trust of Columbus, Ohio, a real estate 
investment trust, or REIT, that secured its financing before Wall 
Street's recent travails. Michael Ovitz, former president of Walt 
Disney Co. and, before that, head of Creative Artists Agency, is involved 
in the mall's entertainment component. ``What we are offering is an 
experience,'' said Michael Glimcher, senior vice president of development 
and leasing at the company, noting that nearly 65 percent of the space 
at the mall had been preleased. Beyond Jeepers and Loews, other tenants 
that have signed on for space at the mall include: Annie Sez, a discount 
women's clothing store; Record Town SuperStore, Oshman's SuperSports 
USA, Bed Bath &AMP; Beyond, Off Fifth-Saks Fifth Avenue Outlet, Jewelers 
on Fifth and Mikasa, a tableware store. Rents, including common area 
maintenance charges, range from $20 to $165 a square foot and average 
$55. Leases run from five to 15 years. Financing includes $140 million 
in tax-exempt bonds and grants from the semi-autonomous New Jersey 
Economic Development Authority, most of it for the road improvements, 
as well as a $163 million loan from Bankers Trust and Huntington National 
Bank. Glimcher is also investing $56 million of its own equity. ``The 
mall has been talked about for years; now it is a reality, creating 
a sense of excitement about the opportunity for jobs and additional 
economic development it will create,'' said J. Christian Bollwage, 
mayor of Elizabeth. ``In the '80s other cities around us developed. 
Now, it's our turn.'' He said the mall has stirred early discussions 
about a possible arena for the New Jersey Metro Stars soccer team 
on a portion of a 200-acre undeveloped tract adjacent to the mall. 
The arena, he said, could help the area to become a tourist attraction. 
Estimates by the city are that when the mall is complete it will generate 
5,200 permanent jobs, as well as $4 million to $5 million in annual 
tax revenues. The city, Bollwage added, will also receive a similar 
amount from a tax on retailers of 3 percent of gross sales and ``hard 
goods,'' such as appliances, electronics and furniture _ permitted 
under a 1996 state law specifically targeting Elizabeth _ that can 
be levied on tenants in the mall, which sits within a state Urban 
Enterprise Zone. In such a zone businesses are offered tax breaks 
and retailers can charge a 3 percent sales tax instead of the normal 
6 percent. The idea of building a mall on the former landfill, which 
closed in 1972, dates to 1995. But preparing the site for development 
was started three years earlier by OENJ Corp. of Elizabeth, a land 
developer specializing in difficult sites. In June 1997 Glimcher bought 
126 acres of the site from OENJ, which still owns 40 acres along Newark 
Bay that it will develop. The company would not disclose the price. 
Location was a key reason the company got involved in the Elizabeth 
project, said Glimcher. He noted that the site offered ``access to 
all of New Jersey as well as to Manhattan'' and represented ``an opportunity 
in an untapped market.'' Some 180,000 cars pass the site daily and 
15.2 million people with an average household income of $61,000 live 
within a 40-mile radius of it. Newark International Airport is five 
minutes away and just to the north sits an IKEA furnishings store, 
which was recently expanded by 80,000 square feet to 268,324 feet 
and attracts more than 2 million shoppers a year. Those factors along 
with the appeal of the 3 percent sales tax and the mall's hybrid nature 
will serve it well, despite the stock market's recent mood swings 
and signs of tempered consumer confidence, its developers said and 
many retail brokers agree. ``Consumers are cautious but they are not 
paranoid,'' said Ted Kraus, who heads TKO Real Estate Advisory Group, 
a retail consulting firm in Mercerville. The uncertainties in the 
world's financial markets, he added, have not severely affected the 
retail market in New Jersey, where the statewide vacancy rate is under 
3 percent and rents remain stable at $15 to $41 a square foot on average, 
up from $12 to $35 a square foot annually last year. ``If there is 
a downturn in the economy and consumer spending slows, traditional 
retailers will be more affected than discounters, who may be more 
in demand by shoppers looking for value,'' said Richard Kalvoda, manager 
at the Ridgewood office of the real estate advisory group for PricewaterhouseCoopers. 
Jonathan Schultz, president of Schultz Organization, a commercial 
brokerage in Woodbridge, added: ``The expansion of the discount speciality 
chains, or category killers, which has started to put supply in front 
of demand, will accelerate and at that point, only the strong will 
survive.'' While the location of the Elizabeth mall makes its retail 
potential clear, brokers say the area's entertainment draw is cloudy. 
``When you think of entertainment, you don't think of that area,'' 
said Kalvoda. Added Schultz: ``It may take time to catch on.'' The 
developers and Loews Cineplex are betting otherwise. ``It's one of 
the few areas in the state that has a dense population and no theaters,'' 
said Glimcher. To Loews Cineplex, ``it is an unbelievable location 
that with the quality of the mall will have a regional draw,'' said 
Marc Pascucci, vice president of advertising and publicity. He said 
the Elizabeth theater reflected his company's newest design, and will 
be first in the New York-New Jersey area. He likened what he called 
the VIP lounge to skyboxes in sports stadiums. It will have its own 
concession stand as well as an area where liquor and light snacks 
will be sold. Patrons will pay a ticket premium of 25 to 30 percent, 
said Pascucci. Glimcher said his company will offer van service to 
and from Newark Airport to draw travelers on long stopovers. It is 
also negotiating with a ferry operator to run a service from a location 
on the property along Newark Bay to and from Manhattan. The movie 
theater and the mall are being designed by David Rockwell of Manhattan, 
who has been involved in designing many entertainment attractions, 
including the Academy Awards Theater in Hollywood and improvements 
to Radio City Music Hall. Jersey Gardens will have an ``earthy'' exterior 
finish of brown, beige and green to reflect ``its name and create 
a green oasis in an otherwise gray area,'' Glimcher said, adding that 
he expected the mall, which began construction last April, to attract 
more than 20 million visitors a year. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>