<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981114.0162 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
A man with a long criminal record, who had been wanted in connection 
with four rapes at subway and bus stops in Brooklyn, has been found 
on Long Island, the police said, where he was arraigned Saturday on 
charges in two sex crimes there. The man, James Smith, 29, was arrested 
on Friday afternoon in Freeport, Nassau County Police Department officials 
said, after a 15-year-old girl who said he had attempted to rape her 
a week earlier spotted him on the street. After his arraignment Saturday 
morning, he went to New York City for questioning in several unsolved 
sexual assaults, the police said. According to detectives, the girl 
who alerted the police had been walking on Pine Street in Freeport 
on Nov. 6, when a man fitting Smith's description grabbed her and 
attempted to drag her away, but she escaped and called the police. 
They added that Smith was also accused of sexually abusing a 16-year-old 
girl who was grabbed while walking in that town. Smith was charged 
with attempted rape and sexual abuse in those two cases, said Officer 
Patrick Byrne, a Nassau County police spokesman. Smith, who the police 
say uses several aliases and has a long history of drug and robbery 
convictions, is also suspected in a string of four attacks on women 
who were waiting for trains or buses in Brooklyn. A single assailant 
was suspected in all of those attacks because victims gave similar 
descriptions of the man and fingerprints from several of the scenes 
matched. Smith became a suspect in those attacks after an anonymous 
caller brought him to the attention of the Brooklyn Special Victims 
Unit, and then three of the victims identified him through a photograph 
as their attacker, the police said. According to police documents, 
a man believed to be Smith first attacked at 10 a.m. on March 2, showing 
a handgun to a 19-year-old woman waiting for a subway train in Park 
Slope, Brooklyn, and then raping her at the end of the platform. Six 
months later, on Sept. 5, the police said, a man fitting Smith's description 
robbed, raped and sodomized a 20-year-old woman after following her 
onto a train at a subway station in Carroll Gardens, Brooklyn, shortly 
after 11:30 p.m. Less than two hours later, a man believed to be the 
same attacker pulled out a box cutter and then raped a 15-year-old 
girl waiting at a bus stop in downtown Brooklyn. He fled after hailing 
a cab for her, the police said. The last assault in the series occurred 
at 9:30 a.m. on Sept. 10, when a man pretending to have a gun threatened 
to shoot a 23-year-old woman on a train unless she performed oral 
sex on him. But as the train neared a station in Park Slope, she refused, 
the police said. The man then fled into the station. Smith, who is 
also known as Bart Roman and Robert Gaines, is known to loiter near 
pornography shops and has occasionally solicited prostitutes, the 
police said, but he had never been charged with rape. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>