<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981114.0117 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
The New York Times said in an editorial for Sunday, Nov. 15: With 
the accession of Robert Livingston as the next House speaker, Republicans 
have proclaimed a new order in Washington. But so far Livingston remains 
trapped in the old issues, unwilling to assert himself. He says he 
wants to settle the possible impeachment of President Clinton this 
year, but he is standing by while Judiciary Committee Republicans 
squabble with Democrats and among themselves over how to proceed. 
As a way of exerting his leadership and defining how it will differ 
from Newt Gingrich's, Livingston needs to help guide the Judiciary 
Committee and its chairman, Henry Hyde, in finding a way through the 
impeachment crisis. He can then clear the way for a pragmatic Republican 
approach on Social Security, health care and issues the public cares 
more about. As chairman of the House Appropriations Committee, Livingston 
earned a reputation as a tough partisan who knew how and when to make 
a deal. Those skills are needed now that sentiment in the House is 
running against impeachment and counter to the determination of Hyde 
and the Judiciary panel Republicans to push ahead with a vote to impeach. 
Averting a showdown is the best path to a bipartisan agreement on 
the alternative of censuring Clinton. Livingston is clearly waiting 
until his own formal election as Republican leader this Wednesday 
and for the results of the other leadership contests dividing his 
party. But he cannot wait much longer before addressing this issue, 
which could embroil the Congress for months. This will be a trend-setting 
test of Livingston's abilities. He gained support for the speaker's 
job by tapping resentment over Gingrich's penchant for trampling on 
the autonomy of House committees and their chairmen. He therefore 
cannot run over Hyde, who is looking grumpier by the day. But effective 
House speakers learn to guide without dictating. The Judiciary Committee 
enters a critical phase on Thursday when it hears from Independent 
counsel Kenneth Starr and faces partisan struggles over Starr's tactics 
and whether to call other witnesses. Livingston cannot pretend that 
he has no influence over the tone and direction that his party members 
and their chairman take, but must find a way to guide them with a 
subtle, respectful hand. Hyde, for example, needs to be encouraged 
to lean on Starr to deliver any and all additional information, like 
the Kathleen Willey material sent to the committee Friday. Starr's 
office cites the Friday indictment of Webster Hubbell on Whitewater 
charges as a sign that it is moving aggressively in wrapping up its 
investigations. With settlement of the Paula Jones case adding to 
the momentum, the House Judiciary Committee needs to get into the 
flow and expedite its proceedings. If the evidence does not change 
dramatically, a negotiated conclusion on impeachment would strengthen 
the Republicans' hand and create the right climate for a productive 
Congress. Although Senate Majority Leader Trent Lott said testily 
that he would not work with the administration on a Social Security 
compromise, Livingston surely knows better. The public favors using 
budget surpluses to save Social Security, as the White House proposes, 
while Republicans are promising to come back with more proposals for 
tax cuts. A bipartisan agreement on the safety-net programs would 
have an added advantage for Republicans, removing a losing issue in 
the 2000 presidential race. There are many issues for which broad 
bipartisan agreement exists. Campaign finance reform, aid to education 
and protections for patients in managed care are among the top priorities 
of the next Congress. Livingston may recognize better than Gingrich 
did that if he cannot reach agreement with the Democrats, the Democrats 
will forge agreements with enough moderate Republicans to pass their 
own proposals. But the first order of business is impeachment. There 
is an old saying in politics that you have only one chance to make 
a first impression. The public and the members of Congress are waiting 
for Livingston to tell them who he is. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>