<DOC>
<DOCNO> APW19981121.0327 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Tension is increasing dramatically in this town near the front line 
as international efforts to find a peaceful solution to the six-month 
border dispute between Ethiopia and Eritrea appear to have hit the 
wall. Troops dug in on either side of the border north of Adigrat 
exchange artillery fire nearly every day, and some of the shells have 
fallen just north of town. There was a 30-minute artillery duel Wednesday 
night. It followed a number of other exchanges over the past two weeks 
in which one civilian was killed. There is no information about military 
casualties, and military officials make it clear they don't welcome 
visitors. Adigrat is just 25 kilometers (12 miles) from the front 
line at Zalambesa, occupied by Eritrea since early June when air raids 
and fighting caused several hundred deaths on both sides. At least 
100 were killed in Adigrat. Eritrea, which gained independence from 
Ethiopia in 1993, refuses to withdraw from areas it occupied after 
May, a precondition of all the peace proposals put forth so far. The 
population of Adigrat has nearly doubled from 35,000 in May, swollen 
by people moving away from border areas. Although residents flee to 
outlying villages when the shelling starts, only a few have left the 
town altogether. A military source said no decision has been made 
yet to evacuate Adigrat, 900 kilometers (620 miles) north of the capital, 
Addis Ababa. But he said people have been told to prepare for further 
bombardments and to leave if they can. The source said artillery exchanges 
have escalated along 1,000-kilometer (620-mile) disputed frontier 
since the failure two weeks ago of peace talks sponsored by the Organization 
of African Unity and the subsequent visit to both countries by U.S. 
envoy Anthony Lake. The increased shelling has forced schools to close. 
Makeshift classrooms have been set up in caves and fields. But a boy 
was still injured when a shell exploded outside his cave-school. Adigrat 
has been transformed into a military staging post. Hundreds of soldiers 
fill the bars and restaurants, and military convoys rumble through 
on their way to Zalambessa. Nevertheless, residents try to carry on 
as normal. Shops and businesses are open, the construction of new 
roads and irrigation channels continues. But everyone is constantly 
alert, ready to react at the first sound of shelling. Authorities 
do not allow any travel beyond Adigrat towards the front line because 
of the danger. They say in extreme western Ethiopia near the junction 
of the Sudanese-Eritrean border, an estimated 30,000 people have been 
moved 50 kilometers (30 miles) back from the front after shelling 
Nov. 5. Another 10,000 people fled Shiraro in disputed northern Badime 
district after heavy shelling killed 13. So far there have been no 
reports of actual troop engagements, but fears are growing that fighting 
could break out if something is not done to halt the artillery exchanges. 
The OAU's central conflict resolution body, which is trying to mediate 
the dispute, is not scheduled to meet until late next month, and the 
meeting could be postponed. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>