<DOC>
<DOCNO> APW19981121.0133 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Exactly six months after he took power from former strongman Suharto, 
Indonesia's current head of state, B.J. Habibie, Saturday launched 
a commission of inquiry into corruption allegations against his predecessor 
and one time mentor. The probe into Suharto's wealth appears to be 
a major concession to protesting students who have fought bloody street 
battles with the military. The students have demanded that Suharto, 
77, be tried for illegally enriching himself and his family during 
32 years as president of the Southeast Asian nation. About 200 students 
staged a protest near Suharto's residence Saturday, where the ex-president 
has lived as a virtual recluse since quitting amid riots and protests 
on May 21. Speaking on behalf of President Habibie, State Secretary 
Akbar Tanjung told reporters the commission would ``examine and investigate 
the wealth of former President Suharto.'' Members of the commission 
have not yet been appointed. However, they would have ``credibility 
and high integrity within the nation and state,'' Akbar said. Akbar 
said Habibie made the decision after a four-hour meeting with seven 
Cabinet ministers, including armed forces commander Gen. Wiranto. 
Critics and opponents of Suharto say he plundered the wealth of Indonesia 
by allowing his six children and a small group of cronies to build 
huge business empires under his patronage. They also accuse him of 
stashing a fortune away in overseas bank accounts. Suharto has repeatedly 
denied accusations of corruption during his three-decade rule. An 
investigation by Indonesia's attorney general launched several months 
ago has failed to identify any wrongdoing by Suharto. Opponents have 
branded that inquiry as a whitewash and have accused the Habibie government 
of trying to protect the former autocrat. Last week, a special government 
assembly called on Habibie to include Suharto in a new wide ranging 
corruption inquiry. Visiting former Australian Prime Minister Paul 
Keating, who met with Suharto on Thursday, told reporters on Saturday 
that the ex-leader said he would be willing to face any inquiry into 
his wealth, estimated by Forbes magazine at dlrs 4 billion. Also Saturday, 
U.S. President Bill Clinton said during a visit to South Korea that 
he hoped ``there will be no backsliding'' on human rights by the new 
Indonesian government a week after clashes between student demonstrators 
and the military left up to 16 people dead. Speaking at a news conference 
in Seoul, Clinton said there had been both troubling and hopeful signs 
coming from Indonesia in recent months. ``The United States very much 
hopes there will be no backsliding as we come up with an election 
season in Indonesia and that every effort will be made to minimize 
any harm to people who are exercising their voices to make their political 
views heard,'' he said. In Jakarta, Habibie met with a delegation 
from the ruling Golkar party's youth wing on Saturday, as about 300 
students placed flowers on the street outside the Atma Jaya University, 
where the worst of the violence occurred last week. Habibie, Wiranto 
and other ministers met university deans on Saturday at the presidential 
palace. Indonesia, a sprawling archipelago nation of 202 million people, 
is enduring its worst economic turmoil in three decades. Discontent 
over inflation and joblessness helped spark bloody riots in May which 
helped force out Suharto and in which 1,200 people were killed. Doctors 
confirmed Friday that metal bullet fragments were found in the bodies 
of some protesters killed. Officials say security forces were ordered 
to fire only blank ammunition or plastic bullets. Habibie has accused 
some opposition activists of orchestrating the protests in an attempt 
to overthrow his government. Police have formally charged 10 with 
sedition. Those charged have denied the allegations against them. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>