<DOC>
<DOCNO> APW19981121.0125 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Exactly six months after he took power from former strongman Suharto, 
Indonesia's current head of state, B.J. Habibie, launched a commission 
of inquiry on Saturday into corruption allegations against his predecessor 
and one time mentor. The probe into former President Suharto's wealth 
appears to be a major concession to students who have fought bloody 
street battles with the military, demanding that Suharto be tried 
for illegally enriching himself and his family during 32 years as 
leader of the Southeast Asian nation. About 200 students staged a 
protest near Suharto's residence Saturday, where the ex-president 
has lived as a virtual recluse since quitting amid riots and protests 
on May 21. Speaking on behalf of President Habibie, State Secretary 
Akbar Tanjung told reporters the commission would ``examine and investigate 
the wealth of former President Suharto.'' Members of the commission 
have not yet been appointed. However, they would have ``credibility 
and high integrity within the nation and state,'' Akbar said. Akbar 
said Habibie made the decision after a four-hour meeting with seven 
Cabinet ministers, including armed forces commander Gen. Wiranto. 
Critics and opponents of Suharto say he plundered the wealth of Indonesia 
over three decades. They say his six children and a small group of 
cronies built huge business empires under his patronage. They also 
accuse him of stashing a fortune away in overseas bank accounts. Suharto, 
who was forced to quit on May 21 after a wave of riots and protests, 
has repeatedly denied accusations of corruption during his three-decade 
rule. An inquiry by Indonesia's attorney general launched several 
months ago has failed to identify any wrongdoing by Suharto. Opponents 
have branded that inquiry as a whitewash and have accused the Habibie 
government of trying to protect the former autocrat. Also Saturday, 
U.S. President Bill Clinton said during a visit to South Korea that 
he hoped ``there will be no backsliding'' on human rights by the new 
Indonesian government, a week after bloody street clashes between 
student demonstrators and the military left up to 16 people dead. 
Speaking at a news conference in Seoul, Clinton said there had been 
both troubling and hopeful signs coming from Indonesia in recent months. 
``The United States very much hopes there will be no backsliding as 
we come up with an election season in Indonesia and that every effort 
will be made to minimize any harm to people who are exercising their 
voices to make their political views heard,'' he said. In Jakarta, 
Habibie met with a delegation from the ruling Golkar party's youth 
wing on Saturday, as about 300 students placed flowers on the street 
outside the Atma Jaya University, where the worst of the violence 
occurred last week. Habibie, Wiranto and other ministers met university 
deans on Saturday at the presidential palace. Indonesia, a sprawling 
archipelago nation of 202 million people, is enduring its worst economic 
turmoil in three decades. Discontent over inflation and joblessness 
helped spark bloody riots in May which helped forced Suharto out after 
32 years in power and in which 1,200 people were killed. Doctors confirmed 
Friday that metal bullet fragments were found in the bodies of some 
protesters killed. Officials say security forces were ordered to fire 
only blank ammunition or plastic bullets. Habibie has accused some 
opposition activists of orchestrating the protests in an attempt to 
overthrow his government. Police have formally charged 10 with sedition. 
Those charged have denied the allegations. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>