<DOC>
<DOCNO> APW19981121.0142 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
One day after receiving control over more West Bank land, the Palestinian 
Cabinet called on Israel to cease Jewish settlement activity in the 
West Bank and move ahead with the latest Mideast peace accord. An 
Israeli withdrawal from parts of the West Bank went smoothly Friday, 
giving the Palestinians control over an additional 2 percent of the 
territory and upgrading their authority in 7 percent of the land. 
Israeli settlers, who opposes the U.S.-brokered land-for-peace deal 
with the Palestinians, have been trying to take as many West Bank 
hilltops to prevent them from being handed-over in the future. A statement 
from the Palestinian Cabinet issued early Saturday morning after an 
all-night session in the West Bank city of Hebron said ``settlements 
would destroy the peace process, stability and security.'' The Cabinet 
welcomed the first of three Israeli troop pullbacks but was critical 
of Israel's handling of a Palestinian prisoner release. Israel set 
free 250 Palestinian prisoners Friday, including 150 criminals. Arafat 
had demanded freedom for Palestinians who fought Israeli occupation. 
``We hope that the next batch of prisoners will include political 
prisoners,'' said senior Palestinian negotiator Saeb Erekat. Friday, 
Palestinian policemen in the village of Qabatieh leaned out of jeep 
windows and fired their rifles victoriously into the air to celebrate 
their takeover of this West Bank farming town after Israel's troop 
pullback. ``At last the sun of freedom rises,'' declared a banner 
at the entrance to Qabatieh greeting the convoy of powder blue jeeps. 
Arafat told reporters late Friday that the withdrawal had ``gone well 
and according to plan.'' The Palestinian leader sent congratulations 
to those residents now under his authority. In a call for unity, Arafat 
asked that they ``raise the Palestinian flag.'' By late January, Israel 
is to have carried out two more pullbacks under the Wye River agreement, 
awarding Arafat joint or sole jurisdiction over 40 percent of the 
West Bank, or 920 square miles. Israel captured the West Bank from 
Jordan in the 1967 Mideast war. Friday's pullback from 36 small towns 
and villages earned praise for Israeli Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu, 
yet it made his government more fragile than ever. U.S. Secretary 
of State Madeleine Albright applauded the withdrawal and said it showed 
that the two sides both want to carry out their parts in the peace 
accord signed last month in Washington. However, support for the agreement 
signed last month in Washington is slipping in Netanyahu's hard-line 
government, and Israeli media said Friday the prime minister might 
call early elections in the spring, more than a year ahead of schedule. 
In the month since the signing of the accord Israel and the Palestinians 
have incessantly argued about each others' obligations, and Friday's 
pullback was four days behind schedule because of Israeli delays in 
ratifying the accord. Erekat, usually a tough critic of the Israeli 
government, said that the arguments of recent weeks may have brought 
the two sides closer. But more needed to be done, he said. ``We have 
to concentrate ... and have to exert maximum efforts to build the 
trust required between us.'' The Palestinian Cabinet statement reiterated 
Palestinian statehood goals with Jerusalem as its future capital but 
refrained from saying it would unilaterally declare a state next May. 
Israel opposes Palestinian statehood and held up implementation of 
the accord because of such declarations. The withdrawal isolated several 
Jewish settlements and Israeli troops began reinforcing them with 
cement trenches and shooting positions. In Ganim, a community of 51 
families, many were thinking about leaving. Ilan Amar, 34, had just 
moved to Ganim with his wife Rikki and three children three months 
ago. ``If this place turns into an armed camp, it's not the way we 
wanted to live,'' said Amar, who sells car paint in the Israeli port 
city of Haifa. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>