<DOC>
<DOCNO> APW19981121.0729 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Mallorca regained the league leader's spot Saturday on downing defending 
champion FC Barcelona 1-0 while two goals by Argentine striker Piojo 
Lopez helped Valencia zap Real Madrid 3-1. The victory left Mallorca 
with 22 points, two more than Celta who went into the 11th round league 
leader but slumped 2-0 against second-last Alaves. Mallorca went ahead 
in the 21st minute when Barcelona defender Sergi Barjuan misheaded 
a clearance following a cross from the wing and sent the ball into 
his own net. Barcelona mounted attack after attack against Mallorca 
but the Balearic Island team held out in defense. Barcelona slipped 
a place to No. 3 in the 20-team division with 19 points. Other 11th-round 
results were: Tenerife 0, Athletic de Bilbao 1; Atletico de Madrid 
6, Valladolid 1; Oviedo 0, Betis 1 ; Real Sociedad 0, Zaragoza 0. 
Remaining games to be played Sunday include: Deportivo La Coruna vs. 
Villarreal; Salamanca vs. Extremadura and Espanyol vs. Racing Santander 
Valencia 3, Real Madrid 1 Miguel Angel Angulo dampened Real Madrid's 
spirits with a 35th-minute goal for the homeside. Brazilian Savio 
raised the side hopes momentarily in the 57th minute with an equalizer 
but Argentina's Claudio `Piojo' Lopez made it 2-1 for Valencia in 
the 62nd. Piojo finished Madrid with a third for Valencia in the 74th 
minute. Madrid now lies No. 4 with 18 points while Valencia moves 
up to one place behind with the same points. Alaves 2, Celta 0 Struggling 
Alaves dealt Celta a deadening blow in the 27th minute when midfielder 
Gerard Lopez scored. The northern side took another knock seconds 
into the second half when its key striker Michel Salgado was sent 
off and then it went 2-0 down in the 69th with a goal by Arturo `Sivori' 
Igoroin. Celta moved to No. 2, two points behind Mallorca while Alaves 
with four wins, now has 12 points. Atletico de Madrid 6, Valladolid 
1 Under pressure for results, Italian coach Arrigo Sacchi got a break 
with a 6-1 thrashing of Valladolid. Brazilian defender Julio Cesar 
gave Valladolid false hope by scoring in the second minute. It took 
Atletico 25 minutes to equalize and even then on an own goal by defender 
Juan Manuel Pena. Atletico had to wait until the 41st minute to take 
the lead with a goal by Yugoslav midfielder Vladimir Jugovic. But 
the second half had only started when fellow countryman Zoran Njegus 
made it 3-1. Uruguayan Fernando Correa, Kiko Narvaez and Jose Mari 
Romero each slotted in goals to bury a helpless Valladolid. The result 
left Atletico with 17 points, two more than Valladolid. Oviedo 0, 
Betis 1 Betis continued its upward surge under former Spanish team 
coach Javier Clemente with an 1-0 away win on a 33rd-minute goal by 
Oliverio Alvarez. The Seville-based side moved toward mid-table with 
14 points while Oviedo stays with 15. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>