<DOC>
<DOCNO> APW19981121.0474 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
When a South Korean cruise ship sailed into the North Korean port 
of Changjon this week, passengers could hear the shouts of drilling 
soldiers carry clearly on the cold winter air. As the tourists crowded 
the ship's deck, they were treated to the sight of hundreds of fatigue-clad 
soldiers marching down a waterfront road, singing military songs and 
shouting slogans. Anchored nearby were seven warships weighing up 
to 1,000 tons. One, its guns clearly visible, sailed past the curious 
tourists, who stood on the cruise ship's open deck to take a first 
look at a land that had been off limits to them for the past half 
century. The scene symbolized a subtle but significant change taking 
place along the tense Korean border, the world's last front line in 
a Cold War that began to evaporate a decade ago. It was a difference 
that U.S. President Bill Clinton pointed to in a news conference Saturday 
with South Korean President Kim Dae-jung, as he endorsed Kim's policy 
of engagement with North Korea. ``The significance is far reaching,'' 
Hong Yong-chan, an economic professor at Seoul's Hankook University 
of Foreign Studies, said of the North Korean decision to open Changjon 
to South Korean tourists. Hong was one of the some 800 tourists who 
arrived in Changjon on Thursday aboard the first cruise ship operated 
by a South Korean conglomerate in a joint venture with North Korea. 
Communist North Korea and capitalist South Korea fought in the early 
1950s in a war that ended without a peace treaty, leaving them still 
technically at war. Their border is the world's most heavily armed, 
with 2 million troops deployed on both sides. But apparently for economic 
reasons, the impoverished North opened the military port at Changjon 
to South Korean tourists under a dlrs 905 million deal with Seoul's 
Hyundai Group. Changjon is the gateway to Diamond Mountain, a remote 
region of high crags, deep valleys and thundering waterfalls only 
16 kilometers (10 miles) from the border with the South. Officials 
of South Korea's Unification Ministry, who accompanied the tourists, 
said North Korea's military strongly opposed opening Changjon, but 
were overruled by leader Kim Jong Il. The Unification Ministry is 
charged with guiding policy toward the North, and about half a dozen 
of its officials were aboard the tour ship. The North initially objected, 
but eventually relented and allowed them to debark. The ministry officials 
said the deal with Hyundai is enough to cover North Korea's annual 
shortfall of 1.5 million tons of grain until 2004. Changjon's harbor, 
nestled below Diamond Mountain in an excellent natural shelter, was 
until recently the home base of a major North Korean naval fleet. 
Most of the fleet was relocated farther north before the tour started, 
according to the South Korean officials. The port's facilities look 
very old. Some were built during Japan's colonial rule in the early 
part of the century. Berthing facilities were rusting and shore embankments 
were unrepaired. Along the long ridge of the mountain stretching into 
the sea were several huge tunnels used as shelters for warships. Their 
entrances were temporarily blocked and camouflaged after the ships 
were relocated. Matchbox-shaped gray concrete buildings used by soldiers 
and their families dotted one side of the shore. Most of those buildings 
were empty, their occupants transferred to other bases. Lee Chang-sung, 
69, who served as a North Korean sailor at Changjon before the Korean 
War, said the port looked just as he remembered it. ``No improvement 
was made from my days in 1949 and 1950,'' said Lee, who was captured 
during the Korean War, freed, and chose to live in South Korea. Hyundai 
plans to spend millions at Diamond Mountain building a hotel, golf 
course, restaurants and other facilities in an effort to create a 
major tourist attraction. But major obstacles remain after decades 
of conflict and mistrust. Every movement of the first South Korean 
visitors was closely watched by North Korean officials. They blocked 
transmission of reports by 200 journalists who accompanied the tour, 
a major news event in South Korea. Most of the tourists were elderly 
natives of North Korea who were separated from their families during 
the war, a fate shared by about 10 million Koreans on both sides of 
the border. But the visitors were confined to strictly designated 
areas and no reunions were allowed. No contact with any North Koreans 
civilians was allowed. For Lee Young-shik, 67, a South Korean businessman, 
the tour stopped only about 1,000 meters (yards) from where he was 
born and raised. ``My native home is just over there, but I can not 
go,'' Lee said fighting back tears. ``I am returning with a broken 
heart, but i will come back.'' 
</TEXT>
</DOC>