<DOC>
<DOCNO> APW19981121.0167 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Former Philippine military chief of staff Gen. Fabian Ver, once the 
chief aide to the late dictator Ferdinand Marcos, has died at a hospital 
in Bangkok, Thailand following a long illness, a family spokesman 
said Saturday. He was 78. Ver was one of the most powerful figures 
during the 20-year Marcos administration, heading the presidential 
security force before being appointed by Marcos as his chief of staff. 
He fled with the Marcos family to Hawaii after the autocratic leader 
was ousted in the ``people power'' revolt in February of 1986. Mel 
Amado Jr., a spokesman for the Ver family, said the former general 
succumbed to a ``lung malfunction complication'' early Saturday at 
an undisclosed hospital in Bangkok. Ver was rushed by his eldest daughter, 
Helma Ver Tuazon, to the private hospital after he started experiencing 
shortness of breath, Amado said. Before he died, Ver was able to talk 
on the telephone to his wife, Aida, and his youngest daughter Faida 
in California, sons Wyrlo and Rexor in Hawaii, and another son, Irwin, 
in San Francisco, Amado said. Ver underwent lung surgery last year 
and a gall bladder operation early this year, which may have led to 
a deterioration of his health. Foreign Secretary Domingo Siazon, quoting 
a Philippine embassy officer in Bangkok, said the Ver family is making 
arrangements to fly the former general's remains to Manila. Former 
President Corazon Aquino, who succeeded Marcos, had banned the return 
of Ver and his three sons, all former military officers, on grounds 
that they posed a security threat. Fidel Ramos, who succeeded Aquino, 
continued the ban. Ramos was Ver's deputy under the Marcos regime 
but later led rebel troops in the 1986 revolt. One of the last images 
of Ver seen by Filipinos was at the height of the revolt when he was 
urging Marcos during a live television broadcast to give the order 
to bomb mutinous troops holed up in two suburban camps surrounded 
by hundreds of thousands of civilian supporters. Ver rose from the 
rank of private to four-star general in his four decades in the country's 
military. He served as an intelligence officer during World War II 
and gained fame in the anti-Huk campaign in the 1950s, when the government 
suppressed a Communist-led peasant rebellion in the Philippines. Ver 
was accused of involvement in the 1983 assassination of opposition 
leader Benigno Aquino Jr., Mrs. Aquino's husband, at Manila's airport 
but was acquitted while Marcos was still in power. After Mrs. Aquino 
took office, the Supreme Court ordered a new trial in which 16 soldiers 
were convicted of killing her husband. The trial, however, failed 
to determine whether Marcos or his associates ordered the assassination. 
Ver, who was accused as an accomplice, was not tried in absence and 
the case against him had been shelved. In a radio address on Saturday, 
Philippine President Joseph Estrada said police and military intelligence 
have determined the Vers are no longer a threat to security. He said 
he has ordered that passports be given to members of the Ver family 
so they can return home. Estrada, a former Marcos follower, had said 
that although Ver would have to face charges in the Aquino murder, 
he could not be forced to identify the mastermind of the assassination. 
Marcos' widow, Imelda, said she was ``deeply saddened'' by Ver's death. 
``The last time I spoke to him on the telephone, I was telling him 
that I am praying so that you will be able to come home and finally 
find ultimate vindication,'' Mrs. Marcos said. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>