<DOC>
<DOCNO> APW19981121.0731 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Top-ranked Lindsay Davenport avenged her recent loss to Steffi Graf 
on Saturday and advanced to a meeting with No. 2 seed Martina Hingis 
for a chance at a dlrs 500,000 payoff in the Chase Championships. 
Displaying the game that made her the world's best player, Davenport 
beat Graf 6-1, 2-6, 6-3, eliminating the German six days after losing 
to her in the title match of a tournament in Philadelphia. ``Last 
week in Philadelphia she was playing unbelievable,'' Davenport said. 
``She made a few more mistakes today.'' In the final, Davenport will 
face the Swiss teen-ager she replaced at the top of the rankings. 
Hingis beat Romania's Irina Spirlea in the other semifinal Saturday, 
6-2, 7-6 (9-7). Spirlea, like Graf, was unseeded in this 16-player, 
season-ending tournament at Madison Square Garden. Sunday's finale 
will be a best-of-5 sets, the only time women play more than three 
sets. The winner will collect dlrs 500,000, with dlrs 250,000 going 
to the losing finalist. The first semifinal was a battle of wills 
as much as forehands, and Davenport proved just as tough in both. 
She played mostly to Graf's backhand, daring her opponent to come 
up with a winning solution. Graf was the crowd favorite until nearly 
the last game of the match. It made no difference to the U.S. Open 
champion, who finally won them over with gutsy play and big strokes. 
Whenever Graf seemed to gain the upper hand, Davenport would rally 
with yet another winner. She finally got the crowd cheering for her 
on the second point of the final game when, after making several off-balance 
shots to stay in the point, she won with a sharply angled crosscourt 
forehand. That made it 15-all, and Graf won only one more point in 
the match. ``We were both trying to hold our serves at the end,'' 
Davenport said. ``I just was able to hold mine a little more.'' Graf 
broke Davenport in the opening game. But any thoughts of a romp by 
the German were quickly dispelled when Davenport broke right back, 
aided by Graf's double fault. Graf is accustomed to the the season-ending 
tournaments, having won five of them. Trailing 5-1, she fought to 
deuce before the American held to close the opening set. After Graf 
held at love to lead 5-2 in the second set, Davenport took a three-minute 
medical timeout. As a trainer treated a blister on Davenport's left 
foot, Graf took advantage of the break to leave the court. When play 
resumed, Davenport lost her serve for the second straight time as 
Graf wrapped up the second set to even the match. Following the sixth 
game of the final set, Graf called for the trainer, who worked on 
her right hamstring, wrapping the thigh. Hingis, at 17 the youngest 
of the semifinalists, ripped through the first set in 22 minutes. 
The second set was another matter. Spirlea, one of the game's most 
talented players, matched strokes with Hingis. Twice she had her serve 
broken. Twice she broke Hingis. Hingis began the tiebreaker with an 
ace. Then Spirlea pulled ahead and reached set point at 6-4 with a 
sharply hit forehand down the line. Then errors returned to Spirlea's 
game. She needed a backhand while serving for the set. On the next 
point, she pushed a backhand wide, causing Hingis to fan her face 
in relief. Another Spirlea error gave Hingis match point, which the 
Romanian saved with a backhand passing shot. Two shots later, Hingis 
was in her second Chase Championships final in three years. She lost 
to Graf in five sets in her Championships debut in 1996. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>