<DOC>
<DOCNO> APW19981121.0487 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
South Africa ran in four second half tries for a 35-10 victory over 
Scotland Saturday to make it 16 wins in a row in international matches, 
one short of New Zealand's record of 17. On top of opportunist tries 
by scrum half Joost van der Westhuizen and winger Pieter Rossouw, 
the Springboks, who trailed 7-3 early in the game, produced top-quality 
scores by center Andre Snyman and livewire back row forward Bobby 
Skinstad. Scottish fly half Duncan Hodge scored all his team's points 
with a try, conversion and penalty while South African winger Stefan 
Terblanche also crossed the home line. Fullback Percy Montgomery kicked 
two penalties and two conversions. Narrowly beating Wales 27-20 after 
trailing with three minutes to go, the Springboks were expected to 
totally overwhelmed a much-changed Scottish team. Although they produced 
long periods of pressure, with the back row Skinstad, Johan Erasmus, 
Gary Teichmann and later Andre Venter in control, they didn't produced 
the high-scoring result they expected and the Scots, who impressed 
with their attacking ideas and handling, didn't look like a team which 
lost for the 10th time in 11 internationals. The South Africans went 
ahead when Montgomery kicked a penalty from 20 meters and Hodge had 
a great chance to tie the score from a similar distance in the 22nd 
minute but sliced his kick wide. Hodge made amends with a try. From 
30 meters out, the Scots kicked for position rather than going for 
points and, after winning the lineout, ran the ball across the line. 
Back row Eric Peters fed Hodge, who ran through a a huge gap in the 
South African defense to cross beneath the posts. Hodge kicked the 
convertion and the Scots led 7-3 with 27 minutes gone. Montgomery 
cut the lead to 7-6 with a penalty for a Scottish offside in front 
of the posts before Terblanche scored his ninth try in South African 
colors. Fly half Henry Honiball fed Johan Erasmus who found Terblanche 
in plenty of room. With the Scottish defense expecting a pass outside, 
the winger cut inside and charged through the gap for the score. Just 
before half time, Hodge had a chance to cut South AFrica's lead to 
one point with an angled penalty after a stunning break by New Zealand-born 
center John Leslie had been halted 20 meters short of the line. With 
minutes into the second half, Van der Westhuizen scored his 24th try 
for South Africa in a breakaway after Scottish winger Alan Tait had 
been tackled by winger Roussow. The scrum half picked up the loose 
ball and raced half the field for the score. Montgomery missed the 
conversion attempt but another South African try soon followed. After 
strong forward pressure, Snyman took a long pass from Honiball high 
in the air and ran past Townsend to the line. Montgomery kicked the 
conversion and the Springboks led 23-10. Hodge cut the lead to 23-10 
with a straightforward penalty with 21 minutes to go before Roussow 
came up with another breakaway try. Hodge tried to chip the ball over 
the head of Honiball but the lanky fly half stretched up his arms 
to block the ball. It rebounded conveniently into the arms of winger 
Roussow who had no one between him and the line. Montgomery missed 
the conversion kick. Skinstad almost made it to the line for another 
try but passed to Andre Venter who was tackled just short. But he 
wasn't to be denied and produced the fifth South African try of the 
match in the final minute for his fourth in eight tests. With the 
Scottish defense sucked in, Honiball fed a short pass to substitute 
Venter who switched it on to Skinstad who used his amazing pace to 
outrun the only two defenders left. Montgomery converted. Lineups: 
Scotland _ Derrick Lee; Alan Tait, Jamie Mayer, John Leslie, Cameron 
Murray; Duncan Hodge, Bryan Redpath; Tom Smith, Gordon Bulloch, Paul 
Burnell, Scott Murray, Doddie Weir, Peter Walton, Eric Peters, Budge 
Pountney. South Africa _ Percy Montgomery, Stefan Terblanche, Andre 
Snyman, Christian Stewart, Pieter Rossouw; Henry Honiball, Joost van 
de Westhuizen; Robbie Kempson, James Dalton, Adrian Garvey, Krynauw 
Otto, Mark Andrews, Johan Erasmus, Gary Teichmann, Bobby Skinstad. 
Referee _ Chris White, England. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>