<DOC>
<DOCNO> CNN19981121.1600.0052 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> CAPTION </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
United Nations inspectors made a surprise check of a suspected weapons 
facility in Iraq today. It was their first unannounced visit since 
Iraq promised to cooperate fully with the U.N. in order to avert an 
attack by U.S. forces. The Iraqi news agency says the country provided 
the team with all necessary assistance. But Iraq and the inspectors 
did become embroiled in a dispute over documents. Ben Wedeman reports. 
a paper storm is swirling around a set of crucial documents sought 
by the U.N. commission charged with accounting for Iraq's weapons 
of mass destruction. Chief U.N. weapons inspector Richard Butler has 
sent several letters to iraqi deputy prime minister Tariq Aziz over 
the past week requesting that iraq hand over documents -- including 
the diaries of Iraqi officers -- to ascertain the extent of Iraq's 
program to produce chemical and biological weapons. In response to 
the letters, Iraqi foreign ministry under secretary Riyadh al-qaisi 
described Butler's requests as "provocative rather than professional." 
Qaisi said inspectors would be allowed to see some of the requested 
documents, but only in the presence of prakash Shah, the special representative 
of U.N. secretary-general Kofi Annan. Last week, an Iraqi official 
suggested in an interview with CNN that some documents may not be 
handed over. All nonrelevant items or details, nonrelevant to UNSCOM's 
mandate and uNSCOM's work, should be excluded, because those constitute 
information which are sought after by intelligence. Only a week has 
gone by since Iraq agreed to resume cooperation with the weapons inspectors, 
narrowly averting a U.S.-led air and missile attack. U.S. President 
Bill Clinton, on a tour of the far east, is playing down the matter. 
First of all, I think it's important that we not overreact here on 
the first day. I want to make sure that I know exactly what the facts 
are. Clinton's national security adviser was more Blunt. The issue 
here is whether Iraq will meet its obligations under the security 
council resolutions. And whether UNSCOM is able to do its work. If 
we reach the conclusion that the answer to those questions is Negative, 
we obviously are prepared to act. On the ground, UNSCOM appears to 
be going about its business without any complications. Iraqi officials 
say the inspectors have visited more than 20 sites since returning 
to their work on Tuesday. But with new questions being raised about 
Iraq's commitment to cooperate with the inspectors, the future of 
their work is once more in doubt. Ben Wedeman, CNN, Baghdad. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>