<DOC>
<DOCNO> CNN19981121.0130.1489 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> CAPTION </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Woody Allen is sticking to what he knows best in his new movie. "Celebrity" 
is all about being famous. But Allen would rather poke fun at fame. 
Bill Tush explains. Get ready for another Woody Allen satire about 
society, love and relationships. This one is called "celebrity." It's 
also another film that actor's practically volunteer for just to have 
the chance to work with the quirky Allen. Hollywood's hottest Leonardo 
DiCaprio does a turn as an actor who's also a Party animal. You mean 
all of us? Yeah. Wait a second. You know, the woman thing is not -- 
the guy thing I feel a little uncomfortable. I mean, you know we're 
not getting together, right? Is that acting or art imitating life? 
I love you! It was funny. It was a satire. As soon as I read the part, 
I was immediately drawn to it. Kenneth Branagh put Shakespeare and 
his British accent on hold to play an American journalist who sounds 
a lot like the wood man himself. I mean, you're a miracle. Because 
I don't usually drool in my date's salad. I'm not usually like this. 
It was interesting to play a kind of extension of him and be directed 
by somebody who knows so much about comedy, what is funny verbally 
and physically. And probably only Allen could coach bebe neuwirth, 
who plays a Hooker, into demonstrating oral sex with a banana. She 
thinks it's one of the film's highlights. So you're actually a hooker? 
Yeah, that's right. Because it's played without pornography, without 
raunch or without adolescent humor, that's what makes it so funny. 
At "celebrity's" gala premiere, the stars couldn't help gushing about 
Woody. What he does is he chooses the actors that he wants and he 
sorts of lets you go free and do what you need to do. He doesn't overbear 
you with a lot of direction, which is fantastic. He said this thing 
to me constantly, which was just, "if it feels right, do it. Trust 
your instincts." Talk about trusting the man behind the camera? This 
film, like Woody Allen's others, was made under wraps. Since he doesn't 
give you a script, he only gives you the pages, you really have to 
rely on him. He holds all the cards. And you just -- you just have 
to trust him. So what is "celebrity" all about? All these people are 
really in a pursuit of love, really, trying to find it in its most 
purest fashion. That might not explain all of the plot, but one thing 
is certain, if you see "celebrity," you might be looking into Woody 
Allen's world. Bill Tush, "CNN Entertainment News," New York. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>