<DOC>
<DOCNO> CNN19981121.1300.1455 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> CAPTION </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
The Internet is linking children from around the world. And not all 
of them are just using chat rooms and playing games. Bruce Francis 
reports on some kids who are taking on some pretty weighty issues. 
Not everyone has access to Internet, right? Yeah. Yeah. This is the 
junior summit, a project of MIT's media lab. 100 kids from around 
the world are gathering at the famed institution, sharing very adult 
ideas on how to attack the world's problems. For months before the 
conference began, they hashed it out on the web in virtual discussion 
groups -- how to heal the environment, end child labor or improve 
education -- talk tinged with media savvy. If they would sponsor us, 
that would be excellent. Many of the kids who were selected based 
on essays come from countries where the Internet is almost the exclusive 
domain of the wealthy. I don't think that money should determine the 
education that you get, or the opportunities you have, which it does, 
which is sad. But Internet access is something that we correct and 
we can improve the educational system. 10-year-old Hilary McQuaide 
is from the heart of Silicon Valley, yet she cared little for computers 
before the summit. Computers will change the world. It doesn't matter 
through computers what language you speak, there's translations. It 
doesn't matter what you look like, people don't have to see that. 
It doesn't matter where you live. You can communicate with someone 
who lives 2,000 miles away, who lives halfway around the world. What 
do you guys think of proposing kid representatives in the U.N.? And 
the kids are doing much more than just talking. We've started a petition 
actually, we have, and I've got -- we've got about, more than 1,000 
signatures already. So we plan to give it to the companies which use 
child labor, hoping that they will stop exploiting the kids. And some 
of the ideas show a modern mix of altruism and capitalism, like a 
bank that takes deposits and pays interest in donated premiums from 
merchants. Basically the kids' bank is an organization that is trying 
to make money to fund different projects -- maybe junior summit projects 
which have been discussed, or other projects which are in need of 
money. They're good projects, but the point is where we're going to 
get the money to implement them. And they know a good opportunity 
when T(ey see one. This newspaper production workshop demanded a corporate 
sponsorship from cNN in exchange for permission to shoot them at work. 
We declined. And because they are kids, there were more surprises. 
The kids may be deeply involved with technology, but here at the MIT 
media lab, where the cutting edge is honed, the kids have relatively 
little interest in the fastest chips and the latest software. A group 
of children met with me to tell me that they were sick and tired of 
computer bloat. They thought all of these fast processors, all of 
these were unnecessary. They wanted affordable computing for them 
and their countries. I don't think there's an adult that understands 
that. Bruce Francis, "CNN Financial News," Cambridge, Massachusetts. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>