<DOC>
<DOCNO> NBC19981121.1830.0064 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> CAPTION </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Good evening. After a week that saw impeachment proceedings begin 
for the third time in U.S. history, tonight, the traveling Clinton 
White House is watching two overseas trouble spots, close to 5,000 
miles apart -- the Korean peninsula and Iraq. More on Korea in a moment. 
We'll begin with Baghdad. There's a good reason why the Pentagon hasn't 
put away the plans to launch an air strike. The U.S and the U.N. have 
been fearing what has just happened -- a standoff developing over 
documents the U.N. badly wants to see. Even though the Iraqis are 
largely cooperating with weapons inspectors of late, this is a problem. 
And in response, the president is urging caution. We begin there tonight. 
NBC's Ron Allen is in Baghdad. Today UNSCOM inspectors turned up the 
pressure on Iraq making their first surprise inspections. No problems 
reported, but another dispute is developing. UNSCOM has hit what sources 
call "A total stonewall," the Baghdad government refusing to hand 
over sensitive documents about its weapons programs, despite a promise 
of full cooperation that stopped U.S. air strikes. In New York, earlier 
this week, chief weapons inspector Richard Butler received an angry 
response to a request for documents about Iraq's chemical, biological 
and missile programs. The Iraqis called Butler's request provocative 
and unprofessional, claiming the documents were lost or not important 
Iraq emphasizing instead, its demand for a comprehensive review of 
its compliance to date, which it hopes will lead to an easing of the 
sanctions. Butler, on the "today" program Tuesday, had said his request 
would test iraq's commitment. The production of the documents would 
be the first good instance of giving their cooperation, failure, I'd 
have to tell the security council what happened, and that this didn't 
seem to me to be cooperation. Now the security council is considering 
its next step. The U.N. secretary-general is reportedly alarmed by 
Iraq's hard-line -- the United States with a huge force of ships, 
warplanes and troops still in the region, now deciding whether Iraq 
has gone to far. The issue is whether Iraq will meet its obligations 
under the security council resolutions and UNSCOM is able to do its 
work. If the response is Negative we're prepared to act. And to make 
the point clear, "the USS enterprise" passed through the Suez canal 
today planning to be within striking range of Iraq by the time President 
Clinton gets back to Washington Monday night. Tonight, Iraq's government 
says it remains committed to cooperating with uNSCOM but adding the 
inspectors will never get full submission. For now, sources say, "the 
U.S. thinks this problem calls for diplomacy rather than force." Ron 
Allen, NBC news, Baghdad. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>