<DOC>
<DOCNO> NBC19981121.1830.0972 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> CAPTION </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
In "focus" this evening, the role of marriage education classes in 
reducing america's divorce rate, which currently stands at just under 
50%. NBC's Betty Rollin has our report. Fay buisson and Stephen Bishop 
are planning to marry, and they want to get it right. I didn't want 
to fall into traps that I had fallen in my previous marriage. Peggy 
and Greg Wilkenson got married two years ago and began having problems 
they couldn't solve. We wanted to really fully live with each other, 
and we realized we didn't have the skills or the tools to do it. And 
the homework last week was the letting go of grudges. Skills and tools 
-- both couples say they're gaining in this dallas marriage education 
class called "pairs," one of hundreds in a Growing movement based 
on the premise that good marriages can be learned. You want me to 
check the ones I think are me? For three months these couples have 
been doing various relationship exercises, teaching them, chiefly, 
how to listen and how to disagree without fighting. Couples that are 
happily, sexily married, disagree the same amount as couples that 
divorce. It's not whether or not we disagree. It's how we handle the 
disagreement. One of the techniques is saying to your partner, "I'm 
about to explode." And then the other person says, "how long are you 
going to explode?" And then we say, "30 seconds or a minute." By then, 
aren't you laughing? It diffuses the anger. It puts the goodwill right 
back into the relationship. While some programs, like this one, go 
on for months and cost thousands of dollars, others are two-day seminars 
costing nothing. Churches have traditionally counseled couples about 
to marry, and now they, too, are running classes as are the U.S. army, 
the Navy and the Marines, through their chaplain service. High schools 
in more than 30 states now offer marriage courses, and they'll be 
required in all Florida high schools starting in January. What do 
you mean that you don't love them? This class for 11th graders and 
12th graders in suburban Chicago is taught by a divorce attorney with 
the American bar association. Videos show students how not to handle 
conflict. I'm starving, what's for dinner? I just got home, didn't 
you hear a word I said? Then the video shows how, by communicating 
differently, the outcome can change. I really don't want to argue 
with you. How about I make dinner on Monday and Wednesday nights? 
Lisa schuenemann says she's been practicing "talking tips," as they're 
called, with her boyfriend. You shouldn't use "never" or "always" 
because that puts the other person on the defense automatically, and 
you start fighting. Some say it's not appropriate to teach this sort 
of thing in school. This school's principal disagrees. It's no longer 
the role of the school to prepare youngsters to earn a Living, but 
we also have to prepare them to live a life. Does marriage education 
work? For youngsters, it's too soon to tell. For adults, many seem 
to feel the classes make a difference, but that's because, some experts 
say, couples who attend like Peg and Greg Wilkenson, are not the ones 
in serious trouble. I'm sorry for that, because that puts you in an 
uncomfortable position. Meanwhile, the wilkensons feel they're avoiding 
serious trouble, and they can do that simply by learning to talk and 
listen to eachother in a better way. How does it feel to hear that 
from her? That feels good, that she'd say she's sorry. Betty Rollin, 
NBC news, Dallas. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>