<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981121.0076 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
My friends and I fish all summer in the shadow of Old Barney, the 
140-year-old, 165-foot lighthouse that looms over Barnegat Bay at 
the northern tip of Long Beach Island, N.J. It's a rare day when we 
don't bring back something for lunch or dinner, be it fluke, blues 
or weakfish. But when the fall rolls around and the temperatures slip 
below 60, we set our sights on Morone saxatilis, better known as striped 
bass. The fish fed settlers along the Atlantic Seaboard for centuries, 
but the only way to consume one legally in the state of New Jersey 
now is to go out and catch it. And once you land a keeper (currently 
a minimum of 28 inches), you start to appreciate the passion these 
fish inspire, enough to keep grown men up all night casting off rain- 
and wind-swept rock jetties or lurching boats for a chance to reel 
in one. My introduction to striper fishing came three years ago, when 
I hooked up with one near the Sedge Islands, at the southern tip of 
Island Beach State Park. I was so excited about boating this beautiful 
fish, with its distinctive green-shaded striping reminiscent of its 
freshwater cousin, the large-mouthed bass, that I couldn't imagine 
eating it. I let it go. This October, however, Greg Setter and I fully 
intended on bringing home some meals. The conditions were ideal _ 
the sun bright, the sky clear blue, the temperature in the low 60s. 
We had a cooler with a dozen live croakers in it and an outgoing tide 
as we puttered around the bay in my 19-foot Boston Whaler for 45 minutes 
or so before we found striper central: an eddy of current in the bay's 
main channel where the depth dropped off from about 15 to 25 feet. 
For the next hour, we were on to a fish almost every time we dragged 
our minnows (with two-ounce weights attached) through that eddy. First, 
Greg pulled up a 24-incher, a ``short'' in striper parlance. As soon 
as he put it back in the water, I was on to a keeper. We had a 32-inch 
fish in the well when Greg and I hooked up simultaneously, laughing 
and yelling as we reeled in our heavy fish. We had three keepers in 
the well, plus a 10-pound weakfish, when we let Greg's second keeper 
go, saving our limit (it's two fish a day per person unless you apply 
to the state for a bonus fish permit) for what we hoped to be the 
big kahuna. I released a short and Greg lost a big one when he tried 
to set the hook _ he had pulled a baitfish out of the striper's gullet 
in the process. Soon we were out of bait and, like the other boats 
around us, out of action. We saw Victor, our bait supplier, and pulled 
up to his skiff. He informed us, surprisingly, that he had no bait 
to spare. We made several unproductive drifts with a lure and a dead 
minnow while we watched Victor hook up time after time as he passed 
through the magic drift. (He would catch 11 fish that day, including 
a 35-inch, 22-pounder.) A little while later, Victor relented and 
gave us some spare minnows. We didn't land the big kahuna that day 
but I was certain we would the next time we fished. Toward the end 
of October, my brother Pat and Charlie LeDuff joined us. I had regaled 
them with stories about our previous trip, and I was mildly worried 
about how we were going to distribute the fillets from all the fish 
we were going to catch. My fears were unfounded; two days produced 
only two keepers, both smaller than the four Greg and I had caught 
earlier in the month. I watched Pat and Charlie high-five each other 
as they boated their fish, and I was happy for them, to a point. I 
would have been happier if I'd had my drag set tighter and not lost 
a fish on the one good strike I had in three hours of fishing on day 
one. I would have been even happier if I'd landed the fish I had on 
the next day, which was definitely a keeper, but I lost it about 20 
feet from the boat. Still, we had fresh striped bass for dinner, a 
true delicacy. Many people never get to taste the sweet, flaky white 
meat since it has been illegal to sell wild striped bass in New Jersey 
for more than a decade. After the striper population crashed in the 
early 1980s, Congress passed the Atlantic Striped Bass Conservation 
Act in 1984, which severely restricted commercial fishing for stripers 
along the East Coast. A moratorium on striped bass harvesting offshore 
followed in 1988. (Net fishing for striped bass was banned in New 
Jersey in 1952.) Recreational fishing was also heavily regulated. 
Overfishing and pollution contributed to the striper decline, according 
to Russ Allen, a senior fisheries biologist for the New Jersey Division 
of Fish, Game and Wildlife, but there have been strong signs of a 
recovery in the last five years. For instance, the size limit for 
a keeper in New Jersey has fallen from 38 inches in 1990 to its current 
28 inches. And Allen reports that surveys of young striped bass in 
1993 and 1996 had the highest indices for the fish since the survey 
was started more than 40 years ago. The Atlantic States Marine Fisheries 
Commission reopened the striped bass fishery as stocks recovered in 
the 1990s, but New Jersey still does not permit commercial fishing 
for stripers. The state has allocated its quota of 225,000 pounds 
of striper to recreational fishermen. Allowing more than two fish 
to be taken with a special permit account for only a small percentage 
of that quota. The commercial interests feel they should be entitled 
to the large, unused portion of the 225,000-pound allocation. They 
say they should be allowed to keep the stripers caught in nets they 
now have to throw back. Assemblyman Nicholas Asselta introduced a 
bill in the New Jersey State Assembly in June to reintroduce the commercial 
striped bass fishery, setting the stage for a battle between two powerful 
interests. The political struggle over striped bass has taken place 
up and down the Atlantic Coast for at least half a century. With the 
fish's remarkable recovery, the argument will only intensify in the 
next few years. Also, since striped bass can live as long as 30 years 
and mature between 8 and 15 years old, the best fishing _ be it off 
a boat, jetty or beach _ is yet to come. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>