<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981121.0160 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Distributing turkeys to union members has been a holiday tradition 
at District Council 37 for more than a decade. In some years, frozen 
turkeys were packed to the ceiling at the council's headquarters while 
1,000 or more union members lined up to receive their bounty. The 
tradition delighted members of the council, the umbrella group representing 
120,000 New York City municipal workers, and it benefited union leaders 
politically. ``A lot of members liked the idea of getting turkeys, 
and they liked the social aspect of meeting friends when they went 
to pick up the turkeys,'' said Gary Goff, a computer programmer. But 
on Friday, a gesture of generosity at Thanksgiving turned into evidence 
of corruption, as Joseph DeCanio, president of the local that represents 
highway workers, pleaded guilty to embezzlement. DeCanio admitted 
skimming more than $50,000, over four years, as he bought and sold 
turkeys for distribution to municipal workers in another local. And 
it did not end there. The office of the Manhattan district attorney, 
Robert Morgenthau, which had been tipped off to possible impropriety 
in the Thanksgiving giveaway by local members, is expanding its inquiry 
at the district council to cover the sales of all turkeys bought and 
distributed, and is investigating allegations of vote fraud, falsified 
records and kickbacks from travel agencies and caterers. ``It all 
started with turkeys, and it's ending with turkeys,'' said Mark Rosenthal, 
the new president of the local representing motor-vehicle operators. 
Union records show that DeCanio's turkey business was not limited 
to the transactions referred to in his guilty plea. In addition to 
his own local, DeCanio has sold turkeys to several others, including 
the local representing 2,800 motor vehicle operators, a local for 
2,350 data-processing workers, a local for 1,570 custodial workers 
the local representing crossing guards and cafeteria aides, according 
to records and labor leaders who spoke on condition of anonymity. 
DeCanio charged some local presidents more than $40 each for 20-pound 
turkeys he bought for about $18, union records show. In some years, 
union leaders said, DeCanio helped furnish 22,000 turkeys to about 
half a dozen of the 56 union locals in the district council. While 
the turkey giving pleased union members and leaders alike, officials 
from the district council's parent union, the American Federation 
of State, County and Municipal Employees, said there was another downside: 
The large sums spent on turkeys pushed some locals deeper into debt 
and underscored the lack of financial controls among the locals. For 
instance, Local 372, the local representing 25,000 crossing guards 
and school cafeteria workers spent $275,000 for about 8,000 turkeys 
last year _ a year in which the local's debt soared from $5 million 
to almost $10 million. ``It was very excessive,'' said Lee Saunders, 
who was appointed trustee of that local because of financial mismanagement 
there. ``It shouldn't have happened. There weren't a hell of a lot 
of financial controls within the union'' And, Saunders said, fewer 
than half the turkeys were given to members of Local 372; most of 
them were donated to churches and charities. The local's former president, 
Charles Hughes, gave turkeys to Parkchester Baptist Church in the 
Bronx, Trinity Temple Baptist Church in Brooklyn and at least one 
church in Millen, Ga., where he had a second home. Union officials 
said that Hughes gave out hundreds of turkeys in Georgia. One year, 
said the officials, speaking on the condition of anonymity, there 
was a mini-riot in Millen when the people who showed up for turkeys 
far exceeded the number available. A union judicial panel expelled 
Hughes last June after finding that he had embezzled more than $1.7 
million from the local through schemes such as taking fraudulent overtime 
and having the union pay his personal credit-card bills. Gerald Shargel, 
a lawyer for Hughes, lauded the turkey donations and said Hughes he 
was not guilty of any crime. ``Charlies Hughes has had a long history 
of tremendous efforts on behalf of disadvantaged people,'' Shargel 
said. ``He has not only fed the hungry and done acts of charity and 
kindness all over the country, indeed all over the world. It is absolutely 
appalling that now the very acts that he was praised for many years 
are now a subject of condemnation.'' The tradition of giving turkeys 
to union members at Thanksgiving goes back to at least 1985, when 
Victor Gotbaum was the council's executive director. It was overseen 
by Vincent Parisi, who government investigators say had ties to organized 
crime and was then president of the highway laborers local. DeCanio 
became president of the highway laborers local in 1991. DeCanio, in 
pleading guilty on Friday, said that, acting as a middle man, he gave 
Bessie Jamison, the president of a local representing 1,800 Board 
of Education clerical workers, an improperly inflated invoice for 
the turkeys she bought. DeCanio said he then shared the inflated amount 
with her. Ms. Jamison did not return phone calls to her office. In 
a news conference after DeCanio pleaded guilty, prosecutors said he 
improperly increased turkey prices by about 20 cents a pound, normally 
raising them to $1.10 a pound from 90 cents. This meant that a 20-pound 
turkey was priced at $22 rather than $18. DeCanio bought his turkeys 
from Drohan Co. in Queens. Prosecutors said there was no evidence 
that Drohan overcharged or skimmed off money. But some union leaders 
who bought turkeys from DeCanio sometimes demanded 60 cents to $1 
a pound for themselves, union officials said. In 1995, according to 
the local's financial records, Robert Taylor, who was then president 
of the local representing motor vehicle operators, spent $11,000 for 
250 turkeys _ $44 per turkey. ``That was outrageous, especially because 
Taylor left a big debt for us,'' said Walter Drummonds, a member of 
the local. Several members of the motor-vehicle operators local said 
that as soon as they learned last year that Taylor had paid $44 for 
turkeys, they grew convinced he was skimming off money and they complained 
to Stanley Hill, the council's executive director. ``Where'd he get 
the turkeys from, Peru?'' one of the members asked at the meeting 
with Hill. Sometimes union officials let their friends take more then 
one turkey, officials said. Edward Blassingame, an urban park ranger, 
said: ``They used to bring a truck over, and you'd see some people 
leaving with two, three, four turkeys, while they'd be telling other 
people, `Sorry, we've run out of turkeys.' It wasn't right.'' Many 
union members also complained that their leaders played favorites 
in distributing turkeys. Rosenthal, who defeated Taylor this year 
in a race for the local's presidency, said his predecessor held raffles 
to give 250 turkeys to the 400 members who showed up. Most members 
got one raffle ticket, Rosenthal said, Taylor's friends got 10. ``Some 
members of the executive board would take cases of turkeys home for 
themselves,'' Rosenthal said. Taylor's telephone number is unlisted, 
and district council officials said he was unavailable for comment. 
This year, to remove suspicions about the turkey-giving process, Rosenthal's 
local gave its members $20 vouchers to buy turkeys at Pathmark. Each 
member, he said, had to show identification before obtaining a voucher. 
``I wanted to be able to show accountability to my members where the 
money went,'' Rosenthal said. ``I wanted to make sure no one from 
my executive board or anyone took more than one.'' Saunders, the trustee 
of the crossing guards local, did the same thing, substituting vouchers 
for turkeys. This year, he paid $48,000 for 2,400 vouchers, down from 
the $275,000 that the local's ousted president, Hughes, spent last 
year on turkeys. Saunders questioned the propriety of spending so 
much of the local's money on turkeys for charities in the past when 
the local was so deeply in debt and many of its members live below 
the poverty line. ``I understand the importance of community relations 
and church relations, but it was excessive,'' Saunders said. Robert 
Crilly, who recently retired as president of the data processors local, 
said in a series of interviews that in past years he bought 1,600 
turkeys from DeCanio, often paying about $36,000, but last year paying 
$27,000 after he demanded a lower price. Crilly said he expected to 
be indicted for his role in the purchases, although he insisted he 
had never taken any kickbacks. He said that when he bought turkeys, 
he gave DeCanio two checks, one for the wholesaler and one for about 
$5,000 made out to DeCanio. In a telephone interview several weeks 
ago, DeCanio denied Crilly's account and called him ``a chronic liar.'' 
</TEXT>
</DOC>