<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981121.0186 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
For many homeowners, the strategy for planning a home renovation project 
is like the one used when planning a visit to the dentist: Fix whatever's 
broken, please, and leave everything else alone. There is an argument 
to be made, however, that home renovation should be less like dentistry 
and more like holistic medicine, where a tweak here prevents a twinge 
there and a bit of prevention could head off major problems later. 
In fact, construction specialists say, almost any renovation project 
presents opportunities for homeowners not only to address short-term 
problems or improvements but to realize the long-term benefits of 
making homes safer, more energy-efficient and less susceptible to 
the ravages of time and the environment. ``For many architects today, 
saving energy is the primary focus,'' said Chris Benedict, a Manhattan 
architect who specializes in energy-efficient design and renovation. 
``And we're finding that by making energy efficiency our focus, we 
can't help but end up with healthier, more durable housing.'' Specialists 
like Ms. Benedict operate from the premise that a house is more than 
a lifeless collection of wood, plaster, pipes, vents and wires. Houses 
breathe, they say, inhaling at one place and exhaling at another. 
Houses have circulatory systems, too _ heating, plumbing, ventilation 
and electrical circuits _ all of which operate either efficiently 
or erratically by delivering more or less of whatever is needed to 
wherever it is needed at the time. And houses can be healthy or they 
can be sick, such as when moisture, warmth and airborne spores converge 
to form hidden colonies of mold and mildew; or when a breath taken 
by the attic draws harmful carbon monoxide from the basement. ``A 
house must be thought of as a system,'' Ms. Benedict said. ``And the 
system must be thoughtfully designed.'' Since many existing houses 
were built before architects and designers fully realized the extent 
to which individual building elements affect one another, however, 
most homes can benefit from some retrospectively applied thoughtful 
design. ``Just about every remodeling project presents a unique opportunity 
to make your house more efficient, more comfortable and more personally 
suited to you,'' said Alan Meier, executive editor of Home Energy 
magazine and a staff scientist at the Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory 
in Berkeley, Calif. ``And no matter what kind of change you make, 
there is a good chance it will affect how the house functions as a 
system.'' Building an addition to a house, for example, would obviously 
affect the way heat in the house is distributed, Meier said. But so 
would removing an existing wall to make one large room out of two 
smaller ones. ``And it's not just heat you have to think about,'' 
he said. ``You have to think in terms of all five senses.'' Removing 
a wall between a kitchen and a dining room _ a relatively common renovation 
project in older homes today _ will not only alter the way heat circulates 
through the house, but is also likely to introduce new sounds and 
smells into the living space, Meier said. ``You don't want whatever's 
being cooked in the kitchen to permeate the entire living area,'' 
he said. ``So you need to make sure you've got the proper ventilation.'' 
Installing proper ventilation, however, is only half the battle; residents 
have to turn it on for it to be of any use. ``Most range hoods are 
too noisy,'' Meier said. ``So people don't use them as much as they 
should.'' One solution, he said, is to install one of the newer, quieter, 
energy-efficient ventilation fans. Another is to install a remote-mounted 
fan in an area other than the kitchen (such as in a crawl space _ 
provided the fan is vented to the exterior of the building) and connect 
the fan to the range hood with a 6- or 8-inch duct. Of course, any 
time you have air being pulled out of a house by a ventilation system, 
you have the same amount of air being pulled in. ``You start with 
a fixed volume of air,'' said David Johnston, president of What's 
Working, a construction-industry consulting firm in Boulder, Colo. 
``Now, you turn on your kitchen fan, or your bathroom fan, or even 
your clothes dryer, and what you're doing is creating negative pressure. 
The next thing you know, you're sucking air through every crack in 
the house to make up the difference.'' Johnston said that with leaky 
houses, sucking in the necessary air is fairly easy. But easy isn't 
necessarily good. In the winter, for example, the air getting sucked 
in is usually cold. That results in drafts, uneven heating and high 
energy bills. And since cold air holds less moisture than warm air, 
outside air that enters a house in winter usually ends up lowering 
the relative humidity inside, making the air dry and the occupants 
uncomfortable. In fact, Johnson said, in leaky houses, cold outside 
air can be pulled into the house even when there aren't any ventilation 
fans doing the pulling. That results from what is known as the ``stack 
effect,'' in which warm air inside the house rises through cracks 
and holes in floors and walls to the attic while pulling air from 
lower parts of the house behind it. ``One place people usually don't 
suspect is where the pipes come up from the basement to the upper 
stories,'' Johnston said, adding that since pipes coming through walls 
often have decorative circular plates that hide the holes around them, 
many homeowners erroneously believe that the holes are adequately 
sealed. And pulling air into a house from the basement, he said, can 
be a problem. ``You can pull all kinds of stuff out of a basement 
and into the house,'' Johnston said, adding that sewer gas, pesticides 
and even radon are but a few examples. Even more dangerous is the 
possibility that improper ventilation in a house can lead to backdrafting, 
in which carbon-monoxide exhaust from combustion appliances like furnaces 
or gas water heaters are sucked into the living space rather than 
going up the chimney. About a year and a half ago, the building at 
34 Ditmars St. in Bushwick, Brooklyn, was little more than an empty, 
crumbling shell. Today it is a showpiece for what is possible when 
a remodeling strategy is developed using thoughtful energy-efficient 
design. Using grant money from the Joyce Mertz Gillmore Foundation 
and the New York City Department of Housing Preservation and Development, 
Ms. Benedict recently rehabilitated the Ditmars Street house and 17 
other vacant, deteriorated multifamily buildings. In each she incorporated 
state-of-the-art energy-saving construction and design techniques 
while keeping her budget as close as possible to the budget for an 
ordinary renovation. ``The energy-efficiency elements of the project 
ended up adding about 1 percent to the total cost,'' Ms. Benedict 
said. ``And I believe that as this kind of construction becomes more 
common, we can do even better.'' The building at 34 Ditmars St. is 
a three-story, six-unit frame structure that was built about 100 years 
ago. Once drafty, noisy and inefficiently heated, the building is 
now tight, quiet and far more energy efficient than it was even when 
it was new. Every exterior wall, Ms. Benedict said, is superinsulated 
with densely packed, blown-in cellulose _ another name for finely 
shredded newspapers; every electrical outlet and switch box is caulked 
to prevent drafts from seeping in from behind the walls; every piece 
of sheetrock is screwed and glued to the studs and sealed at both 
floor and ceiling, creating a nearly airtight envelope around each 
apartment; every window is insulated and double-glazed and set in 
frames that are sealed airtight with caulk; every room has its own 
heating element and every heating element has its own thermostat, 
making it possible to take energy-saving advantage of the heat produced 
by sunlight in the living room or by the stove top in the kitchen. 
And while Ms. Benedict's rehabilitation work is on a grander scale 
than most home-improvement projects _ the $4.3 million project involved 
the gut-renovation of all 18 multifamily buildings _ the design and 
construction techniques used in the project can be employed in virtually 
any home where there is a renovation being planned and the will to 
plan it properly. A homeowner who is planning to re-sheetrock a room 
or two, for example, can use that opportunity to insulate any uninsulated 
exterior walls and seal around electrical outlets and switch boxes 
with caulk. In fact, Ms. Benedict said, any time the interior framing 
of an exterior wall is exposed, it is a good idea to use expanding 
urethane foam to seal any holes through which wires or pipes pass. 
``Air is smart,'' she said. ``If there's a hole to move through, air 
will find it.'' Homeowners replacing windows, for example, should 
settle for nothing less than double-glazed, argon-filled windows with 
a low-emittance _ or low-e _ coating. Argon-filled double-glazing, 
Ms. Benedict said, has far more insulating ability than single-glazed 
windows. And the low-e coating, she said, can regulate the amount 
of heat from the sun entering the room, while keeping heat inside 
the room from radiating out. Ms. Benedict said that even home-improvement 
projects as modest as the repainting of a few rooms presents an opportunity 
to enhance comfort and efficiency by insulating the exterior walls 
of the rooms being repainted. That can be done without significantly 
disturbing the interior wall surfaces, she said, by using blown-in 
cellulose. Generally, Ms. Benedict said, cellulose insulation is injected 
into the wall cavity through holes cut in the spaces between the studs. 
The equipment used to blow the cellulose typically remains outside 
the house, and the holes can be patched relatively easily after the 
insulation is in place. One of the advantages of using densely-packed 
cellulose, Ms. Benedict said, is that unlike fiberglass _ which insulates 
well but does little to stop air circulation _ packed cellulose can 
virtually eliminate air movement through the wall being insulated. 
The cost for blown-in insulation, Ms. Benedict said, averages about 
$1 a square foot. If superinsulating the exterior walls of a house 
with densely packed, blown-in cellulose is not practical, it is nevertheless 
possible to reduce unwanted air infiltration by plugging whatever 
holes may be accessible. ``The best locations for reducing overall 
leakage are often found at the top and bottom of the house,'' said 
David Keefe, an energy-efficiency consultant in Fairfax, Vt. ``Leaks 
at the top of the building, where air usually goes out, often cause 
condensation problems. And leaks at the bottom can carry moisture, 
radon _ or whatever else is in the soil gas _ into the house.'' A 
common site for leaks in a house, Keefe said, is the attic floor. 
Problem areas include the spaces around plumbing vent stacks, holes 
for electrical conduits, chases around chimneys, gaps around ductwork 
and the open tops of interior partitions. Accordingly, Keefe said, 
homeowners converting an attic into living space have an ideal opportunity 
to make important improvements that will pay significant dividends. 
First, he said, all sources of air penetration into the living space 
should be sealed with expanding urethane foam before installing floors 
or walls that will make future access difficult. Next, and even more 
important, he said, is to determine the ``thermal envelope'' of the 
area. The thermal envelope, he said, is the insulative boundary between 
the heated area of a house _ typically the living area _ and the unheated 
portion. During an attic renovation project, he said, it is common 
for homeowners to install short ``knee walls'' between the attic floor 
and the sloped roof. If that is done, Keefe said, it is advisable 
to include within the thermal envelope the triangular space created 
by the knee walls outside the new living space. That is done by insulating 
from the bottom of the roof to where it meets the knee wall and then 
over the top of the living space and across to the other side of the 
roof. In any case, Keefe said, care should be taken to provide a way 
for air to circulate through the vents in the soffits (the exterior 
underside of the roof where it extends beyond the exterior walls of 
the building) along the underside of the rafters and then out through 
a vent in the peak of the roof. Proper circulation, he said, will 
not only keep the living space cooler in summer but will also aid 
in the prevention of ice dams _ a fairly common problem that can cause 
serious damage to a house. Ice dams form, Keefe said, when a poorly 
insulated roof allows heat from the house to melt snow on the roof 
surface. As the runoff trickles down the roof it eventually gets to 
the uninsulated eaves at the edge of the roof and refreezes. Then, 
as more snow melts, the runoff begins to back up under the shingles, 
where it can leak through the roof surface or even trickle down into 
the exterior walls. The best way to prevent ice dams, Keefe said, 
is to keep the roof uniformly cold with proper insulation. Homeowners 
who are reshingling their roofs, however, can take some extra precautions 
against the damage caused by ice dams by installing a waterproof membrane 
under the shingles part way up the roof. Corey McIsaac, supervisor 
of technical information services for GAF, a roofing-materials manufacturer 
based in Wayne, N.J., said that roof membranes should be installed 
at least 24 inches beyond the interior wall line. Just as roofs need 
fresh air to stay healthy, so do the occupants of a building. In the 
Ditmars Street property renovated by Ms. Benedict, for example, the 
techniques used to insulate the building and seal every possible source 
of outside air infiltration made proper ventilation a necessity. ``A 
leaky building will have between one and two full air changes each 
hour,'' Ms. Benedict said, referring to the rate at which inside air 
is replaced by outside air in a building. ``Our buildings have only 
one-third to one-half an air change per hour,'' she said, explaining 
that to achieve that rate, the ventilation fans in the kitchens and 
bathrooms run at low speeds 24 hours a day. And rather than have replacement 
air being supplied through a multitude of holes and leaks, Ms. Benedict 
said, fresh air admitted into her buildings comes through ``trickle 
vents'' installed over the windows in the bedrooms. Such vents, she 
said, are equipped with screens and mechanical louvers that allow 
only a measured flow of air into the room, keeping out wind and insects. 
Of course, no energy-efficient renovation project would be complete 
without installation of the most cost-efficient heating system possible. 
For that, Ms. Benedict contacted Henry Gifford, president of Gifford 
Fuel Saving, a Manhattan heating-and-ventilation design consulting 
company. The first thing Gifford did was calculate how much heat was 
going to be needed in the building by figuring out how much was likely 
to be lost. In the Ditmars Street project, Gifford said, the three-story, 
six-unit building was so tightly sealed against heat loss that he 
was able to install a high-efficiency, sealed-combustion gas boiler 
with a capacity of only 90,000 BTU _ about one-third of what would 
normally be installed in a building that size. The boiler burns so 
efficiently, Gifford said, that it can be vented directly through 
the exterior wall of the building _ like an ordinary gas clothes dryer. 
And rather than drawing the air needed for combustion from inside 
the building, it draws the air from outside, through an intake pipe 
that extends through the exterior wall. That means there is essentially 
no potential for backdrafting,'' he said, adding that such a system 
was almost always preferable to drawing combustion air from inside 
the house and venting exhaust gases up the chimney. In addition to 
heating the house, Gifford said, the boiler also heats the domestic 
water for the building. ``We installed an 80-gallon, stainless-steel 
hot-water tank,'' he said, explaining that unlike conventional water 
heaters, which use combustion or electricity to heat water in the 
tank, the system he installed uses heat produced by the boiler. ``There's 
a coil from the boiler running through the tank,'' he said. ``The 
hot water in the coil heats up the water in the tank and then circulates 
back to the boiler.'' The tank is wrapped in an insulating jacket 
to minimize heat loss and is guaranteed for 15 years. ``And it'll 
probably last even longer than that, because there's no fire in it 
to burn it out,'' Gifford said. When everything is taken into consideration, 
he said, the $1,200 high-efficiency boiler added about $300 to the 
cost of the heating system, an amount that should be recovered in 
fuel savings in a year or two. Another energy-saving feature used 
in the building _ and one that homeowners installing new heating systems 
might want to consider _ is a hot-water baseboard heating unit, with 
its own thermostat _ one in every room. ``That means that there is 
absolutely no overheating or underheating of individual rooms,'' he 
said, explaining that the thermostats on each heating unit, which 
are calibrated to account for being near the floor rather than higher 
up, allow for individualized room settings that help save energy. 
``Even when it's sunny all day on one side of the house, and windy 
all night on the other, the heat load always stays even,'' he said, 
adding that each thermostat added about $35 to the cost of the baseboard 
heating units. ``I would say it's worth $35 a room to be comfortable 
for as long as you own your house,'' he said. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>