<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981121.0137 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Although she spent much of her time in the thrall of delusions, Margaret 
Mary Ray wrote her last missive to her mother in what seemed to be 
a moment of clarity. She mentioned her love for her children, wrested 
so many years earlier from her care. She said she had tried, in her 
way, to be good to them. And she gave vent to her exhaustion and disillusionment, 
hinting that she understood how untenable her existence had become. 
``I'm all traveled out,'' Ms. Ray, 46, said in the letter, which was 
written before her death Oct. 5, but reached her mother, Loretta Duvall 
in Greenwich, Conn., when it was too late. ``I chose a painless and 
instantaneous way to end my life in the valley I loved.'' That valley 
was in a remote area of Colorado, and that way was to kneel before 
a 105-car coal train. Law-enforcement authorities said that her end 
was indeed instantaneous. But family members and friends said that 
the pain that preceded it was immeasurable. Over the last decade, 
Ms. Ray drew national attention for behavior so bizarre and audacious 
it was often portrayed as comical. Gripped by the fantasy that she 
was romantically involved with comedian David Letterman, she repeatedly 
broke into his home in New Canaan, Conn., camped out on his tennis 
court and once stole his Porsche. Her exploits became a staple of 
supermarket tabloids, a running gag of sorts. Even Letterman turned 
them into a punch line, kidding about her on his late night television 
talk show. But behind the headlines and jokes was a life almost unimaginably 
sad, a harrowing portrait of the devastation that mental illness can 
wreak not just on an individual but on an entire family. Ms. Ray, 
one of four siblings, was the third to become ill and the third to 
commit suicide. Her older brother drove a car at full speed into a 
tree when he was 22. Her younger brother lay down in a garage filling 
with carbon monoxide when he was 21. Although the medical records 
from Ms. Ray's various court-ordered psychiatric evaluations are confidential, 
her mother, Ms. Duvall, said that Ms. Ray suffered from schizophrenia, 
a brain disorder believed by many psychiatrists to have a strong genetic 
component. Ms. Duvall said schizophrenia also plagued her children's 
father, who died of a heart attack two decades ago, and the couple's 
two dead sons. She said that if she knew when she started her family 
what she knows now, she is not sure she would have bothered. ``It's 
foolish to rear all of these kids and have them be so healthy and 
bright and have something eat away at their heads,'' said Ms. Duvall, 
70, who lives in the Greenwich apartment of her one surviving child, 
a 45-year-old businessman named Tom Ray. ``We're the only two left 
in this family, and it's unconscionable.'' Later, Ms. Duvall added, 
``My family has paid dues, and I'm not sure what we did wrong.'' Tom 
Ray said that throughout his years as an undergraduate at an Ivy League 
university and his early adulthood, he feared that the disease he 
watched destroy his brothers and sister would claim him as well. He 
would worry that he had begun to hear nonexistent voices, a telltale 
sign of schizophrenia, only to realize that a radio was playing in 
a nearby room. ``I'm kind of the oddball of the family,'' he said. 
``The genetic lot missed me.'' At least one of Ms. Ray's five children 
grappled with a similar dread. ``Because I look so much like her, 
I've always been treated like I'm going to be crazy, too,'' Anna-Lisa 
Johanson, a 22-year-old law student in Washington, D.C., said of her 
mother. Ms. Johanson, who was recently married, said she was not sure 
she would ever have children, in part because she worried about their 
genetic inheritance. She said that while she often tried in the past 
to conceal her identity as the daughter of the woman who stalked David 
Letterman, and once sought a restraining order against her mother, 
she refuses to feel ashamed any longer. ``Right now, I'm not embarrassed 
of who my mother was,'' she said. ``I'm embarrassed of the society 
I live in. She was a sick woman, and people made it a joke.'' Schizophrenia, 
which can give rise to visual and auditory hallucinations, severe 
mood swings and incoherent behavior, is believed to afflict 1 percent 
of adults and usually manifests itself in men by their late teens 
or early 20s and women by their mid-20s. Although doctors have yet 
to pinpoint its cause, and have weighed such possibilities as abnormal 
prenatal development, viral infection and environmental influences, 
much of their research in recent years has focused on hereditary factors. 
``It's clearly a familial illness, and it appears to involve abnormal 
genes,'' said Dr. Jack Gorman, a professor of psychiatry at Columbia 
University. Gorman said that an estimated 10 percent of people with 
schizophrenia commit suicide, often motivated less by their delusions 
than by the despair they feel in lucid moments. Psychiatrists said 
the higher incidence of suicide in Ms. Ray's family might be explained 
by the fact that people with loved ones who commit suicide are more 
likely to see it as an option for themselves. Schizophrenia can frequently 
be managed with drugs, but getting people with the illness to stay 
on their medication can be difficult. That was certainly true of Ms. 
Ray. Her relatives said that Ms. Ray did not like the side effects 
of some drugs, which caused lethargy or weight gain. She often convinced 
herself that there was nothing wrong with her and that there was no 
need to take the medication. In addition, she missed the grandiose 
self-image that came with her delusions, her mother said. ``It made 
her feel important,'' Ms. Duvall said. ``She enjoyed that.'' Letterman 
said that in between Ms. Ray's uninvited visits to his house over 
the years she sent him many letters, and it was obvious from each 
whether she was taking her drugs. ``When she was on them,'' he said 
in a recent telephone interview, ``it was like hearing from your aunt. 
When she was off them, it was like hearing from your aunt on Neptune.'' 
Letterman said that if he occasionally joked about Ms. Ray's behavior, 
it was only because he jokes about every public aspect of his life. 
He noted that he never mentioned her name on the air, and said that 
he had great compassion for her, often declining to press criminal 
charges against her. ``I wasn't comfortable with the humanity of that,'' 
he said, noting that most of her appearances at his house were more 
odd than alarming, such as the time she convinced painters that she 
was his housekeeper and cadged a ride into town for food. Only once, 
he said, did he feel threatened; that was when he and a girlfriend 
looked up from bed one Sunday night and saw Ms. Ray watching from 
the hallway. She immediately ran away, he said. Ms. Ray often seemed 
to be running away, although it was seldom clear why. She grew up 
in a middle-class family in Grayslake, Ill., about 45 miles northwest 
of Chicago. Her father, George Ray, worked on the machinery maintenance 
staff at a factory; her mother, Loretta, was a nurse. Margaret Ray, 
nicknamed Peggy, was the second oldest of four children all born within 
five years. ``She was the most wonderful, beautiful, all-American 
girl,'' recalled Clare Avery, a neighbor in Grayslake, who frequently 
hired her as a baby sitter. ``Every mother around that lake would 
say, `Don't you wish? Don't you wish you had a daughter like Peggy 
Ray?''' The Ray home, however, was not entirely happy. Relatives said 
that George Ray had been treated for schizophrenia before his marriage, 
and while he maintained a job and a semblance of normality, he drank 
heavily, possibly as a means of self-medication. Billy Ray, the couple's 
oldest child, was the first to become ill, around the time he was 
20. Although he received treatment, he hated the debilitating effect 
the medication had on him and did not always take it, his relatives 
said. After Billy Ray's suicide in 1974, Tom Ray and his younger brother, 
David, promised each other that they would never do that, no matter 
what happened. But after David fell ill, he took the same way out 
in 1977. By then, Tom Ray said, his family had learned enough about 
schizophrenia to suspect that they were victims of something more 
than happenstance. Even so, he said, his sister's impulsive behavior 
and itinerant life initially seemed innocuous. She dropped out of 
a nursing program at Marquette University in Milwaukee, married young 
and roamed the Midwest with her husband, Gary Johanson. The couple 
had four children in rapid succession, eventually settling near Grand 
Junction, Colo., where Johanson, a carpenter, and several of the children 
still live. Johanson, who was divorced from Ms. Ray in the mid-1980s, 
did not respond to a telephone message left with his second wife. 
She said he does not like discussing his first marriage. It was a 
turbulent union, roiled by Ms. Ray's erratic behavior and sudden jaunts 
across the country in borrowed cars with her four young children. 
When they all arrived, in the summer of 1983, at a loft in Manhattan 
where Tom Ray was living, he saw for the first time how ill his sister, 
then 31, had become. She would wear three layers of clothing on a 
warm day and prattle in sentences and syntax that made no sense. She 
would go into the kitchen to fry hamburgers for the family's dinner 
and come back with one enormous, under-cooked patty. Asked why, she 
simply shrugged. Anna-Lisa Johanson, Ms. Ray's second oldest child, 
remembered that whenever she was out walking with her mother, people 
stared at them ``with this mix of pity and fear.'' Even as a 7-year-old, 
Ms. Johanson said, she knew the reason. ``She had a running commentary 
on the world that was very inappropriate and a few decibels too loud,'' 
Ms. Johanson said of her mother. As Ms. Ray's condition deteriorated, 
Johanson took custody of the children. But Ms. Ray refused relatives' 
attempts to get her into treatment, often bolting and disappearing 
for months as soon as they made the suggestion. She hitchhiked back 
and forth across the country, sometimes living in shanties without 
running water. She had a fifth child; friends and relatives did not 
even know who the father was. The boy was with her in Letterman's 
Porsche, stolen from his home, when she was arrested outside the Lincoln 
Tunnel in New Jersey in May 1988, the first time her obsession with 
Letterman was publicly revealed. She told a toll collector that she 
was his wife and that the child, Alex, just 3, was their son. By then, 
Ms. Duvall had divorced her husband, begun using her maiden name and 
moved to Greenwich. She obtained custody of Alex, caring for him with 
Tom Ray's help. Her daughter, meanwhile, plunged further into her 
fantasies, on several occasions returning to Letterman's house only 
days after being released from jail for her last visit. Sometimes 
Ms. Ray was found competent to stand trial on trespassing or burglary 
charges, sometimes not. She served her time alternately in prisons 
and psychiatric hospitals. With medication she would get better and 
be released, then she would stop taking it and get worse. It was a 
vicious cycle that Ms. Duvall and Ray said they were powerless to 
break. They could not commit Ms. Ray to an institution or compel her 
to get treatment, they said, unless she was proved to be a physical 
danger to herself or others. The damage Ms. Ray was doing was less 
immediate than that. Anna-Lisa Johanson said that on her 16th birthday, 
she got a long-distance call from her mother during which Ms. Ray 
incoherently accused her of being a tramp. Around the same time, Ms. 
Johanson said, she looked in the mirror and made a private resolve. 
``I decided to prove to the world that I was not at all like my mother,'' 
she said. She got straight A's in high school, then maintained a perfect 
grade-point average at the University of Colorado at Boulder. Scared 
that her mother would show up and mortify her, she gave her dormitory 
advisers a photograph of Ms. Ray and told them to notify the police 
if they ever spotted her. ``It was the most painful thing I've ever 
done,'' Ms. Johanson said. ``But I knew it was the only way I could 
ever make myself a success.'' She added, ``I've always loved my mother, 
but I hated the woman who broke into David Letterman's house.'' Friends 
said that Ms. Ray occasionally had insights into how much she had 
hurt her children. During a recent stint in jail in Florida, where 
she was convicted of stalking a new target, retired astronaut F. Story 
Musgrave, she told a fellow inmate, Terry Ellingson, that she wanted 
to do something that would make her kids just a little proud. Ms. 
Ellingson said in a recent telephone interview that Ms. Ray was on 
medication then, but that she did not continue treatment after she 
was released in August and went to live briefly with Ms. Ellingson, 
who was already out of jail. At the hearing that freed Ms. Ray, a 
judge openly lamented the absence of any legal mechanism to make sure 
she received medical help. Two months later, Ms. Ray was dead. Ms. 
Johanson said that most of her siblings are healthy and well-adjusted, 
but refused to be more specific, citing privacy concerns. Ms. Duvall 
said that Alex Ray, now 14, is finally flourishing after years of 
being taunted by peers who learned his mother's identity. Ms. Ray 
mentioned him in that last letter, suggesting that the greatest kindness 
she could show him was not to remind him of who she was. ``I have 
no final words to Alex,'' she wrote. ``I think I will let him just 
be distant in his mind to me.'' 
</TEXT>
</DOC>