<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981121.0046 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Forget E.F. Hutton. These days, when the markets speak, everyone, 
even Alan Greenspan, listens. That's the message from the Federal 
Reserve Board's decision last week to cut interest rates for the third 
time in seven weeks. The reason for the rate reductions was not a 
slowdown in the domestic economy, which is typically behind a rate 
cut. Rather the moves were an attempt to eliminate ongoing problems 
in the international bond markets that first surfaced in August when 
Russia defaulted on its debt. A perhaps unintended consequence of 
the Fed's moves is a stock market that has gone up, up and away. In 
about a month, the Dow Jones industrial average has risen more than 
1,000 points. This recovery, from the depths of August's despair, 
is impressive indeed. Compare it, for example, with how stocks acted 
after the Crash of 1987. Then, according to Peter Canelo, an equity 
strategist at Morgan Stanley Dean Witter, it took 15 months for stocks 
to recover half of what they lost. This year, it took less than one 
month. And yet, many of the world's economic woes that caused the 
market to go down remain as troubling now as they were two months 
ago. Most of Asia continues in deep recession, the success of the 
Brazilian bailout is unclear and earnings at corporations in this 
country are falling. Many economists think prospects for economic 
growth next year are tepid at best. And so the market is made up of 
two voices: one that votes with its funds, another that worries over 
the economic data. The gulf between these two is wider than it has 
been in a long time. Those putting their money into stocks are saying 
that there will be no recession in 1999 and that corporate profit 
growth next year will not be as disappointing as pessimistic economists 
predict. Part of their optimism is based on lower interest rates, 
which mean less onerous borrowing costs for corporations. Bond prices 
typically also rise when the Fed cuts rates because the new lower 
prevailing rate of interest paid on debt securities makes those bonds 
issued previously and at higher rates more valuable. But three interest 
rate cuts, a balm to both economy and consumer, cannot explain all 
of the stock market's feverish movement. The rocketing stock market 
seems to be increasingly unconnected to economic reality. This is 
not to say that investors are behaving irrationally. Since the market 
is thousands of individuals making discrete investment decisions with 
cold, hard cash each day, the market actually tends to see the future 
better than the economists and market strategists who pop up on television 
and in the newspaper. No one yet knows, of course, whether the market 
or the pessimistic pundits will win out next year. What is knowable 
is which voice is being heeded more these days. It is the voice of 
the market. How do you search for clues about the nation's economic 
future? Historically, analysts scrutinized the government's releases 
of economic data to decide on an investment path. Now people are looking 
at the market to see which path to take, buying stocks simply because 
they are going up. More than one Wall Street strategist says that 
since the market is very good at seeing recessions on the horizon, 
rising stock prices mean there will be no such thing in 1999. If the 
market saw a recession looming, stock prices would not be rising, 
according to this argument. Even the Fed chairman seems riveted on 
the markets, not on economic arcana such as, say, the U.S. international 
price index for in-bound ocean line freight. His three recent rate 
cuts have been strictly the result of disturbing patterns in the bond 
market. Investors used to watch the Fed to help them make their investment 
decisions. Now the Fed analyzes investors to help it set monetary 
policy. This is not to say that the Fed no longer considers economic 
data, of course. And part of the central bank's increased focus on 
the bond market is the Fed's quite fitting response to the increasing 
significance of the bond and stock markets. As more and more individual 
investors put their savings into stocks, for example, the performance 
of the stock market becomes more of a predictor of consumer buying 
patterns. Since the American consumer accounts for two-thirds of the 
nation's economy, a surging stock market and its resulting wealth 
creation, has a big effect on businesses everywhere. But there is 
also something strangely circular in this focus on the financial markets. 
As investors and policy-makers look increasingly to the markets for 
wisdom, it becomes the investment equivalent of looking at dancers 
looking at themselves in the mirror. ``We've lost our anchor,'' said 
Stan Jonas, managing director of Fimat U.S.A., a brokerage in New 
York that specializes in futures and derivatives. ``We used to have 
some idea and take a bit of news and say it means that the Fed is 
more or less likely to do something. But now it's not the fundamentals, 
it's what other people think about the fundamentals that are important.'' 
Not that the market isn't wise. It is, because the market is, at any 
given time, the sum of investors' current knowledge of the facts that 
influence investing decisions. But it is not omniscient; sometimes, 
investors don't have all the facts they need to make an informed decision. 
But facts are becoming less important to the increasing numbers of 
investors who buy stocks. After years of a roaring bull market, many 
players are short term oriented in their trading, investing based 
on what they think valuations of stocks and bonds will be next month 
or even next week; the objective is less about long-term investing 
than it is about investing to outwit the masses. A dangerous thing. 
Behavior like this is as old as human nature. John Maynard Keynes 
discussed it in his 1936 book, ``The General Theory of Employment 
Interest and Money.'' To Keynes, ``professional investment may be 
likened to newspaper competitions in which competitors have to pick 
out the six prettiest faces from a hundred photographs, the prize 
being awarded to the competitor whose choice most nearly corresponds 
to the average preferences of the competitors as a whole.'' What inevitably 
happens, he wrote, is ``each competitor picks not those faces which 
he himself finds prettiest, but those which he thinks likeliest to 
catch the fancy of the other competitors.'' In the context of today's 
market, Keynes' observation translates to: What counts is not what 
we think about the future of the economy or the stock market but what 
we think most people think about the future of the economy or the 
stock market. At a recent investment conference in New York City sponsored 
by Grant's Interest Rate Observer, one of the speakers was Steven 
Leuthold, a respected stock market analyst known for relying on hard 
facts and historical data to draw his conclusions on market strategy. 
Leuthold had been bearish recently, pointing to a raft of figures 
that put the stock market at overvalued levels. Yet Leuthold said 
he had become bullish about stocks and felt that the Dow would pierce 
the 10,000 level within months. The reason for his change of heart? 
The biggest indicator of all: the crowd. Main Street is in love with 
stocks, he said, and this made higher stock prices a given. If you 
can't beat them, get in line. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>