<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981121.0189 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
The first residents have begun to move into two new subdivisions in 
metropolitan Atlanta in which African-American developers are marketing 
homes in largely black neighborhoods to upper-income buyers. Prices 
start at $300,000 for a new house on a lot at Sandstone Estates, a 
48-lot subdivision in the suburb of Lithonia in DeKalb County about 
12 miles east of downtown Atlanta. And at Legacy Hills, in the town 
of Riverdale in Fayette County 12 miles south of downtown, the lowest 
price for a house in what will be a 63-lot development is $350,000. 
The third quarter median price for houses in Riverdale was $85,000 
and for Lithonia it was $102,900, according to Smart Number Analysis, 
a market-data-research firm in Atlanta. So far there are 50 lot buyers 
at the two subdivisions, and 15 houses have been built or are in construction. 
The most expensive is expected to cost more than $700,000. The buyers 
have been black professionals and their families, and the development 
companies are owned and run by black entrepreneurs. In the case of 
Legacy Hills, the developer is Wayne Kendall, a lawyer who is embarking 
on his first land-development venture. Three builders have been approved 
to construct houses for people who buy his lots. At Sandstone Estates, 
the developer is a partnership led by an experienced home-building 
contractor, Earl Thomas, and Greg Baranco, the owner of three new-car 
dealerships in Atlanta. The two projects are the latest in a long 
line of predominantly black residential subdivisions in metropolitan 
Atlanta, but the earlier projects have usually been developed by whites. 
What is rare, even in Atlanta, is the presence of black home builders, 
putting up the equity and attracting the necessary institutional financing 
to do subdivisions for high-end buyers. ``Outside of Atlanta, in my 
experience, I know of no community where the principal target market 
would be African-American buyers,'' said William Webb, a marketing 
consultant based in Amelia Island, Fla., who is president of the Institute 
of Residential Marketing, an affiliate of the National Association 
of Home Builders. ``Generally, developers will envision a market where 
the demographic characteristics include everything but ethnicity.'' 
He recalled that the lawyers at the association had carefully vetted 
an article advocating ethnic marketing that he had written for an 
association magazine before allowing its publication. He said that 
legal actions against real estate agents who have attempted to steer 
white clients away from black areas have made agents leery of mentioning 
race at all. ``If we are trying to stop illegal discrimination, that's 
a step in the right direction,'' he said. ``But another step is to 
recognize ethnic and cultural differences and to cater to them. There's 
nothing wrong with that.'' The lack of financing poses the biggest 
obstacle to building single-family developments, said Danny Brown, 
the managing partner in charge of sales at Legacy Hills and one of 
its investors. ``If you come into a project without a lot of development 
experience, banks tend not to want to give you money,'' he said. In 
both Legacy Hills and Sandstone Estates, developers have limited their 
need for capital by limiting their roles. They have bought the property, 
built the streets and installed utilities. But then they sell vacant 
lots rather than build the houses themselves. The homes must follow 
specific design guidelines. At Legacy Hills, for example, exterior 
walls must be entirely made of stone, brick or stucco, and the first 
two floors must have at least 3,500 square feet of space. Buyers are 
given the names of approved contractors from which to choose. At Sandstone 
Estates, Thomas, one of the developers, is also one of the contractors 
building houses for lot purchasers. For at least one buyer, the fact 
that the developer is black provided one of the incentives to buy 
in the subdivision. Degas Wright, the 35-year-old treasurer of the 
Metropolitan Atlanta Rapid Transit Authority, and his wife, Dr. Patricia 
Braz-Wright, a physician, who have two children, built a house at 
Sandstone Estates last summer. Wright said that his decision to buy 
had been influenced by the hope that the developer's success would 
help strengthen the black community in southeastern DeKalb County 
and its business base. He also said that he wanted to raise his children 
in a neighborhood where they will come into contact with successful 
blacks every day. ``Thirty years ago, 20 years ago, we probably would 
have had to move into a majority white neighborhood to get the kind 
of home we wanted,'' Wright said. ``Now, it is not necessary to move 
in with white families to say that we've made it.'' Sandstone Estates 
traces its origins to about a decade ago when Baranco, the car dealer, 
yearned to live in an estate-style home in southeastern DeKalb County. 
At the time, he lived there and there were no subdivisions for well-to-do 
home buyers. He found that neither developers nor lenders had any 
interest in building high-end homes in the area. But when several 
of his neighbors also expressed interest in moving to better homes 
there, his wife, Juanita, suggested that they become do-it-yourself 
developers. After finding little interest among lenders, Baranco put 
his dealerships up as collateral to finance a 23-lot development called 
Sandstone Shores, along a small lake. Sandstone Shores sold out all 
of its 23 lots. Baranco has had his own home there for the last eight 
years. Baranco said he had not initially planned to target blacks, 
since the area was largely white at the time. ``We thought maybe there 
would be some interest in white people moving there, but it just didn't 
happen,'' he said. It came as a disappointment to the Sandstone Shores 
owners that several plans to build high-priced housing on neighboring 
land never came to fruition. ``Reluctantly, we decided to do Sandstone 
Estates,'' he said. Thomas and two other neighbors were recruited 
to put up seed capital. A native of Jamaica, Thomas had moved to Atlanta 
when his wife, an aerospace executive, was transferred from New York 
in 1989. He not only built homes in other high-end subdivisions, but 
he also engaged in other facets of home-building, such as working 
for roofing and siding companies. Financing was easier for Sandstone 
Estates because Baranco sat on the board of directors of First Southern 
Bank, which supplied a loan. First Southern has since merged into 
Citizens Trust Bank, based in Atlanta. Close to $2 million has been 
invested in the 142-acre Sandstone Estates to prepare 48 house lots 
on 142 acres of land for home construction. Three houses are completed 
and six others are under way. Through a word-of-mouth marketing drive 
that Thomas has conducted wherever he has built homes, 34 of the lots 
have been sold in two years, all to black buyers. ``We attract black 
professionals who do not want to move to the north side of town,'' 
said Thomas, referring to the locale of several of the region's most 
affluent suburbs. While the advertising for the 243-acre Legacy Hills 
has been aimed at all upper-income buyers, Brown, the managing partner 
in charge of sales, said that ``the marketing effort is geared to 
a market base that happens to be African-American.'' The project, 
which may include a golf course, eventually secured financing from 
Colonial Bank, based in Montgomery, Ala., and Kendall built streets, 
installed utilities and put 24 lots on the market last September. 
Sixteen have been sold solely to black home buyers, and six homes 
have been built. The plans for an 18-hole golf course have fallen 
behind schedule, Brown said, but he added that he hoped it would open 
in the spring of 2000. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>