<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981121.0048 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
It was many, many, many hours into the dullest day in Washington history. 
Ken Starr was giving that spooky smile of his and droning on with 
starchy phrases like ``possible potential offenses,'' ``at a fairly 
high level of generality,'' ``not in a person-specific way'' and, 
of course, his irritating tag for almost every observation, ``and 
the like.'' Detailing his endless, fruitless pursuit of Bill Clinton, 
he was like a prissy Elmer Fudd. I'll get that siwwy wabbit . . . 
and the wike! One could only hope that Maxine Waters, the gentle lady 
from California, would completely lose it and lunge for the prosecutor's 
neck. This pathetic scandal is like one of those unfunny ``Saturday 
Night Live'' skits that go on too long and get painful to watch. The 
players are no longer thinking impeachment; they're just scrambling 
to save their credibility. The Flummoxed Henry Hyde was flailing to 
keep alive the myth of the Judicious Henry Hyde, as he is routinely 
described. As Starr was spinning and grinning, Sam Dash was making 
a mad dash. Monica was holed up in L.A., watching her griller on the 
grill and preparing to spin and sob on TV with Barbara Walters and 
in print with Princess Di's biographer. The wacky right-wing blondes 
who hope to give conservatism legs and the Clinton apologists were 
still throwing food at each other on cable, but who could stomach 
it? We need an exit strategy. I have one. We must suspend disbelief, 
and cynicism, and give every single unappetizing character in this 
morality play the benefit of the doubt. They are all shy, enigmatic, 
cruelly misunderstood creatures. Bill Clinton: OK, he was just mentoring 
her. He threw her across the desk and mentored her 'till dawn, as 
Michael Kinsley once wrote about another office romance. Besides, 
this most pastoral of presidents was really only ministering to a 
troubled young soul in his flock. Besides, he was under a lot of pressure 
from the rabid pursuit of Independent Counsel Javert and needed an 
outlet real bad. Besides, he didn't really lie under oath because 
the sex was too lame to count. Besides, he couldn't tell the truth 
because it would hurt his wife and daughter. Besides, it is none of 
our business. Besides, it depends on what the definition of ``is'' 
is. Besides, the stock market's zooming up again. Kenneth Starr, Esquire: 
The counselor wasn't sex-crazed. He was just a lawyer in love with 
the law, the blind mistress with scales who sang a siren song and 
lured him deeper and deeper into investigating the romance between 
the president and the intern. He did not have any animus toward Clinton. 
For Pete's sake, he let him off the hook (OK, so it was after the 
election) on Travelgate and Filegate and might yet let him off the 
hook on Whitewater. It wasn't an obsession because he was hardly even 
involved in that four-year, $40 million marathon. He revealed at the 
hearing that he didn't attend any of the grand-jury questioning or 
depositions and did not even bother to meet Monica. His goons only 
manhandled Monica's mother, interrogated a schoolchild, investigated 
a witness' adoption of a foreign child and held Monica hostage at 
a shopping mall in pursuit of almighty facts. Monica's 10 hours in 
mall custody were a nice little ``sojourn'' for her, as David Kendall 
put it, and Monica was still able to shop and visit the food court 
under FBI supervision. Monica Lewinsky: She was only trying to adjust 
her thong underwear, not flash it. She really did have some fresh 
ideas on education reform. The Big Creep just wasn't listening. House 
Republicans: They only meant to give the president a good scare, not 
drive him from office. They always understood it would be the height 
of hypocrisy to lynch the president for an office romance given the 
fact that so many members of Congress fool around with their own nubile 
aides and shed their first wives to marry babes who work in their 
offices. House Democrats: Never mind the president's perjury and obstruction 
of justice and witness tampering and abuse of power. Parliamentary 
procedure was at stake _ not to mention Kendall's shot at prime time. 
Linda Tripp: She really needed to tape her best friend, a vulnerable 
young woman in need of guidance, because _ oh good Lord, forget it. 
This one is indefensible. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>