<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981121.0131 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
William French Githens, a newsreel pioneer and tennis-playing society 
figure, died Nov. 10 at a hospice near his retirement home in Arlington, 
Va. He was 92 and is credited with opening the world's first all-newsreel 
movie theater in 1929. In a democratic nation famous for the fluid 
movement between classes, it is rare to catch a glimpse of the precise 
moment of social elevation, which is why it is too bad that Githens 
did not have his trusty Eyemo portable movie camera with him that 
evening in 1927 when he presented himself at the royal penthouse suite 
of the Savoy Plaza Hotel on Fifth Avenue in New York. Invited by a 
friend to join his family for dinner, Githens, then 21, had reason 
to feel self-conscious as he arrived at the hotel wearing his new 
double-breasted dinner jacket. Not that he had anything to be ashamed 
of. As the son of a New York City fire captain, he had graduated from 
Columbia that year with both a bachelor's degree and a master's in 
business administration. In addition, he had an easy charm and had 
mastered the society game of tennis so well that he had made the Columbia 
team. He had also demonstrated a flair for business by acquiring an 
early Eyemo in 1924. He used it to make films of Columbia football 
games and then charged admission to show them, netting him $400 a 
game, or about $4,000 in 1998 dollars. But for all his achievements, 
Githens was out of his social league this December night. For his 
tennis friend, McClure Meredith Howland, was the stepson of Ogden 
Hammond, a Civil War general's son, who had made a fortune in banking, 
insurance and real estate and was the U.S. ambassador to Spain. Unaware 
that the evening would alter the course of his life, Githens was greeted 
at the penthouse door by Howland and his 15-year-old stepbrother, 
Oggie Hammond, and led into the enormous living room to meet Oggie's 
sisters, Mary and Millicent Hammond, and their first cousin, Margaret 
Starr. If Githens had had his Eyemo tucked under his arm as he stood 
in front of 17-year-old Millicent to be introduced, the resulting 
film would have shown a series of jerky views of the room's elaborate 
paneling, ceiling, far wall and carpeted floor as Githens tumbled 
backward, the spinning camera perhaps catching a glimpse of the impish 
grin on the face of young Oggie, who had knelt behind the unsuspecting 
visitor's knees as Howland had given him a fateful push. Years later, 
Githens admitted that his first thought had been of his new dinner 
jacket, but once he'd checked and found all buttons in place, he got 
up laughing _ and secured his position in society. ``I like you,'' 
Millicent told him. ``You know how to laugh at yourself.'' It was 
the start of a friendship that would last for 65 years, until Miss 
Hammond, by then long since known as Millicent Fenwick, the redoubtable 
four-term congresswoman from New Jersey, died in 1992. Githens apparently 
made an even more favorable impression on her cousin, Peggy Starr. 
Within five years, they had married and begun raising poodles in Bernardsville, 
N.J., where Githens served two terms as mayor in the 1950s. The evening 
paid immediate dividends. Hammond was so impressed by the young man's 
maturity that he asked him to be his private secretary in Spain. Returning 
to New York after a heady year abroad, Githens almost immediately 
converted the 4-year-old Embassy Theater on Broadway and 46th Street 
into what he was never shy about calling the world's first all-newsreel, 
all-the-time movie theater. It opened on Nov. 2, 1929, catching a 
Depression wave that helped turn the United States into a nation of 
news addicts. Within a few years, as Githens was simultaneously working 
with Fox Movietone News and later as managing editor of Pathe News, 
the Embassy had expanded into a chain of 26 theaters stretching from 
New York to San Francisco. In an era when a famous Peter Arno cartoon 
made ``going down to the Trans-Lux to hiss Roosevelt'' an upper-crust 
mantra, Githens, who had campaigned for Roosevelt in 1932, took precautions 
to protect the president from such disrespect in Embassy theaters: 
He ordered a picture of an American flag to be shown at the end of 
every Roosevelt appearance. Githens, who eventually started and ran 
six corporations, including film production companies, was in his 
element in the 1930s. Having learned to fly to indulge his fascination 
with aerial photography, he eventually owned seven planes. and thought 
nothing of popping over from New Jersey for a game of tennis on Long 
Island. During World War II, he produced training films for the Navy, 
but with the emergence of television after the war, his business slid 
into bankruptcy. By the time his wife died in 1968, he had been reduced 
to selling Rolls-Royces in Manhattan, but with such charm that a widow 
named Sophe Delar, who stopped in to have her 1932 Rolls serviced, 
took him back to Croton-on-Hudson as her husband. A few months after 
her death in 1986, he married Anita Githens, the widow of an older 
brother, and moved to her home on Long Island. She died in 1991, but 
the marriage continued to give Githens, who had no children, the delicious 
pleasure of hearing his nephew, John Lawrence Githens, a Manhattan 
translator, address him as Uncle Stepfather. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>