<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981121.0133 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Attorney General Janet Reno must decide by Tuesday whether to seek 
an independent counsel to investigate Vice President Al Gore, in the 
first of three decisions likely to determine whether there will ever 
be an outside investigation of Democratic fund raising in 1996. Reno's 
deliberations, which in the next two weeks will also turn to the former 
White House deputy chief of staff Harold Ickes and then to President 
Clinton, will sweep across a panorama of political fund-raising practices. 
She has reviewed some of the same underlying facts for nearly two 
years, each time refusing to refer the case to an outside counsel. 
But Reno has yet to reach a conclusion on the actions of Gore or the 
other officials, law-enforcement officials said. In recent days, however, 
the political stakes have unexpectedly risen as the House impeachment 
and the Justice Department's campaign-finance investigation show signs 
of overlapping. Republican investigators for the House Judiciary Committee 
decided last week to move beyond the Monica Lewinsky matter and include 
campaign finance among the issues they are tentatively exploring as 
they look for a wider pattern of perjury, obstruction of justice and 
abuse of power by the president. But the panel's interest might be 
short-lived. Lawmakers have said they would vote on articles of impeachment 
early in December, and Democrats are opposed to any expansion of the 
inquiry. Nevertheless, the committee's inquiry has focused attention 
on Reno's independent-counsel decisions. If she refuses to seek an 
independent counsel in each of the three cases, as some law-enforcement 
officials believe to be likely, it would almost certainly provoke 
a bitter outcry among Republicans in Congress. One House committee 
investigating fund raising has already voted to hold Reno in contempt. 
Even the possibility that the Judiciary Committee could advance further 
onto Reno's campaign-finance turf could complicate the attorney general's 
decision-making. Among other things, if the scope of the impeachment 
inquiry widens far enough, it could theoretically encompass an examination 
of Reno's own resistance to appointing an independent prosecutor, 
although there is no evidence that the White House played any role 
in Reno's past decisions. The Justice Department and the Judiciary 
panel are approaching the issue with standards of evidence and goals 
that are very different. The committee must decide whether Clinton 
committed impeachable offenses. By comparison, Reno must decide, by 
a prosecutor's standard, whether there are reasonable grounds to conclude 
that a crime may have been committed in any of three discrete areas, 
each focused on a different official. The deadlines, officials under 
scrutiny and issues being examined by Reno are as follows: _ Nov. 
24: Did Vice President Gore answer truthfully when he told Justice 
Department investigators that he did not know that contributions he 
solicited would be split between hard- and soft-money accounts? A 
White House memorandum was unearthed several months ago that indicated 
Gore attended a meeting on Nov. 21, 1995, in which the splitting of 
contributions was discussed. Gore has said he did not realize that 
some of the large contributions he solicited would be used not as 
soft money _ unregulated donations meant to finance general party 
activities like voter-registration drives _ but as hard money. Hard 
money is subject to regulation but could be spent on specific Clinton-Gore 
re-election activities, like television advertisements. _ Nov. 30: 
Did Ickes answer truthfully in a deposition to Senate investigators 
in 1997, when he said he did not recall taking any action to intervene 
in a Teamsters strike at a Diamond Walnut processing plant in Stockton, 
Calif.? Memorandums and testimony showed that Ickes asked Mickey Kantor, 
then U.S. trade representative, to telephone the company. _ Dec. 7: 
Did Clinton knowingly violate election laws when he directed a multimillion-dollar 
advertising campaign by the Democratic National Committee that might 
have improperly benefited the Clinton-Gore campaign? Reno opened the 
inquiry after Federal Election Commission field auditors questioned 
the legality of the ad campaign, saying the commercials contained 
an electioneering message, but should have stuck to generic party 
themes. Law-enforcement officials said that Reno's aides had engaged 
in a spirited debate in the case of Gore after FBI interviews with 
other officials in the November 1995 meeting produced contradictory 
recollections. Some recalled a discussion of how contributions would 
be split. Others did not. The Judiciary Committee's interest in possible 
campaign-finance abuses had been rumored for weeks. But on Thursday, 
David Schippers, chief Republican counsel for the House committee's 
impeachment inquiry, asked the Justice Department to turn over copies 
of a confidential report written in July by Charles La Bella as he 
was leaving as Reno's top campaign-finance prosecutor, along with 
a report written last year by Director Louis Freeh of the FBI. The 
reports had been prepared for Reno. Both reports directly challenged 
the conventional thinking at the Justice Department, which held that 
Reno had no legal basis under the independent-counsel statute to refer 
the political fund-raising case to an outside prosecutor, because 
federal election laws were too porous to hold top officials criminally 
liable. The reports have been previously sought by Republicans in 
Congress. Only a few lawmakers have seen them, and they saw only the 
heavily edited versions. Reno's refusal to release the reports to 
the House government Reform and Oversight Committee, which has been 
looking into 1996 campaign fund-raising practices, resulted in a contempt 
citation. The full texts of the Freeh and La Bella reports, which 
are based on grand jury material, remain secret. Still, their main 
conclusions are known, including the overall findings that the Democrats 
engaged in questionable activities in many areas, that there was sufficient 
evidence for an independent counsel and that only an outside prosecutor 
could credibly sort through the complex body of accumulated evidence. 
Officials said the Judiciary panel may have difficulty digesting the 
reports, because they were written to persuade Reno to seek an independent 
prosecutor. Although La Bella and Freeh suggested that Clinton operated 
at the center of a swirl of possible illegality, neither directly 
addressed whether Clinton committed a potentially impeachable offense. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>