<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981121.0084 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
While their counterparts in Congress were steeped in the impeachment 
hearings last week, the nation's Republican governors gathered here, 
happily oblivious to the biggest political story in Washington. Most 
of them did not even tune in. ``I have been here three days and I 
have not heard one governor mention those hearings,'' said Pennsylvania 
Gov. Tom Ridge, who served in the House for 12 years. ``I have not 
heard an utterance.'' North Dakota Gov. Edward Schafer said he glimpsed 
only a snippet of the hearings on television from the vantage point 
of an exercise bike _ and that that was more than enough. ``We all 
have business to do, and states to run and politics to conduct,'' 
he said. At times last week, it seemed hard to believe that the governors 
and members of Congress were even from the same party. As those attending 
the annual meeting of the Republican Governors Association in New 
Orleans exchanged success stories about their landslide victories, 
back in Washington recriminations continued over the party's loss 
of House seats. As the governors quizzed one another about improving 
school reading programs, House Republicans gently quizzed Kenneth 
Starr about a scandal these governors wish would go away. And as several 
governors seemed surprisingly willing (at least in private conversations) 
to practically anoint one of their own, Texas Gov. George W. Bush, 
as the next Republican presidential nominee, the party's congressional 
wing was struggling to patch up the internal discord that led to the 
toppling of House Speaker Newt Gingrich. More than anything, the New 
Orleans meeting was a cry for recognition: The Republican governors 
want credit for dominating the governorships; in January, there will 
be 31 Republican governors. They want a bigger role in setting the 
tone and national agenda for the Republican Party. And they are irritated 
that Republicans in Washington stood by as the Democrats held them 
responsible for being obsessed with scandal _ and not interested in 
improving education or health care. ``Shrill voices and sitting down 
and doing no more simply doesn't cut it at the state level,'' said 
Oklahoma Gov. Frank Keating , the incoming chairman of the governors' 
association, in a barbed reference to congressional Republicans. New 
York Gov. George Pataki said the prescription for the party was basic. 
``What we have to do as a party is to have a positive agenda of change,'' 
he said. ``In the states, we did. But I didn't see that coming out 
of Washington. ``I don't think we should go down and ask for their 
ear,'' Pataki said. ``I think we should have a pro-active positive 
agenda for the future of our states and the country that we present 
to the administration and congressional leaders.'' The governors took 
their concerns to a closed-door session with the incoming House speaker, 
Bob Livingston of Louisiana, who spoke to them by satellite on Wednesday, 
after he was elected, and to Senate Majority Leader Trent Lott, who 
was in New Orleans. And Saturday, Ridge, who declared that ``the year 
2000 is fraught with opportunity and peril for the party,'' convened 
a meeting here of governors, members of the Republican National Committee 
from around the country and the party's most successful fund-raisers 
in a drive to broaden the governors' portfolio. Members of Congress, 
pointedly, were not invited. If anything, the midterm election results 
seemed only to accentuate the strain between Republican congressional 
leaders and the governors. ``We lost seats in the Congress; that creates 
a tension,'' said Utah Gov. Michael Leavitt. ``We just had a change 
in leadership; that creates a tension. Everyone is now evaluating 
the direction they think the party should go; that creates a tension. 
``There's a nervousness on the part of congressional leaders as well 
as a sense of anxiety and anticipation among the governors. Governors 
have a very important contribution to make; we just have to figure 
out how to make it.'' The governors and other Republican leaders were 
all smiles as they assembled around a horseshoe-shaped table at one 
session. But beneath the surface, it was clear that all was not serene. 
At the head of the table was South Carolina Gov. David Beasley, the 
outgoing chairman of the Republican Governors Association. He found 
himself in the uncomfortable position of presiding over a conference 
about the party's future and the governors' ``winning message'' _ 
even though he was one of only two Republican governors who lost _ 
and he faulted the national party's efforts to get voters to the polls. 
Seated to Beasley's left was Lott, whom some governors criticized 
for not taking up a tax cut bill that the party's candidates could 
have used in their campaigns. On Beasley's right side was Republican 
National Committee chairman Jim Nicholson, who is struggling to fight 
off a challenge from partisans trying to oust him because of the disappointing 
election results. ( Nicholson is up for re-election in January.) At 
the other end of the table from Nicholson was Michigan Gov. John Engler, 
who has publicly called for ``a stronger national figure'' to replace 
Nicholson. Schafer said of the election outcome: ``Everybody was pretty 
civil, but it's always rough when you don't like the results. We talked 
about the fact that we used to have a pretty good relationship and 
that it diminished over the last couple of years.'' Though many governors 
complained that Lott slighted them at this gathering last year, this 
time he praised ``the most outstanding group of governors, maybe in 
the history of the country.'' He invited the governors to meet with 
congressional leaders in Washington early next month. For all the 
talk of an improved dialogue, it was not evident that governors will 
exert more influence in the party. Despite the assurances by Livingston 
and Lott, many of the chief executives here remember that at their 
meeting in Williamsburg, Va., only four years ago, Gingrich had made 
similar overtures, only to shut them out of deliberations over most 
issues except welfare reform. Another hurdle for governors is that 
it is not easy to translate a successful state agenda into a potent 
national theme. Though the governors criticize their friends in Congress 
for having no agenda and bending too much to the right, the reality 
is that governors can often pursue a more moderate agenda because 
they are not lobbied by interest groups as much as lawmakers in Washington 
are. It was not an encouraging omen that in his welcoming remarks 
to the governors, Livingston made a minor gaffe, but one that did 
not escape a roomful of governors who want to be taken more seriously. 
He referred to 34 Republican governors who will be in office next 
year. The correct number is 31. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>