<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981121.0136 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
The New York Times said in an editorial for Sunday, Nov. 22: The decision 
by Rep. Henry Hyde, the House Judiciary Committee chairman, to subpoena 
additional witnesses for reasons he could not explain outside executive 
session is a singularly bad idea for a very specific reason. It sends 
the Judiciary Committee hurtling down paths already meticulously explored 
by Kenneth Starr when Hyde and the committee's Republican majority 
ought to be searching for an exit strategy that would serve two valuable 
public needs. One is to allow Congress to move on to other business. 
The other and more immediately important need is for Congress to find 
a way to write into the historic record a condemnation of President 
Clinton for failing in his constitutional duty to uphold the rule 
of law. Instead of moving in an orderly way toward that goal, the 
Republican leadership, and to some degree all of political Washington, 
are dashing around blindly. The leaders cannot seem to absorb the 
week's main political development. Clinton, barring the emergence 
of dramatic new evidence, has won the political battle over impeachment. 
Having heard Starr's evidence presented in its most damning form, 
the American people do not want Clinton removed from office, and the 
Republicans cannot muster the votes to accomplish it. Starr's testimony 
and the assault on his tactics by David Kendall, the president's lawyer, 
and others left the public and congressional majorities where they 
started _ in favor of censuring but not removing Clinton. Hyde continues 
to look like a man riding a bicycle with welded handlebars. Does he 
really think he is going to find evidence that will change that consensus 
by calling Kathleen Willey's lawyer, Daniel Gecker, or Clinton's lawyer 
in the Paula Jones case, Robert Bennett? These subpoenas represent 
a reckless assault on attorney-client privilege for no apparent gain. 
Starr, whatever his faults, did not seem to leave much room for new 
discoveries on the sex-and-lies front. Moreover, the fact that Clinton 
lied in sworn and unsworn situations to family, friends, the American 
people, the courts, his staff and perhaps his own lawyer has been 
firmly established. If the committee wants additional testimony on 
potentially impeachable issues, it could more productively spend its 
time on allegations like subornation of perjury or obstruction of 
justice and hear from direct witnesses like Monica Lewinsky, Betty 
Currie and Vernon Jordan. The most apparent need right now, though, 
is not for more testimony but for focused leadership. Hyde's current 
direction could lead to a successful vote in committee to pass articles 
of impeachment and send them to the House. Impeachment would then 
fail in the House, leading to the possibility that Clinton could escape 
without official punishment. That is a totally unacceptable outcome. 
To avoid it, Republican and Democratic leaders need to craft a stinging 
censure for presidential misconduct that can be passed by the Judiciary 
Committee or, failing that, offered as a substitute measure on the 
House floor. There are, admittedly, great pressures and enticing issues 
pulling Washington away from the main business of finding an exit 
strategy that gives Clinton the maximum punishment consistent with 
political reality. Many of those issues are undeniably important. 
For example, Starr's tactics, as highlighted by Kendall's critique 
and Sam Dash's oddly timed resignation, have to be fully explored. 
Both Congress and the Justice Department have to come to grips with 
Starr's disturbing hint that he might still want to bring indictments 
after Congress has finished with Clinton. Both bodies need to discover 
why Starr delayed informing the public of his findings on Whitewater, 
Travelgate and Filegate. The Independent Counsel Act, while seemingly 
doomed by public aversion to Starr, still deserves serious congressional 
debate when it comes up for renewal next year. But the overriding 
immediate need is for Hyde and the Judiciary Committee to start crafting 
a censure resolution before the start of a political skirmish that 
could allow Clinton to slip past the condemnation that he so richly 
deserves and that history demands. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>