<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981121.0087 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Deep in the mangrove swamp of the Niger River Delta, Bello Orubebe 
pressed his nose against the window of a deserted houseboat once used 
by Shell oil workers. Peeking inside, he saw a simple room the size 
of a big closet, with bunk beds, metal lockers, an air-conditioner 
and a fan. ``Inside there,'' he said, ``you have the best facilities 
you can think of. The best of everything you need. We, the people 
of the delta, have nothing. The international community must know 
that in Nigeria, there is a place called the Niger Delta that produces 
the country's oil, and we are abused and exploited.'' Orubebe, 32, 
who describes himself as a revolutionary, was giving voice to long-simmering 
resentments that have finally reached the boil of outright rebellion 
in the delta, an oil-rich region that produces 90 percent of Nigeria's 
hard-currency earnings but itself lacks roads, electricity and even 
running water. In recent weeks, Orubebe and other members of the Ijaw 
ethnic group took control of about 20 oil stations belonging to Royal/Dutch 
Shell and Chevron, at one point cutting Nigeria's oil production of 
2 million barrels a day by a third. Ten of Shell's sites remain in 
the hands of young Ijaw men, who also control the hundreds of creeks 
and Niger River tributaries that lace the region and provide its only 
means of access. A week and a half ago, some Ijaw invaded an offshore 
oil rig belonging to Texaco and held eight employees, including three 
Americans, hostage over five days. Hostage-taking and bitter complaint 
are not new to this desperately poor and disgruntled area of Africa's 
most populous country. But the recent acts of rebellion and the disruption 
they have caused to the flow of this country's lifeblood have rarely 
posed so grave a risk to stability. This is particularly so as the 
country staggers through an uncertain democratic transition. At the 
root of the resentment are nothing less than power and money. While 
the largely Christian south is the source of Nigeria's oil, profits 
from the industry go to the Muslim north. It has lubricated gross 
levels of corruption there among the generals who have ruled Nigeria 
for all but four of the last 32 years. In the past, isolated acts 
against oil installations typically resulted from particular communities' 
grievances toward a local oil station, industry officials said. But 
the spread of the rebellion across such a vast territory, especially 
in the western delta, suggests that the actions are better organized 
than before and are intended to convey a broader message to the central 
government. ``There's no doubt that there's been an escalation,'' 
Tom Schull, general manager of production for Chevron's Nigerian operations, 
said of the unrest. ``The frustration of the people living in the 
delta in the past was between host communities and the oil companies. 
There has been a change recently. They're using us to express their 
frustrations against the federal government.'' So far the government, 
which is involved in joint ventures with all the Western oil companies, 
has refrained from using force to stop the unrest. Gen. Abdulsalami 
Abubakar, who took over as president after the sudden death of Gen. 
Sani Abacha in June, has urged negotiations with the leaders of the 
rebellion and last week went on a tour of the eastern delta. If the 
Ijaw represent those most directly affected by a system of neglect 
based in the north, their anger is also shared by the south's two 
major ethnic groups, the Ibo and Yoruba. But the region's poverty 
is also cause for ethnic division. Rising violence between groups 
competing for oil jobs has left scores dead around the oil town of 
Warri, which is under a dusk-to-dawn curfew. And in October, not far 
from Warri, more than 700 people died after an attempt to siphon fuel 
illegally from a pipeline set off a devastating fireball. The Ijaw 
in particular have taken aim at the Western oil companies, which generate 
some $10 billion a year in revenue for the Nigerian government and 
have made Nigeria the world's sixth-largest oil producer. They have 
demanded that some of that oil money be returned to the delta to build 
roads, and provide electricity, running water and medical outlets. 
And there is talk, albeit vague, of secession and self-determination 
if their demands are not met. Abubakar, who has won praise in the 
West as a reformer, has at least acknowledged the existence of problems 
here. This month he allowed public rallies commemorating the 1995 
hanging of Ken Saro-Wiwa, a delta writer who was executed after demanding 
reparations for the region. The general has also pledged to overhaul 
the agency charged with developing the delta for its 7 million inhabitants. 
Shell's complex here, a ``flow'' station called Benisede, was one 
of the first to be seized. According to Shell, about 35,000 barrels 
of crude were pumped every day from more than 20 wells in the area, 
and the oil flowed through a maze of pipelines into Benisede. The 
company is Nigeria's largest oil investor, pumping more than half 
of the 2 million barrels that Western companies take out of the country 
each day. In August, a group of Ijaw from a neighboring village took 
eight Shell workers hostage for a week, and the station has been closed 
since then, said Albert Aramabi, the external relations manager for 
Shell's operations in the western Niger Delta. Aramabi said that Shell 
was negotiating with the Ijaw over the release of its stations, but 
that disagreements among some Ijaw were hampering talks. He also said 
the Ijaw occupying Shell flow stations were generally armed, although 
on a recent visit to Benisede, the 20 young men there carried no weapons. 
Clad in T-shirts and shorts, they moved comfortably around the station 
in flip-flops or bare feet. ``Until our demands are met, we will stay 
here,'' said Eric Ekereke, 28, who like almost everyone occupying 
the station is an unemployed villager from Ojobo. ``We are very, very 
angry. While we are suffering, they are enjoying themselves here. 
They have constant power and water supply here, A.C. all around. Telecommunications 
to London, to anywhere in the world.'' To the young men, everything 
at the station seemed a source of bitterness, the vague symbol of 
some personal injury: the helicopter landing pad that allowed Shell 
workers to fly in and out of the area; the station's two gas flares 
that once lit up the night sky. ``Until we stopped them,'' Orubebe 
said, ``light at the flow station had been continuous.'' ``Continuous!'' 
chimed in a local leader, Chief Zaria Torukro. ``If you do not give 
us light, we will extinguish yours,'' Orubebe said. On a recent night, 
he and several other young men gathered at Torukro's house, sitting 
around two kerosene lamps on the front porch. The rank smells of stagnant 
water and untreated sewage clung to the air, as it did in other houses, 
alleyways and every breezeless corner. The village's generator was 
not working that night. Besides, it was unlikely that the power would 
reach Torukro's house, which was a good hike from the riverbank and 
down a muddy, flooded road in the mangrove swamp. The chief, 70, a 
retired schoolteacher, offered visitors warm bottles of Coke. ``The 
development of the people is the responsibility of the federal government,'' 
said Torukro, frequently and loudly, swatting at the mosquitoes that 
dared to land on his chest and back. ``We are angry at the government, 
too. But we are angrier at Shell, because Shell is here.'' In keeping 
with that widely held sentiment, residents of Ojobo tend to describe 
the days before Shell's arrival in the early 1970s as a halcyon age 
of clear river water and bountiful fish and game. They accuse Shell 
of having polluted the water so that the village must supplement its 
catch with frozen mackerel from Warri. By the time the mackerel arrives 
in this fishing village, wrapped in plastic bags and sold on the riverbank, 
it has doubled in price, several traders said. Gray D'Oroso, 48, the 
village's chief administrator, said that big animals, including antelopes 
and leopards, used to inhabit the area. His father was a famous hunter, 
D'Oroso said, adding that the trade disappeared by the early 1980s. 
``The last famous hunter was College Molori,'' D'Oroso said. ``He 
left Ojobo 15 or 16 years ago, and now he lives in Gabon.'' Whether 
all that has befallen Ojobo since Shell's arrival can be attributed 
to it is not clear. What is clear is that, given the scant presence 
here of the federal government, Shell is the most visible symbol of 
the neglect that plagues the region. Residents have turned to the 
company for compensation. In 1996 Shell built a potable-water system 
that residents said has never worked. Instead, in the morning, villagers 
could be seen using the muddy river to bathe, wash clothes, clean 
food and even drink. Others living deeper in the swamp simply used 
the water flooding the dirt roads between their mud-and-thatch houses. 
Aramabi of Shell said a contract to repair the water system had been 
awarded recently. Had it not been for the occupation of the Shell 
site, he said, residents here would probably have potable water now. 
He added that the company had just awarded another contract to fill 
a flooded area of the village with sand. Shell spends $30 million 
a year in ``community development'' projects in the delta, far more 
than any other oil company spends on any other area of the world, 
Aramabi said. But he added that only lasting political reforms in 
Nigeria would lead to real improvements in the delta. ``Whatever we 
throw in is still a drop in the ocean,'' Aramabi said. ``The riverine 
communities are crying out for development. But if one looks closely 
at them, the level of development required goes well beyond the capacity 
of the oil industry. The government should take the lead.'' 
</TEXT>
</DOC>