<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981121.0080 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Bosnian political leaders are so good at resisting changes needed 
to revive the economy that diplomats and foreign officials say their 
governments now face the choice between providing large amounts of 
financial aid for years and watching the country collapse. Three years 
after the Dayton peace agreement, diplomats had assumed that foreign 
private investment would have begun to replace the $1.5 billion in 
annual foreign aid. But, with the ravages of war still very obvious 
and an economy still run by communist-era rules, doing business in 
Bosnia remains so unattractive that there is very little foreign investment. 
It takes 33,000 foreign troops to keep a new war at bay, and Bosnia's 
various governments are held in place only with the daily prodding 
of hundreds of foreign diplomats and experts. Similarly, the economy 
survives in large part on international aid and the money spent to 
support foreign organizations and tens of thousands of foreigners 
working here. ``We urge, we push, we organize meetings, we threaten,'' 
said Didier Fau, his face contorting slightly with the frustration 
of being one of the top foreign officials responsible for Bosnia's 
economic reform. ``But we are not in charge.'' ``Anyone with the power 
to change the system benefits from the way the system works now, so 
there is no reason for them to want change,'' said a Western diplomat, 
referring to the small group of politicians who control much of the 
economy through their control of government. ``They think we can't 
afford to fail and we'll just keep paying,'' the diplomat said. ``Maybe 
they are right.'' Only three big foreign firms have ventured into 
Bosnia, and even their commitment is tentative. Volkswagen, which 
had operated a large plant just outside Sarajevo that was commandeered 
and wrecked by the Bosnian Serbs during the 1992-95 war, is opening 
a much-scaled-down operation. With some 400 workers, it will assemble 
the final 10 percent of the Skoda cars made at the company's plants 
in the Czech Republic. German diplomats said it took two years of 
pressure to persuade the company to return to Bosnia. Coca-Cola has 
a bottling venture in Bosnia, and DHL operates a courier service. 
But both could fold quickly if they needed to get out, businesspeople 
said. Many of the other foreign businesspeople in Bosnia seem to be 
motivated less by profit than emotion. Jean Le Roch has his office 
across from the marketplace where a mortar shell killed 68 people 
on Feb. 5, 1994. Le Roch was a French Army officer with the United 
Nations in Bosnia then. Now his business is to advise European companies 
interested in setting up here. ``So far, in three years, two companies 
that I work with, small companies, have started up,'' he said. The 
problem, he said, is that foreign investors find it is too hard to 
make a profit. ``In 1996 we had 160 delegations come from important 
businesses who wanted to start something here,'' Le Roch said. ``Last 
year 97 delegations, this year we won't even reach 25. This country 
now has a bad reputation.'' ``The leaders, on all sides, have learned 
the words to use,'' he said. ``Free enterprise, Western style, market 
economy, dynamic, efficient. They say these things with great passion. 
But that is only superficial, nothing has changed from when this was 
a communist country.'' Most people in business or government here 
grew up in communist Yugoslavia's unique economic system, which mixed 
Marxist planning with alleged self-management of enterprises and was 
heavily subsidized by the West, which wanted to keep the country out 
of the Soviet orbit. Failing state-run companies in Bosnia received 
loans from a state-run bank that kept them going and were never meant 
to be repaid. The economy was largely a mirage, but its managers mouthed 
the jargon and insisted that they practiced an enlightened mix of 
Communism and capitalism. In similar fashion, today's Bosnian politicians 
refuse to provide the kind of business environment that most large 
foreign investors demand. Foreign economists working to try to open 
the Bosnian economy say there is often favoritism in the way taxes 
and laws are applied, so that a business can find itself penalized 
while a competitor with a friend in the government gets help. They 
say the lack of a commercial bank system or privatization also keeps 
investors away. Instead of helping investors, diplomats and foreign 
economists say, Bosnian political leaders allow, and often profit 
from, corruption, tax evasion, and regulations so burdensome that 
companies often must bribe officials, or break the law. ``There is 
no senior leader from any group who says it is time to move off a 
welfare economy to a productive economy,'' said the U.S. ambassador 
to Bosnia, Richard Kauzlarich. ``Privatization has been delayed, private 
initiative has been discouraged. People here need to realize that 
their future will not be financed by the international community.'' 
``There is no shortage of other places for investors to go in this 
region,'' said Saumya Mitra, deputy director of the World Bank in 
Bosnia. Even with American government experts in place in Bosnian 
banking regulatory agencies, Bosnian officials managed secretly to 
sell off seven government-owned banks, probably illegally, foreign 
experts say. Many diplomats confess that they doubt the problems can 
be fixed before their governments give up hope. For all the foreign 
aid and technical assistance received, and promises of reform made 
by Bosnian officials, most workers still do not have jobs and only 
30 percent of the prewar industrial capacity has been revived. Some 
countries are starting programs they hope will foster free enterprise. 
The European Union is shifting about $350 million from programs to 
help refugees return to programs intended to help develop the private 
sector, a spokesman said. The United States has a $278 million loan 
program for Bosnian businesses, part of a $766 million reconstruction 
project. In addition, the Pentagon estimates that it is costing about 
$2 billion a year to keep U.S. forces here. The United States pays 
$25 million a year for programs giving technical advice on new laws 
and regulations intended to open the economy to investment. These 
allowed the deputy minister of foreign trade, Seadeta Ceric, to say: 
``Our economy is now very open and very friendly for foreign investments. 
No one should have any problems here.'' Not so, said an American investor 
who spoke on the condition of anonymity. ``Every permit is a nightmare,'' 
the investor said. ``New regulations appear overnight and get applied 
retroactively. Every official has his hand out. I'm making money, 
but it's all off the books so the government can't find it, because 
they would take it.'' Le Roch, who now _ in despair _ counsels foreign 
investors to look elsewhere, said: ``I will survive. The people here, 
they will survive, somehow. But is this what we fought for _ a crippled 
country?'' 
</TEXT>
</DOC>