<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981121.0103 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
As sport utility vehicles and pickup trucks become bigger and more 
common, their height and high-mounted headlights are making visibility 
on the road more difficult for other drivers, particularly at night. 
Federal regulators are growing concerned. The normal headlights of 
an oncoming full-size sport utility vehicle or pickup truck can create 
so much glare that they appear to car drivers as bright as high beams. 
When such a big vehicle follows a car at night, the car's rear-view 
mirror and side mirrors reflect very bright glare. The high rear windows 
on sport utility vehicles and pickup trucks, as well as minivans, 
can create another visibility problem. The bottom of the rear windows 
is typically 4 feet high, about the same height as the top of car 
windshields, preventing many car drivers from seeing traffic ahead. 
Headlight glare appears to be the bigger problem. ``It is incredibly 
distracting when you're on the road,'' said David Lichtenthal, an 
accountant in Marlboro, N.J., who drives a Mercury Mystique sedan. 
``Sometimes I wind up pulling over to the right to let the sport ute 
pass me.'' Full-size sport utility vehicles and pickup trucks tend 
to have headlights 36 to 39 inches high _ the same height as the side 
mirror on a small car like a Dodge Neon. Glare is 10 to 20 times worse 
than recommended levels when headlights are at the height of a driver's 
eyes or side mirror, according to a study by the Society of Automotive 
Engineers. Glare and visibility problems are likely to increase as 
pickup trucks, minivans and sport utility vehicles become much more 
common. Such vehicles now account for half of all new family vehicle 
sales, up from 16 percent in 1971. And sport utility vehicles and 
pickups are growing bigger, with higher headlights and rear windows. 
Federal regulators are ``fairly likely'' to take action on light-truck 
headlight glare in the next two years, said Stephen Kratzke, director 
of crash avoidance standards at the National Highway Traffic Safety 
Administration. The agency may require that light-truck headlights 
be mounted lower or aimed downward. ``It's a real issue; it's something 
we're aware of,'' Kratzke said. ``We'd like to do something to address 
that glare; we've seen it.'' Federal regulators also say that they 
have some concerns about the greater variation in vehicle heights. 
But they are unlikely to set any new rules because they have received 
few written complaints from drivers and because they cannot calculate 
the precise effect on safety. Using state and local data, the federal 
government keeps track of dozens of variables on virtually every fatal 
crash across the country. But these variables do not include glare 
or the effects of nearby vehicles' high windows because these are 
hard for police officers to assess when they arrive after an accident. 
Automakers say that neither problem can be too serious because the 
overall death rate edged down last year. But regulators attribute 
the decrease to less drunken driving. Headlight engineers at auto 
parts companies are worried that increased glare hurts safety by tiring 
car drivers' eyes. ``My feeling is it's debilitating; it wears you 
down,'' said Walter Kosmatka, chairman of a headlight height task 
force of the Society of Automotive Engineers, which sets technical 
standards. But automakers' safety experts are less worried. ``I suspect 
there are very few if any collision events associated with glare,'' 
said Robert Lange, the vehicle safety director for General Motors. 
While its impact on safety effects is debated, the growing gap in 
headlight heights is undisputed. A University of Michigan study of 
1995-model-year vehicles found that the average car had headlights 
mounted 24 inches off the pavement, while the average light truck's 
headlights were 32 inches high. And the difference in heights appears 
to have increased since the study, said a university researcher, Michael 
Flanagan. Indeed, sales of full-size sport utility vehicles have nearly 
tripled since the 1995 model year, as automakers have introduced many 
new models while gasoline prices have fallen. More light trucks now 
have four-wheel drive, which raises a vehicle's body by an extra two 
or three inches. At the same time, new technology makes headlights 
up to 30 percent brighter than in the 1970s. Automakers contend that 
the headlights of sport utility vehicles and pickups need to be mounted 
higher than car headlights. Light-truck drivers sit higher than car 
drivers, and headlights provide more effective illumination when mounted 
as close as possible to the height of a driver's eyes. Road signs 
are designed to reflect light directly back, and seem less bright 
for motorists who sit in tall vehicles with low-mounted headlights. 
(But most minivans, whose drivers sit fairly high, are based on car 
designs, and their headlights are mounted almost as low as car headlights.) 
But the task force of auto industry engineers concluded in 1996 that 
current light- and heavy-truck headlights should probably be lower. 
The task force recommended that the maximum allowable height for all 
vehicle headlights be lowered to either 36 inches or 40 inches from 
54. Kosmatka of the task force said it was unnecessary for any but 
the largest freight trucks to be at even the new recommended limit. 
A separate Society of Automotive Engineers task force has just drafted 
a recommendation that all headlights mounted at 36 inches or higher 
be tilted downward to reduce glare. Commercial fleet operators commonly 
aim their trucks' headlights slightly downward, although that is not 
required by regulations. But light-truck headlights shine straight 
ahead, the highest allowed. The high windows of light trucks present 
a separate but related visibility problem. Paul Mercer, the owner 
of a computer software company in Cupertino, Calif., still drives 
sports cars, even though he must hug the left side of the lane when 
trailing a bigger vehicle, in the hope of seeing around it. But Mercer's 
luck almost ran out on Oct. 17, when he was driving a Mazda Miata 
in dense traffic on Interstate 880. The traffic slowed suddenly, but 
Mercer was behind a large sport utility and unable to see the high-mounted 
brake lights come on in the rear windows of vehicles ahead. The sport 
utility braked and swerved at the last minute to avoid a wheel in 
the road. Mercer did not have enough time to react. ``I ran over the 
wheel and blew out my tire and had to limp off at the next exit,'' 
he said. ``I was happy to be alive.'' Mercer's accident could have 
been worse. High-mounted center brake lights, typically placed in 
rear windows, are becoming less effective in preventing multivehicle 
pileups. The height of light trucks may be one reason, according to 
a recent, little-noticed agency safety report. In 1987, vehicles with 
the lights were 14.6 percent less likely than vehicles without them 
to be hit from behind in pileups involving three or more vehicles. 
But in the early 1990s, vehicles with the high-mounted lights were 
only 2.45 percent less likely to be hit in such crashes. Sonja Bultnyck, 
a Chrysler spokeswoman, said that on highways, car drivers should 
allow space in front of them equal to at least one car length for 
every 10 miles an hour that they are traveling. Mercer said he was 
only two car lengths behind the sport utility vehicle in heavy traffic 
going 50 mph. But Chrysler's advice does not satisfy him. Whenever 
he tries to leave a wider space on San Francisco's crowded highways, 
someone cuts in front of him. Automakers say this shows that bad drivers, 
not vehicle design, cause crashes. ``It's not the vehicle we can point 
at, then,'' Mrs. Bultnyck said. ``It's the inconsiderate drivers.'' 
</TEXT>
</DOC>