<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981121.0198 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
It was early in the fourth quarter and Ohio State was leading Michigan, 
31-16. Normally, that is a secure lead. But in this fierce rivalry 
any lead by Ohio State with time still remaining on the clock must 
be considered tenuous. For the 94,339 people in attendance at Ohio 
Stadium, this is when it gets interesting. Would the Buckeyes collapse 
and allow Michigan a chance to break their hearts once more? Or would 
Ohio State be able to preserve its lead and walk away with a precious 
victory? Two Michigan touchdowns and two 2-point conversions and the 
Wolverines would win. But there would be no high drama Saturday. No 
single player stealing the show and acting as Michigan's savior, the 
way cornerback Charles Woodson against did against the Buckeyes last 
year with a punt return for a touchdown and an interception in the 
end zone. Instead, Ohio State (10-1) held on to defeat Michigan (8-3), 
31-16, and help Buckeyes coach John Cooper exorcise some of his Wolverine 
demons. The big star Saturday was Ohio State receiver David Boston, 
who broke his team record for most receptions in a season by catching 
10 passes for 217 yards and two touchdowns. Boston set the team record 
last year with 73 catches. His 10 receptions Saturday gave him 74 
for the season. The Buckeyes had lost three consecutive games to Michigan 
and were 1-4-1 in the past six meetings. Michigan coach Lloyd Carr 
had never lost a game to Ohio State in his four-year tenure with the 
Wolverines, but his counterpart, Cooper, had proved he could beat 
everyone but Michigan. Entering the game, his overall record was 95-33-1 
in 11 years at Ohio State. But Cooper was 1-8-1 against the Wolverines. 
This was another opportunity for Cooper to beat back that maize-and-blue 
misery that has haunted him in his tenure at Ohio State. The game 
matched Michigan's defense, ranked No. 1 nationally against the run 
(yielding 73.7 yards a game) against Ohio State's rushing attack, 
which leads the Big 10 with an average of 205 yards a game. The Buckeyes 
ignored that advantage on their first series and had quarterback Joe 
Germaine throw the ball. But Germaine was so filled with adrenaline 
that his first three passes soared over the heads of his receivers. 
His first pass on the next series slipped from his hand as his arm 
came forward. When the Buckeyes decided to go to the ground they found 
success: Running back Michael Wiley ripped off a 53-yard run for a 
touchdown the second time he touched the ball. That helped give Ohio 
State a quick 7-0 lead. The Buckeyes added to that lead by taking 
advantage of a Wolverines' mistake on special teams. Michigan punter 
Jason Vinson had the punt snap sail through his hands and when he 
picked it up, he tried to punt it anyway. The ball, which was originally 
spotted at the Wolverines' 29, sailed out of bounds at their 16. The 
punt was minus 13 yards and the Buckeyes were in great shape. Germaine 
found receiver Dee Miller streaking across the middle on a crossing 
pattern for a touchdown on a 16-yard, third-down pass play that helped 
give Ohio State a 14-0 lead with 9:44 to play in the first quarter. 
Vinson had more problems punting in the second quarter when his kick 
was blocked by Ohio State free safety Derek Ross. The ball was recovered 
at the 20 by Ohio State running back Jonathan Wells. Germaine connected 
with Boston, who had seven receptions for 142 yards in the first half, 
on a 30-yard touchdown pass play that helped give Ohio State a 21-3 
lead. Even though the Ohio State defense had manhandled the Wolverines 
offense for much of the first half, Michigan was not about to let 
the Buckeyes go into the locker room at halftime feeling comfortable. 
The Wolverines put together a nine-play, 80 yard drive in 2:38, scoring 
with 35 seconds to play in the half on a three-yard pass from quarterback 
Tom Brady to receiver Tai Streets to make it 21-10. Just a reminder 
to the Buckeyes that this game was not over yet. But the Buckeyes 
demonstrated their big-play ability on offense in the second half. 
Germaine and Boston hooked up on a 43-yard touchdown pass that helped 
give Ohio State a 28-10 lead with 9:51 to play in the third quarter. 
And Ohio State set up a 39-yard field goal by kicker Dan Stutlz on 
a 49-yard pass from Germaine to fullback Matt Keller. That field goal 
made it 31-13 with 1:36 to play in the third quarter. That maize-and-blue 
haze around Cooper was finally beginning to lift. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>