<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981121.0174 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
During a campaign debate just five weeks ago, Gov. John Rowland was 
asked what he was willing to do to lure the New England Patriots to 
Connecticut. The governor smiled and dismissed that as ``a hypothetical 
question, so it's very difficult to plug in hypothetical holes,'' 
then talked about other economic development ideas he considered more 
realistic. In fact, a deal to move the National Football League team 
to Connecticut's capital had been all but sealed for two months, according 
to his aides. Talks were progressing so fast by late summer, these 
aides said, that the governor's staff decided to put them on ice because 
of fears about how they might disrupt his campaign for re-election, 
which he won handily. ``We could have done the deal, probably, during 
the summer or early fall,'' Rowland, a Republican, said Friday. ``But 
if we had announced it in September, you would have had 300 candidates 
for the Legislature taking positions on it, and that's not a good 
atmosphere for making good, concrete, sensible decisions.'' Some of 
the governor's strategists had feared touching off a debate over the 
benefits of a new stadium versus more money for schools, while others 
fretted that if the effort unraveled, the governor would be blamed. 
``Even a whiff about the Patriots would have started a frenzy,'' said 
Fergus Cullen, the deputy campaign manager. ``It was a risk no one 
was willing to take.'' The secrecy looked smart on Thursday, when 
grinning legislators of both parties crowded behind Rowland and the 
Patriots' owner, Robert Kraft, for the stunning announcement that 
the team would abandon the Boston area, its home of 38 years, for 
a new stadium that Connecticut has promised to build in downtown Hartford 
in time for the 2001 season. The team and the state negotiated intermittently 
for years, and even as word of fresh discussions leaked out in the 
last several months, few officials outside Rowland's tight circle 
believed until last week that anything would come of them. By keeping 
the lid on Hartford's biggest story in years, Rowland, 41, had the 
chance to establish a rapport with Kraft, 57, in 10 face-to-face meetings, 
and to dicker over the fine print outside the public glare. Now, though, 
the governor faces questions about whether he drove a hard enough 
bargain when he promised to build a $350-million stadium, which the 
team would use rent free for 30 years. The provision that is sure 
to draw the most scrutiny is a guarantee by the state that it would 
pay up to $17.5 million for unsold empty luxury seats and boxes each 
season. A number of factors in both states had come together to produce 
the rarest of achievements _ a huge stadium subsidy that was negotiated 
in secret and greeted with little initial public criticism. Kraft 
said he needed a more modern stadium with lucrative features like 
sky boxes, but wanted to stay in his native New England. Yet his relations 
with the Massachusetts Legislature had deteriorated to name-calling. 
Hartford, which had been withering for decades, now had a detailed 
strategy for a makeover of its riverfront, championed by a business 
community that had tasted success when the city had held a presidential 
debate in 1996. Perhaps most importantly, Rowland had made urban revitalization 
the keynote of his campaign, and thus was eager to land a big project 
to illustrate his contention that the future success of the Republican 
Party involved helping cities. He had spent a year building bridges 
to the Democrats who control both houses of the Legislature, and he 
now had the clout that comes with winning by 28 percentage points. 
As the governor basked in his success at landing a project that could 
change Hartford's image overnight, a bit of a stadium hangover set 
in on Friday. State legislators, who must act on the plan by the end 
of the year, began wading through the 18-page agreement. They said 
that they found it much more generous to Kraft than had been revealed 
in the summary that the governor's office provided. Whatever the uncertainties, 
legislative leaders seem determined to pass the plan in a special 
session in mid-December. In the meantime, Hartford is enjoying a full-blown 
football fever, from the vitamin store that is giving a 10 percent 
discount to patrons who sign a petition supporting the team, to the 
television station that picked out luxury homes and cars that might 
be suited to specific Patriots players. ``When you get the brass ring, 
why ask about the lead content?'' asked Wilson Faude, executive director 
of the Old State House, a restored Main Street landmark that was the 
seat of Connecticut's post-Revolutionary government. After months 
of getting-to-know-you chats between Rowland and Kraft, and countless 
conference calls among the governor's aides and the Patriots' lawyers, 
the talks turned to real numbers in May, when the two men surveyed 
the future stadium site from a conference room on the 16th floor of 
the building that houses Phoenix Home Life Mutual Insurance Co., which 
has been the most visible proponent of a splashy new development on 
the Connecticut River. If there were any doubts about Kraft's seriousness, 
he brought along Paul Tagliabue, the commissioner of the NFL. Their 
guide was Robert Fiondella, president of the insurance company and 
sponsor of a $1 billion project called Adriaen's Landing. Fiondella 
produced drawings that looked like a Tomorrowland vision of Hartford 
and began pointing to the features planned for Adriaen's Landing: 
a stadium for the Patriots and the University of Connecticut, a convention 
center, a hotel, a rooftop restaurant, a museum that looks like a 
solarium, an indoor mountain-climbing range, a jazz club, a 14-screen 
movie theater. Then they stepped to the window. ``Just imagine the 
Goodyear blimp on a Monday night, showing this majestic scene,'' Fiondella 
recalled rhapsodizing. He conjured a stadium, motioned to the river 
nearby, then up the hill to the gold-leaf grandeur of the Capitol 
dome, and finally pointed to the confluence of Interstates 84 and 
91, which he called ``the crossroads of the Northeast.'' Kraft would 
say later that it was the specificity of Hartford's plans that bowled 
him over. That winter, his 34-year-old son, Jonathan Kraft, who is 
chief executive of a Connecticut paper company and a Patriots vice 
president, had shown him pictures of the Adriaen's Landing plans that 
had run in a newspaper when the state Legislature approved $300 million 
for revitalization of Hartford. At Thursday's announcement, Kraft 
gestured to the lawmakers arrayed behind him and said, ``When we saw 
that the people standing behind here had passed this legislation for 
the rejuvenation of Hartford, we realized that this could be an opportunity 
for us.'' At the same time, the Massachusetts House of Representatives 
was continuing to balk at his demands for a new stadium. In July, 
in what turned out to be a goodbye card to the Bay State, Kraft submitted 
a blistering Op-Ed article to The Boston Globe, complaining about 
the ``shortsighted intransigence on the part of the leadership of 
the Massachusetts House,'' particularly its speaker, Thomas Finneran. 
It ran with the headline, ``Blame the Speaker for Stadium Stalemate.'' 
He continued talking with Rowland. ``I had to read the timing of it 
_ when to strike and when to deliver,'' Rowland said Friday. Kevin 
Sullivan, president pro tem of the Connecticut Senate, said: ``There 
are times when the governor's _ how do I want to say this? _ boyish 
enthusiasm doesn't serve him well. This is one of those times that 
it paid off.'' On Friday, Nov. 13, only details remained. Kraft was 
going to fly into a private airport just outside Hartford; to avoid 
publicity, he and the governor decided to meet in a hangar. When, 
at the last minute, Kraft drove down instead, they met in the hangar 
anyway, in a scene that the governor later described as ``Miami Vice-like.'' 
Rowland, who had once referred to Kraft as ``very crafty,'' realized 
he would look like a fool if his deal turned out to be just a bargaining 
chip for the Patriots to get their way with the Massachusetts Legislature. 
So the last major term to be settled was a $2 million fine Kraft would 
pay if he opened negotiations with another state. Rowland's critics 
are calling it his ``ego protection money.'' Both men set about courting 
legislators. Last Sunday night, the Senate majority leader, George 
Jepsen, was drinking red wine at his Stamford home when the governor 
called to tell him about the Patriots deal. The next day, in a meeting 
with the top six legislative leaders, Rowland spelled out the details. 
``We're in this together, or we're not in it,'' several of them quoted 
him as saying. That afternoon, Kraft flew to Hartford and stopped 
by legislators' offices to answer their questions about the deal. 
At 11:30 p.m. on Wednesday, Rowland and Kraft talked on the phone. 
Their lawyers were still haggling, but they were close enough that 
the governor told his communications director, Dean Pagani, that he 
could announce a news conference for 11 a.m. the next day. The final 
``T'' was crossed at 1:45 a.m. The governor and Kraft now must convince 
legislators that although the deal seems quite sweet for Kraft, the 
spillover effects will be a bonanza for Hartford. One of the many 
unadvertised provisions of the contract is a guarantee _ unusual even 
in these days of rich stadium deals for teams _ of up to $10 million 
in annual sales for club seats and $7.5 million for luxury suites. 
If sales fall short, the state will make up the difference. In addition 
to giving the Patriots the stadium rent-free for 30 years, the state 
will pay the stadium's insurance and major repair bills. The right 
to sell the stadium's name will go to the team. In return, the Patriots 
will pay the state a 10 percent tax on ticket sales and invest $75 
million in a hotel and stores for downtown Hartford. The team will 
keep its share of the profits from these ventures. ``It's one thing 
for us to subsidize a private enterprise, but now we're guaranteeing 
them a profit,'' said Rep. Richard Tulisano, a Democrat. ``God bless 
Robert Kraft for getting this deal. But in a recession, the state 
may have to decide whether it wants to buy school books or keep paying 
for this stadium.'' At least so far, his is a lonely voice. If lawmakers 
change even a comma, Kraft can back out. Legislative leaders want 
the deal, and have even said they plan to have Kraft speak privately 
to their caucuses to soothe fears. The kind of changes they're talking 
about are asking Kraft to provide 100 or so tickets a game to underprivileged 
Hartford young people. And Rowland remains a sunny salesman, ready 
to charm his state the same way he did Kraft. ``The only risk will 
be the critics, who will say we could have done something different,'' 
he said. ``But for 30 years, we've haven't had any cranes in the air, 
and we haven't had any excitement. We're going to make this happen.'' 
</TEXT>
</DOC>