<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981121.0144 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
As the board of Bankers Trust Corp. meets Sunday to vote on the sale 
of the bank to Deutsche Bank AG of Germany for about $9 billion, Wall 
Street is rife with speculation about whether a new round of megamergers 
is at hand. The expected deal is yet another example of how economic 
globalization is forcing companies to form once unthinkable cross-border 
alliances. ``Companies are playing in a global space now,'' said David 
Berry, a financial analyst with Keefe, Bruyette &AMP; Woods Inc. ``And 
to be in the business of financing multinational corporations, you 
need to have a global presence, and you need to be in the U.S. because 
that's where the money and the talent are.'' But industry analysts 
and bank advisers said banking executives were not rushing to cut 
deals like the huge marriages of other financial services giants completed 
in the last year. Lower stock prices and an uncertain economic landscape 
are still combining to dampen merger fever. ``In many respects Bankers 
Trust is a unique case, and there aren't a lot of other big buyers 
out there,'' said Charles Peabody, an analyst with Mitchell Securities 
Inc. in New York. In its deal for Bankers Trust, Deutsche Bank is 
clearly being driven by a desire to have greater global reach and 
a stronger presence in the United States, despite its ill-fated attempts 
to jump into investment banking previously. The deal is expected to 
be announced Monday, with Deutsche Bank paying about $90 a share for 
Bankers Trust, in what would be the biggest takeover of a U.S. financial 
institution by a foreign bank. Despite a cooler reception on Wall 
Street for mergers, some U.S. institutions may feel compelled to follow 
Deutsche Bank's lead. Such moves would probably be limited to the 
top tier of U.S. banks that already have an international presence 
or have stated their intentions to develop such a presence. Chase 
Manhattan Corp., which had serious merger discussions with the Swiss 
banking concern Credit Suisse and made repeated merger overtures to 
Merrill Lynch &AMP; Co. earlier this year, may be on the hunt again. 
Other possible partners for Chase include Lehman Brothers Holdings 
Inc., Donaldson Lufkin &AMP; Jenrette, and Paine Webber. J.P. Morgan 
&AMP; Co., which is certain to be the subject of renewed merger speculation, 
is much more financially sound than Bankers Trust and has repeatedly 
stated its intention to remain independent. Deutsche's plunge into 
high-stakes investment banking is out of fashion these days. Many 
European and Japanese firms have already retreated from Wall Street 
in the last couple of years, because they found it either too expensive 
or too difficult to break into that highly competitive world. But 
by paying a premium of about $13 for Bankers Trust over its stock 
price on Friday, Deutsche is showing a renewed willingness to flex 
its muscles here. Executives close to the deal said Saturday that 
Frank Newman, Bankers Trust's chief executive, would be made co-chief 
executive of the new investment banking unit created by Deutsche's 
acquisition of his company. It is uncertain how long Newman plans 
to stay on in that role, although executives involved in the merger 
talks dismissed the likelihood that Citigroup's former president, 
James Dimon, would take over that business. Bankers Trust has 20,539 
employees, with 11,399 in the United States and 9,140 overseas. It 
was already considering cutting its work force before this merger 
neared its conclusion, and there will probably be substantial layoffs 
after the merger is announced. Under Newman, Bankers Trust has focused 
its activities on investment banking for small and mid-sized companies 
and junk bond underwriting. It also has a sizable syndicated lending 
business and is trying to bulk up its business as a securities custodian 
and a cash manager. Although more than 40 percent of its revenue has 
come from abroad in recent years, the bank has been scaling back its 
emerging markets activities and its trading operation. The sale, however, 
is the result of Newman's inability to turn the company around quickly 
enough in an era when only a few big companies are seen as dominating 
the investment banking world. Bankers Trust has also been badly damaged 
by recent trading losses that caused certain of the bank's capital 
requirements to fall below acceptable regulatory standards in the 
third quarter. Such losses were exactly the kind of events Newman's 
hiring was supposed to prevent. He came to the bank from a post with 
the Treasury Department and an earlier position with BankAmerica Corp., 
and had the reputation of being a conservative, risk-averse executive. 
Newman's penchant for high-living _ he has spent lavishly on his offices, 
glittering Manhattan soirees and other executive perks _ has alienated 
many at Bankers Trust, and support for him from the bank's board has 
weakened. Some experts said, however, that Newman faced an uphill 
battle trying to remake Bankers Trust. ``When he signed on, he didn't 
have the strongest cards in the deck, and then he got shellacked this 
summer by big trading losses,'' Berry said. Although it is technically 
a commercial bank, Bankers Trust has more of an investment banking 
profile, especially with its recent moves into equities-related businesses. 
The biggest move was to purchase Alex. Brown of Baltimore in a deal 
valued at $1.7 billion. It also bought National Westminster PLC's 
European equities business and the U.S. investment banking boutique 
Wolfensohn &AMP; Co. But Banker's Trust has had a rocky start with 
Alex. Brown, and the Wolfensohn acquisition is regarded by experts 
as something of a bust. Meanwhile, several of Alex. Brown's most senior 
executives left the firm, including the heads of its investment banking 
and asset management operations. ``We went from having a solid business 
that everyone understands to one that has a new surprise every day,'' 
an Alex. Brown executive said, speaking on condition of anonymity. 
In the end, investors also appear to have grown tired of Newman and 
of Bankers Trust's inability to produce better returns. Between December 
1995, when Newman took over, to this month, the company has provided 
an annualized return on equity of about 16 percent, compared with 
about 30 percent for its peers, according to Keefe Bruyette &AMP; 
Woods. And on Wall Street, a sagging stock price usually translates 
into a sale _ whether the company likes it or not. Deutsche will still 
have a lot of work to do. ``The investment banking business appears 
to be attractive because the fees can be huge,'' said Sallie Krawcheck, 
an analyst with Sanford C. Bernstein. ``But the bottom line is that 
there is severe overcapacity. Only a handful of the top firms make 
money on underwriting.'' Bankers Trust's shares rose sharply on Friday, 
climbing $5.25, or 7.3 percent, to $77.25, because of the merger speculation. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>