<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981121.0146 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
It was Saturday night at the Providence-Mount St. Vincent nursing 
home. Marie Swegle, 96, and her friends on the fifth floor were lingering 
at the dinner table in their wheelchairs, watching the news. John 
Glenn had safely returned to Earth. Mrs. Swegle, who a year before 
had learned to walk again after falling and breaking her neck, was 
not overly impressed by the 77-year-old astronaut. Neither was Effie 
Constantine, at 67 a good 15 years younger than anyone else at the 
table but crippled by hydrocephalus. ``It's a waste of money, sending 
him up in space,'' she said. ``Why don't they spend the money to study 
aging on earth?'' One place to start such a study might be at Providence-Mount 
St. Vincent, a five-story building surrounded by gardens at the top 
of a hill overlooking Elliott Bay. The Mount, as those who live there 
call it, is widely regarded to be what many Americans consider an 
impossibility: a good nursing home. As well as the Mount works, though, 
it cannot alter the stark realities of aging that its residents confront 
every day: the spouses, friends and even children outlived; the physical 
limitations; the loss of independence and control. These are men and 
women who survived the Depression; who fought in World War II; who 
worked as farmers, teachers, office managers, bus drivers and engineers; 
who raised families and ran houses; who now need help to go to the 
bathroom. As nursing homes change and adapt under the pressure of 
managed care and Medicaid rules, even the visionary administrator 
behind the Mount, Robert Ogden, says it would be preferable for nursing 
homes to cease to exist _ for people to be able to remain at home 
or in some other setting in their community. And alternatives are 
increasingly available. But meanwhile, with nearly half of all Americans 
who reach 65 expected to spend time in a nursing home, health care 
professionals are looking to the Mount and a handful of places like 
it for answers. Its current administrator, Charlene Boyd, says there 
is no reason the Mount cannot be duplicated. Money is a factor, she 
acknowledged; at about $60,000 a year, the Mount costs about $10,000 
more than the national average. Yet half of its residents depend on 
Medicaid. More important is breaking free of rigid rules and routines 
that assume residents are helpless. But if the Mount is the last community 
for most of its residents, what is possible within a limited budget? 
How good can the end of the road be? The residents of the Mount are 
not the so-called active senior generation, the attractive silver-haired 
people celebrated in the media playing golf and going on cruises. 
The lucky ones among them are those who can walk, with walkers, and 
those who, as the residents put it, ``have all their marbles.'' It 
is easy to lump them together: a group of men and women in wheelchairs, 
a few staring vacantly, others nodding off. Even those who are fully 
aware are often unable, because of impairments, to show by their expressions 
or gestures just how alive they are. Laurie Thode, the recreation 
coordinator, and other staff members take pains to point out each 
individual. That 92-year old, the one moaning ``Oh dear, oh dear,'' 
lived in a sod house in Alaska with her husband during World War II. 
The 81-year-old whose stroke left her struggling to utter a sentence? 
She once was an international toastmistress. The 83-year-old tethered 
to a feeding tube, who on some days doesn't know where he is, happens 
to be a much loved husband and father, who last week sat clutching 
a letter from his son, telling how his seventh-grade son had just 
gone to his first school dance with a girl. Seven years ago, the Mount 
was exactly the sort of place everyone dreaded. ``It was a very traditional 
nursing home _ very institutional, very cold,'' said Ogden, who became 
the administrator in 1990. The Mount's nursing home was opened by 
the Sisters of Providence in 1967, the beginning of a mass construction 
of nursing homes across the country financed by a new federal health 
care program for the poor, Medicaid. For lack of any other model, 
these new institutions, something more than rest homes or old-age 
homes, were patterned after hospitals. With Medicaid guaranteeing 
income, the care of the frail elderly became big business. And the 
dramatic increase in longevity, combined with the transformation in 
society brought by increasing mobility and women going to work, meant 
a growing need for institutional care. ``Nobody ever used to think 
of putting their grandparents in a nursing home,'' said Maureen Gladstone, 
62, a nurse on the fifth floor whose grandmother lived with her family 
when she was growing up. ``She helped raise us. Then when she got 
older, we took care of her.'' In the old Mount, everything revolved 
around the staff members and their schedules. The day shift arrived 
at 6 a.m. and started getting everyone up for breakfast, whether they 
wanted to or not. ``We didn't know any better,'' said Ogden, who is 
now a regional director of long-term care and housing for the Sisters 
of Providence. ``Our definition of care was to protect people to the 
point where they had no freedom, no dignity. We didn't want them to 
fall. We didn't want to be hurt by anything. The best thing we could 
think of to do was to put them away.'' State regulators gave the Mount 
top ratings. That was how things worked in nursing homes, and how 
they still work in many. As speculators and profiteers rushed into 
the business, conditions in the worst nursing homes led to scandals 
that helped shape Americans' fear of nursing homes. The scandals also 
prompted Congress to enact the 1987 Nursing Home Reform Law. Conditions 
slowly began to improve. Some health professionals began to talk about 
a new way of looking at nursing homes, one stressing the quality of 
residents' lives. At the Mount, by then operated by the nonprofit 
Sisters of Providence Health System, Ogden and his assistant, Charlene 
Boyd, who has since succeeded him, began working with a team to carry 
out the new philosophy. Each floor was divided into ``neighborhoods'' 
of about 20 residents each with their own dining room and kitchen. 
Anyone could get a snack or a cup of coffee at any time. White walls 
were painted pastel shades and hung with art. Floors were carpeted. 
Residents were no longer automatically tied down at night in the name 
of protecting them. ``The nurses came unglued,'' Ogden said. ``They 
said the patients might fall out of bed. Some did. We picked them 
up and put them back. They slept better.'' Medical diets calibrated 
down to the last gram of sugar and salt were thrown out or modified. 
``I went back to the docs and said, `Does this really matter?' '' 
Ogden said. ``They said, `No, not if you're 85.' '' Everyone predicted 
disaster when Ogden decided to unlock the 56-bed Alzheimer's ward 
on the fourth floor and mix its residents with everyone else. ``Eighty 
percent of the social workers walked out,'' said one aide, Tamara 
Allen, who vehemently opposed the move but now is so sold on the change 
that she gives speeches about it at conferences. ``We just couldn't 
imagine how it would be.'' That there were problems with the old way, 
she could not deny. In her trademark speech, she describes the caste 
system that still operates in many nursing homes: ``Independent residents 
look down on the residents that need help, and they in turn look down 
on the residents who are confused.'' Maureen Gladstone, the nurse, 
recalled the fears of ``the alerts and non-agitateds'' _ jargon for 
those without dementia. ``I asked them, `What is it about them that 
bothers you?' '' she said. ``They were afraid they'd be that way. 
It's like a mirror.'' But chaos did not erupt. On the contrary, Alzheimer's 
patients became less agitated. When those who seemed likely to wander 
off were fitted with ankle bracelets that would signal when they were 
leaving, and through which door, ``They didn't seem to roam around,'' 
Ms. Gladstone said. ``Just the idea that they could go wherever they 
wanted _ they didn't want to anymore.'' Adjusting to a nursing home 
can be more difficult for those who are not demented. Six months ago 
Ruth Skoog, a former freelance writer for The Seattle Times, had an 
apartment of her own in the assisted-living half of the Mount. She 
was a big wheel, serving on the all-important food committee and the 
residents council and joining all the organized outings. Then back-to-back 
strokes partly paralyzed her and she crossed the hall into the nursing 
home. The other evening Mrs. Skoog was at dinner on the third floor. 
``She's got all her marbles,'' she said, paying the ultimate compliment 
to the woman in the wheelchair beside her, Ann Hasslinger, a former 
marathon runner who, at a youthful 43, has advanced multiple sclerosis. 
The same could not be said of many of the women, in their 80s and 
90s, around them. ``This is appalling,'' Mrs. Skoog said. ``If my 
husband could see me now, he would die. He hated to visit his own 
mother in the nursing home.'' Mrs. Skoog wishes there were more people 
she could talk to, and yet she carries on. She questions aides closely 
about life outside the Mount. Ms. Heath even says her complaining 
is a sign of health. As the former Miss West Seattle went off in her 
wheelchair for her weekly hair appointment, she said, ``One has to 
keep up one's image.'' Nursing homes look different to people depending 
on their age, their health, their stage of life. In their 70s, Dick 
and Esther Gorman made a pledge: No nursing homes. But when the couple 
turned 80 together, they began down a path that would lead them to 
an assisted-living apartment at the Mount _ and the understanding 
that someday they might move across the corridor, to the nursing home. 
In a letter sent to all their friends, Gorman related why they began 
searching for a final home and what they learned. Their health, ``while 
very good was starting to show signs of changes typical of eighty 
year olds,'' he wrote. ``Although we were quite sound organically, 
it had become apparent we were experiencing some memory loss, loss 
of energy, occasional confusion.'' Visiting retirement communities 
and assisted-living facilities, including the Mount, ``we found each 
had its share of quite disabled people and that frequently they would 
be sitting (sometimes sprawled out and/or asleep) in the lobby. This 
was culture shock for us, seeing all these old people.'' They decided 
not to move until they absolutely had to _ but soon they reconsidered. 
Looking at themselves more closely, he wrote, ``we began to see that 
we weren't that far away from being those old people whose presence 
upset us.'' In June 1997 they moved to the Mount. Since then, 18 residents 
the Gormans knew have died. ``There's a sort of unspoken agreement 
among people who are here that mortality is real, but nothing to worry 
about,'' said Gorman, who is president of the assisted-living residents 
council. ``You have to consider that a part of living is deteriorating.'' 
And now that he makes regular visits to the nursing home to visit 
friends, including Mrs. Skoog, he says it no longer holds the horror 
that it once did. ``We're all heading in that direction,'' he said. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>