<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981121.0172 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Lawyers for four police officers charged with brutalizing a Haitian 
immigrant in Brooklyn plan to challenge crucial aspects of the man's 
horrific account, and at least one lawyer is seeking information for 
use in impugning his honesty, court papers indicate. Fifteen months 
after the man, Abner Louima, 31, reported that four officers beat 
him in a police car and that two of them then tortured him with a 
stick in a station house bathroom, the delayed prosecution is finally 
picking up steam in the politically and racially explosive case, and 
the outlines are emerging of sometimes clashing defense strategies. 
The strategies, indicated in a spate of hearings and a barrage of 
briefs filed in U.S. District Court in Brooklyn in recent weeks, also 
include challenging the integrity of the federal investigation and 
efforts by each officer to separate his trial from one or more of 
the others'. That could prove crucial, the defense lawyers say, because 
the use of important evidence may well depend on whether certain defendants 
are tried together or separately. As for the hunt for information 
to challenge Louima's honesty, the court papers show that one defense 
lawyer is demanding the details of a lawsuit in which two men contend 
they were fired by an insurance company to keep them from disclosing 
information about ``fraudulent insurance claims'' filed by Louima. 
Lawyers for Louima said the allegation about bogus claims was false, 
and a lawyer for the company, Country-Wide Insurance, said that ``there 
was nothing to cover up'' and that the men were fired for other reasons. 
Even as the brutality case moves closer to a trial, or trials, the 
prosecution is taking steps to strengthen its case, by continuing 
to seek potential evidence and by adding a charge last week. The new 
charge came nine months after a federal grand jury in Brooklyn indicted 
the four officers on charges of violating Louima's civil rights and 
also indicted a sergeant on charges of trying to cover up Louima's 
alleged beating in the police car. The officers are Justin Volpe, 
Charles Schwarz, Thomas Wiese and Thomas Bruder. The four, who are 
white, are accused of beating Louima in the car after he was arrested 
in a brawl outside a Flatbush nightclub on Aug. 9, 1997. Volpe and 
Schwarz are also accused of torturing him later in a bathroom of the 
70th Precinct station house, where, prosecutors say, Volpe rammed 
a stick into Louima's rectum and then his mouth, causing severe internal 
injuries, while Schwarz held him down. The officers and the sergeant, 
Michael Bellomo, deny all the charges. The new charge, conspiring 
to obstruct justice, accuses Schwarz, Wiese and Bruder of scheming 
to keep Schwarz from being implicated in the alleged bathroom attack. 
Last month, federal agents went back to the 70th Precinct station 
house and retrieved three flashlights from Volpe's sealed locker. 
A second Haitian immigrant, Patrick Antoine _ whom Volpe is also charged 
with beating several blocks from the brawl outside the nightclub _ 
said the officer hit him with a flashlight. The case is not expected 
to go to trial until spring. In the meantime, the four accused officers 
and the sergeant are on an unusual form of modified assignment. Such 
an assignment normally involves an officer's turning in his gun and 
working in administrative or other nonpatrol duties, but in this case 
the five are not being permitted to perform any police work, though 
they continue getting their pay. The defense briefs show that plans 
to challenge crucial specifics of Louima's account will include efforts 
to undermine his account of how many officers beat him in the police 
car, and when, between his arrest and his arrival at the station house. 
Lawyers for Schwarz, Wiese and Bruder say that this is especially 
important for their clients because Louima did not identify them as 
being among his assailants and that, as far as the lawyers can tell 
now, the charges that the three officers participated in the beating 
inside the police car seem to be built on circumstantial evidence 
based on police records of which officers were with Louima at given 
times between his arrest and his arrival at the station house. The 
prosecutors, from the U.S. attorney's office in Brooklyn, have repeatedly 
refused to detail the evidence they plan to use against the officers. 
Defense papers also show that Volpe's lawyer, Marvyn Kornberg _ who 
cited the insurance case _ also plans to raise questions about Louima's 
identification of Volpe as the officer who ``looks like the guy'' 
who assaulted him with the stick in the station house bathroom. Aside 
from arguing in his papers that ``looks like'' is not a positive identification, 
Kornberg indicated he would stress at the trial that before being 
shown the photographs from which Louima selected Volpe, Louima ``described 
his assailant as having `spiked hair,' which description clearly does 
not match or fit'' Volpe. But among the other evidence the prosecution 
is known to have against Volpe is an account by an officer not accused 
of involvement in the reported attack. He reportedly told investigators 
that he saw Volpe escort Louima away from the bathroom area to the 
cell area of the police station, and that Louima's pants were around 
his ankles. Kornberg is expected to counter this with testimony from 
two other officers who have said they saw a different officer put 
Louima in a cell with his pants down. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>