<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981121.0102 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Snapshots from Chile: Shortly after Gen. Augusto Pinochet was arrested 
in London five weeks ago on a Spanish warrant, neighborhood officials 
cut off garbage pickups at the Spanish and British embassies here. 
But a couple of days later cooler heads prevailed and garbage removal 
resumed. _ A portly right-wing senator, declaring his solidarity with 
``the savior of our nation,'' announced that he was going on a hunger 
strike until the general was released. But when legal proceedings 
bogged down in London, he quietly succumbed to his hunger pangs. _ 
Exactly one month after the general's arrest, Walter Riesco, president 
of the Confederation of Production and Commerce, publicly warned that 
if the former dictator is extradited to Spain, ``the situation in 
Chile will once again become unsustainable.'' On the same day, the 
Chilean stock market climbed, contributing to a sustained rally that 
has lifted the market's index more than 20 percent since Pinochet 
was detained. Such touches of whimsy have offered more than welcome 
respites from what may well be the most serious test of Chile's transition 
to democracy since Pinochet left the presidential palace eight years 
ago. They suggest how much Chile has calmed in recent years, after 
decades of inflamed passions stirred first by the chaotic lunge toward 
socialism by the government of President Salvador Allende, followed 
by the deadly coup in 1973 that propelled Pinochet to power and began 
17 years of brutal repression. The general's arrest provoked demonstrations 
by rightist and leftist activists in which eggs and rocks were thrown, 
but these have lost steam with nobody having been killed or seriously 
injured. Some politicians have received death threats. But the police 
and armed forces have remained disciplined for the most part. ``I 
see the country as very, very stable,'' said Ricardo Israel, chairman 
of the political science department at the University of Chile. The 
relative calm presents a contrast to the last few times Chile went 
through crises over issues of the past. In 1991, after the release 
of a government truth commission report documenting the deaths and 
disappearances of more than 2,000 people during the Pinochet years, 
assassins took the lives of three political figures, including a right-wing 
senator. Three years later, soldiers appeared in the streets in a 
partially effective effort to block investigations of the military. 
Now, once again, Pinochet is dominating the news, and the nightly 
broadcasts of emotional interviews with relatives of those who disappeared 
have stirred memories that most Chileans would prefer to forget. Nevertheless, 
commentators have pointed out that such frequent broadcasts of interviews 
highly critical of Pinochet and the army would have been unthinkable 
only a few years ago. Particularly penetrating have been reports about 
Operation Condor, the effort to seize and murder dozens of exiles 
living in Argentina and other countries, for which Pinochet is being 
investigated by a Spanish judge. But perhaps the most striking image 
to emerge from the crisis has been that of Foreign Minister Jose Miguel 
Insulza, a leader of the Socialist Party that was once led by Allende 
and that now governs with the centrist Christian Democrats, calling 
on the British to free the man who once forced him into exile. ``The 
last thing Chile needs is Pinochet as a martyr,'' Insulza said, expressing 
a commonly held notion that if Pinochet were somehow hounded to death 
by his legal problems, the country could still explode. It is a practical, 
political argument that suggests no newfound respect for the general. 
Rather, when Insulza repeats it almost daily, it is a reminder that 
the governing elite now bridge a political divide that was as wide 
as any in Latin America a decade ago. ``We had our own Cold War but 
now there is a consensus in favor of private enterprise and democracy,'' 
said Jorge Schaulsohn Brodsky, a former speaker of the Chamber of 
Deputies and a member of the social democratic Party for Democracy. 
``While we still have a shopping list of issues, out of that shopping 
list we now only disagree on one and we agree on all the rest.'' The 
issue on which Chileans disagree, of course, is still Pinochet, who 
turns 83 on Wednesday and is in poor health. He stepped down as armed 
forces commander eight months ago, but remains a senator for life, 
a position that conveys legal immunity under a constitution he conceived 
as dictator. So he was weighing in on political issues until he was 
arrested. And his constitution will probably continue to grant disproportionate 
influence to two rightist parties and the military for at least several 
more years, even if the constitution is overhauled eventually.. But 
even if the panel of Britain's House of Lords that is considering 
his case allows Pinochet to return to Chile soon, there are already 
signs that he has become a much diminished figure. Several influential 
conservatives have even suggested that the general should make some 
grand gesture upon his return, like an apology for excesses during 
his regime. A few have even endorsed a proposal by the Chilean Catholic 
Church hierarchy to reassemble the government truth commission to 
gather more information on those who disappeared. ``If the general 
comes back, that will be the end of it and he will no longer play 
a political role,'' said Sebastian Pinera, presidential candidate 
of the conservative National Renewal Party. ``But if he doesn't come 
back, he will be a player forever, especially if he dies abroad.'' 
So the crisis is not over. The other day, President Eduardo Frei told 
a business group that the discord since Pinochet's arrest ``shows 
that our reconciliation is incomplete and we must work hard to strengthen 
that process in the future.'' Then he flew off to South Africa to 
start a nine-day global trade mission. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>