<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981121.0125 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
A senior White House official, surveying the events of the past week, 
sighed in relief and quoted Winston Churchill on his experience in 
the Boer War: ``Nothing in life is so exhilarating as to be shot at 
without result.'' Good fortune continued to shine on President Clinton 
last week. Independent counsel Kenneth Starr spent 12 hours before 
the House Judiciary Committee on Thursday and produced no new revelations 
of presidential vice. Democrats on the committee said Starr's most 
newsworthy statement was that he had found no evidence of impeachable 
offenses in the dismissal of White House travel office employees and 
the retrieval of FBI files. And on Friday, Samuel Dash, the independent 
counsel's ethics adviser, resigned, saying that Starr had abused his 
authority by appearing before the House panel to advocate the impeachment 
of the president. The White House firmly believes that Clinton has 
dodged yet another bullet. With new confidence, Clinton aides are 
calling for a rapid end to the impeachment inquiry and to the Monica 
Lewinsky investigation that spawned it. ``Let's wrap it up,'' said 
Paul Begala, a senior White House political counselor. ``The people, 
the Congress and the vast bulk of constitutional scholars all believe 
there are no impeachable offenses here.'' As the week ended, White 
House officials were counting votes and trying to read minds on Capitol 
Hill, looking for a way to short-circuit the impeachment process. 
Top White House aides opened lines of communication to Republicans 
in the House, possibly as a prelude to a negotiated way out of the 
impeachment mess. The optimists in the Clinton camp saw a chance to 
peel away two or three Republicans on the House Judiciary Committee 
to vote against articles of impeachment, bringing a quick end to the 
matter. But even the pessimists at the White House were increasingly 
hopeful of a rapid and favorable exit, believing that they had a decent 
chance of defeating an impeachment resolution on the House floor. 
Starr's appearance before the Judiciary Committee was intended by 
the Republicans to showcase the prosecutor's bill of particulars against 
the president. Instead, the hearing laid bare the deep partisanship 
of the committee and the charged political nature of the impeachment 
inquiry itself. ``What people are going to remember from the hearing 
are the Republican members _ and only the Republican members _ giving 
Ken Starr a standing ovation at the end of his testimony,'' said a 
senior White House adviser. ``The wheels are coming off their wagon, 
meaning the conglomeration of the Office of Independent Counsel and 
the GOP. What they have accomplished is to trade Newt Gingrich for 
Ken Starr as the public face of the Republican Party.'' On another 
front, White House lawyers continued to work on answers to a catalog 
of 81 questions put to Clinton relating to Starr's impeachment report. 
Lawyers have been working on the responses for two weeks, but do not 
expect to submit them to the committee before Tuesday, after Clinton 
returns from a six-day trip to Asia. The president must approve the 
document before it is forwarded to the panel, a White House aide said. 
But a lawyer working on the matter, who insisted on anonymity, said 
the White House was not stonewalling the committee. Some of the questions 
are ``tricky,'' he said, adding that ``there is no strategy to push 
it over to January,'' when a new, more closely divided Congress is 
seated. While the cards continue to fall the president's way, Clinton's 
fate is still largely in the hands of Congress. The White House is 
looking to Rep. Bob Livingston, soon to be speaker of the House, to 
signal his intentions. He said last week that he hoped to have the 
matter resolved by the end of the year _ an intention also expressed 
by Rep. Henry Hyde, chairman of the Judiciary Committee. But Livingston 
said Congress was still awaiting resolution of a new matter raised 
by Starr, the complaint of Kathleen Willey that Clinton made an unwanted 
sexual advance near the Oval Office. The Judiciary Committee voted 
early Friday to issue four subpoenas to witnesses who may have information 
about the incident and about allegations that Ms. Willey was persuaded 
to keep it quiet. With only three working weeks left on the congressional 
calendar this year, leaders in Congress and the White House are looking 
to quickly establish the outline of a deal to end the impeachment 
inquiry. ``A lot depends on what happens over the next few days, whether 
Republicans step up to the plate and seize the moment,'' a White House 
official said. ``It's completely out of our control. We're waiting 
for a signal from Livingston: Does he assert himself overtly or behind 
the scenes to bring some closure to this thing?'' So far there has 
been no direct contact between top White House officials and Livingston, 
but such a meeting could occur as early as this week, a White House 
adviser said. But even that would be just a beginning, a session to 
open a line of communication rather than to engage in negotiation. 
``There are a lot of conversations going on all over town,'' said 
a White House official involved in handling impeachment matters. ``But 
we're still in a temperature-taking mode, not an arm-twisting mode. 
It's a time of great flux and uncertainty.'' 
</TEXT>
</DOC>