<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981121.0038 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Few people in the National Football League will say anything negative 
about coach Ted Marchibroda of the Baltimore Ravens. He is a good 
man, but he is a good man in trouble. The Ravens expected to be better 
than their 3-7 record. Usually when expectations are not met, the 
coach is blamed, and at the end of the season it is highly likely 
that Marchibroda will be dismissed. A league executive with knowledge 
of the situation said that if Marchibroda were removed as coach, he 
would be asked to remain with the Ravens' front office. Ravens owner 
Art Modell would say only that he has ``high regard for Ted Marchibroda.'' 
``I haven't made any decisions yet,'' Modell said. Another year, another 
round of ``Coaches in Trouble.'' Among the others are: PETE CARROLL, 
PATRIOTS _ Until the team's move to Hartford was announced, the talk 
of Boston was Carroll's response to a reporter who had aggressively 
challenged Carroll to explain the Patriots' blowout loss to Atlanta. 
When Carroll's explanations fell short, the reporter pressed harder 
and Carroll appeared passive. Stories in the news media the next day 
portrayed Carroll as soft because he did not tell off the reporter. 
Carroll is not a typical professional head coach; he is not a control 
freak who has his players, and the media, terrified of him. That's 
to his credit. But he appears to be losing his team, which is a disappointing 
5-5 and in fourth place in the American Football Conference East Division. 
In 1994, when Carroll was the coach of the Jets, one week the team 
was 6-5 and playing Miami for first place. Then, in the blink of an 
eye, Carroll's defense was burned by Dan Marino's fake spike and subsequent 
touchdown pass. After that, the Jets collapsed, losing their last 
5 games and finishing with 10 losses. There were accusations, some 
from Jets players, that the team had quit on Carroll. Now, those same 
accusations are being made in New England. After a playoff loss to 
Pittsburgh last year, Patriots defensive end Willie McGinest cursed 
at Carroll in front of the entire team. This season, players say privately 
that Carroll's relaxed attitude leads to players' taking their time 
coming back from injuries and sloppy play on the field. At first glance, 
Carroll is not a candidate to be in trouble because he has three years 
remaining on a contract that pays him some $1 million a season. But 
if the Patriots don't make the playoffs, he could get a quick hook. 
BRUCE COSLET, BENGALS _ The last several years Coslet teams have been 
cold in the first half of the season and hot in the second. Not this 
year. The Bengals have just two victories, and recently quarterback 
Neil O'Donnell was benched for Paul Justin. If Coslet is not dismissed, 
it will be a small miracle. JUNE JONES, CHARGERS _ When Kevin Gilbride 
was dismissed earlier this season, Jones was seen as someone who would 
keep the seat warm until another coach was hired. That is, unless 
Jones turned around the team _ and rookie quarterback Ryan Leaf. Neither 
has happened. NORV TURNER, REDSKINS _ Washington may be the most disappointing 
team in the league. Turner's job could be saved if the owner, John 
Kent Cooke, can keep the team, which is for sale. Cooke is a big fan, 
but even he must be concerned that Turner has been completely ineffective 
in motivating his players and in four years has not made the playoffs. 
His career record is 28-45-1. RAY RHODES, EAGLES _ Despite his 2-8 
record, Rhodes is still regarded by many in the league as a top coach. 
He has mainly faltered in his drafts. When he leaves the Eagles after 
this season, he will most likely receive offers, possibly as a defensive 
coordinator in Baltimore or Cleveland. Third-Grade Trash-Talker An 
NFL owner called the final minutes of the Denver-Kansas City game 
one of the most embarrassing moments in professional football history. 
The night may not have been quite that bad, but it was bad enough. 
Still, it gave fans a realistic portrait of the true viciousness of 
professional football. Usually, punching, kicking and other cheap 
shots happen underneath the pileup, unseen by television cameras and 
the naked eye. Not in this game. Millions watching ``Monday Night 
Football'' saw the Chiefs' Derrick Thomas elbow quarterback Bubby 
Brister in the head and linebacker Wayne Simmons throw an uppercut 
to the jaw of tight end Shannon Sharpe. Sharpe, in retaliation, later 
dived onto the back of Simmons' legs. The Chiefs suspended Thomas 
for one game _ which amounts to a $35,000 fine _ Simmons was kicked 
off the team and Sharpe was fined $10,000 by the league, a fine he 
is appealing. Sharpe is the one who started all the nonsense. He is 
the most skilled trash-talker in the league and has always made a 
target of Thomas, who usually keeps his cool. Thomas is not the only 
one Sharpe can set off. The muscular tight end has long known how 
to anger people with his words. ``This started at a very young age,'' 
Sharpe said of his trash-talking. ``I was in speech class and the 
teacher always told us that if somebody gets to a word and they can't 
pronounce it, you let them sound it out. ``So I'll never forget, the 
guy got to a word, and she says, `Johnny, it sounds like ... it sounds 
like ...' I said, `It sounds like Johnny can't read.' That was the 
beginning. From the third grade on, I knew I had the ability to make 
people upset.'' Sharpe is a Pro Bowl tight end, and a world champion 
agitator. Extra Points Maybe Tennessee Coach Jeff Fisher should start 
getting serious consideration for coach of the year. His Oilers are 
6-4 over all and 5-1 in the American Football Conference's Central 
Division and the team has not really had a home for two years. ``We've 
been through an awful lot the last couple of years,'' he said. ``Next 
year when we move into the new stadium here in Nashville, we will 
have played in our fourth home venue in four years. The travel and 
all the things associated with the move and the relocation, distractions, 
have been something that I don't wish on anybody.'' 
</TEXT>
</DOC>