<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981121.0094 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
It was Saturday night at the Providence-Mount St. Vincent nursing 
home. Marie Swegle, 96, and her friends on the fifth floor were lingering 
at the dinner table in their wheelchairs, watching the news. John 
Glenn had safely returned to Earth. Mrs. Swegle, who a year before 
had learned to walk again after falling and breaking her neck, was 
not overly impressed by the 77-year-old astronaut. Neither was Effie 
Constantine, at 67 a good 15 years younger than anyone else at the 
table but crippled by hydrocephalus. ``It's a waste of money, sending 
him up in space,'' she said. ``Why don't they spend the money to study 
aging on earth?'' One place to start such a study might be at Providence-Mount 
St. Vincent, a five-story building surrounded by gardens at the top 
of a hill overlooking Elliott Bay. The Mount, as those who live there 
call it, is widely regarded to be what many Americans consider an 
impossibility: a good nursing home. That is to say, in an industry 
freighted with the dread of old age, disability and loneliness, and 
periodically tainted by scandal and abuse, the Mount has found ways 
to be a home to people who can no longer care for themselves, to provide 
a sense of community in a place where no one wants to be, to be a 
community that is more about living than about dying. The Mount is 
a place where Mrs. Swegle finds life sweet enough that she talks about 
wanting to make it to 100, where her friend down the hall, Vivian 
Grenfell, 83, who has a painful bone disease, looks forward to Fridays 
because that is when staff members help her put on her bathing suit 
and take her to a neighborhood pool so they can help her move her 
arms and legs in the water. Swimming is making her stronger. Mrs. 
Grenfell, a retired dressmaker, belongs to a weekly ladies' luncheon 
group at the Mount, serves on the ethics committee and writes a column 
for its newspaper. Things were different at her first nursing home, 
she said: ``You went in your room, you went in your bed. You didn't 
do much of anything.'' As well as the Mount works, though, it cannot 
alter the stark realities of aging that its residents confront every 
day: the spouses, friends and even children outlivedl; the physical 
limitations; the loss of independence and control. These are men and 
women who survived the Depression; who fought in World War II; who 
worked as farmers, teachers, office managers, bus drivers and engineers; 
who raised families and ran houses; who now need help to go to the 
bathroom. Each floor of the Mount is divided in half, one side nursing 
home, the other assisted-living apartments for less-dependent residents. 
While some people come here, get well and return home, for most the 
Mount is the last address. ``It's the end of the road,'' said 84-year-old 
Ruth Skoog, who grew up, graduated from high school, got married and 
raised a family in West Seattle at the bottom of the hill, and now, 
after two strokes, has arrived in Room 317 at the top. The nursing 
home's population of 215 men and women is similar to that of most 
nursing homes: the sickest and most severely disabled elderly. The 
average age is 88. Eighty percent of the residents suffer from some 
degree of dementia. When you are at the Mount, most of what staff 
members do day in and day out hardly seems extraordinary. The aides, 
nurses and social workers keep the residents clean and fed, take time 
to talk and to listen, and treat everyone _ even the most demented 
_ with respect and dignity. They enliven the atmosphere with the stuff 
of ordinary life: plants, pets, pictures on the wall, visits from 
children. This being Seattle, there is a coffee bar. The old enjoy 
a cup of latte, too. ``It's not rocket science,'' said Kevin Bail, 
a social worker who oversees the fifth floor. ``It's basic stuff.'' 
As nursing homes change and adapt under the pressure of managed care 
and Medicaid rules, even the visionary administrator behind the Mount, 
Robert Ogden, says it would be preferable for nursing homes to cease 
to exist _ for people to be able to remain at home or in some other 
setting in their community. And alternatives are increasingly available. 
But meanwhile, with nearly half of all Americans who reach 65 expected 
to spend time in a nursing home, health care professionals are looking 
to the Mount and a handful of places like it for answers. Its current 
administrator, Charlene Boyd, says there is no reason the Mount cannot 
be duplicated. Money is a factor, she acknowledged; at about $60,000 
a year, the Mount costs about $10,000 more than the national average. 
Yet half of its residents depend on Medicaid. More important is breaking 
free of rigid rules and routines that assume residents are helpless. 
But if the Mount is the last community for most of its residents, 
what is possible within a limited budget? How good can the end of 
the road be? The Condition: Aging Residents Live with Pain and Loss 
``I've got a dilapidating disease,'' Vivian Grenfell's roommate, Effie 
Constantine, was explaining to a visitor. Mrs. Grenfell corrected 
her: ``You mean debilitating.'' ``Right, debilitating _ that sounds 
better,'' Mrs. Constantine said. ``But I feel dilapidated.'' They 
are all, in one way or another, debilitated and dilapidated, cut down 
by strokes, heart disease, Parkinson's, arthritis, osteoporosis, cancer, 
dementia and the sheer advance of time, dependent on Digoxin, Darvocet, 
Trazodone, Paxil, Tylenol and for calcium, nearly all of them, Tums. 
This is the condition that awaits anyone who lives long enough. And 
with the rapid growth in the 85-and-over population, it is a condition 
that increasing numbers of people will know. More than 1.5 million 
Americans live in nursing homes now. Frances Mara was talking recently 
about how her father died of influenza in 1918, before he reached 
40. Mrs. Mara, who spends her days alone in her room watching CNN, 
got her annual flu shot a few weeks ago. She is 84. Though her hands 
are so bent and stiff from arthritis that she can no longer do the 
sewing she once enjoyed, a condition that no doubt contributes to 
her depression, Mrs. Mara never fails to vote, even if she needs help 
holding the pen to mark her absentee ballot. Voter turnout is high 
at the Mount. But these survivors, many of them stoical in the face 
of enormous pain and loss, win no honor from a society that promotes 
longevity but denies death and shuns its emissaries, the frail elderly. 
``I see people back away from them when we go on trips,'' said Laurie 
Thode, a recreational coordinator. They are not the so-called active 
senior generation, the attractive silver-haired people celebrated 
in the media playing golf and going on cruises. The lucky ones among 
them are those who can walk, with walkers, and those who, as the residents 
put it, ``have all their marbles.'' It is easy to lump them together: 
a group of men and women in wheelchairs, a few staring vacantly, others 
nodding off. Even those who are fully aware are often unable, because 
of impairments, to show by their expressions or gestures just how 
alive they are. Ms. Thode and other staff members take pains to point 
out each individual. That 92-year old, the one moaning, ``oh dear, 
oh dear,'' lived in a sod house in Alaska with her husband during 
World War II. The 81-year-old whose stroke left her struggling to 
utter a sentence? She once was an international toastmistress. The 
83-year-old tethered to a feeding tube, who on some days doesn't know 
where he is, happens to be a much-loved husband and father, who last 
week sat clutching a letter from his son, telling how his seventh-grade 
son had just gone to his first school dance with a girl. ``People 
ask me, how do you do this work day in and day out?'' said Susan Scully, 
the social worker on the second floor. She tells them she enjoys the 
residents, and she means it _ speaking as a social worker. ``Things 
would be different,'' she said, ``if they were my parents.'' The Approach: 
Respect, Dignity Guide Care at the Mount Monday morning: The weekly 
meeting of the third-floor residents was in session in the bird room, 
a cozy lounge with plush carpeting and big windows and an aviary. 
Karla Heath, the registered nurse who oversees the floor, wanted to 
know if anyone had a complaint. How were the meals? Were they getting 
up in the morning when they wanted? What about the activities? The 
finches were chirping away. The 11 people present _ about a fourth 
of the floor _ were mostly quiet, as usual. Rose Wilson, 81, did not 
breathe a word about the third-floor cat, Kit, who had singled out 
her bed for his afternoon naps; Mrs. Wilson hates cats. It is not 
just that the residents are mostly pleased with the Mount, Ms. Heath 
would explain later. Most have already spent their savings to pay 
for their care, and are on Medicaid; those who are not will be in 
a matter of months. There is an underlying fear that if they complain, 
they might lose the last piece of security they have in the world: 
their beds here. Some residents have come from other nursing homes, 
where they learned what it was like to wait 30 minutes or more for 
an aide to respond to a call button for a bathroom emergency. (At 
the Mount, aides must respond within three minutes.) ``I just think 
they are very aware that they are dependent on others,'' Ms. Heath 
said. Pressing on, Ms. Heath asked the group, ``What about the food? 
Are you getting what you want? It's OK to ask for something different 
for breakfast.'' Alice Berg, 90, who used to serve coffee and snacks 
on the state ferry to Vashon Island, volunteered that she had requested 
toast and orange juice that very morning. For Mrs. Berg, who daily 
proclaims her delight in every aspect of the Mount, it was an assertive 
step forward. Lois Boppell, 87, who was born with cerebral palsy and 
had a job sorting bolts for Boeing, managed to get out, in her slurred 
speech, that she would like more fruit. Lillian Reeder, 85, a retired 
elementary teacher with a bad heart, also had a request: ``I would 
like more chopped up turkey, chicken and beef. It's easier to swallow.'' 
Consider it done, Ms. Heath assured them. She ended the meeting with 
a pep talk: ``Everyone's going to go out there and speak up more for 
what they want, right?'' Seven years ago, the Mount was exactly the 
sort of place everyone dreaded. ``It was a very traditional nursing 
home _ very institutional, very cold,'' said Ogden, who became the 
administrator in 1990. The Mount's nursing home was opened by the 
Sisters of Providence in 1967, the beginning of a mass construction 
of nursing homes across the country financed by a new federal health 
care program for the poor, Medicaid. For lack of any other model, 
these new institutions, something more than rest homes or old-age 
homes, were patterned after hospitals. With Medicaid guaranteeing 
income, the care of the frail elderly became big business. And the 
dramatic increase in longevity, combined with the transformation in 
society brought by increasing mobility and women going to work, meant 
a growing need for institutional care. ``Nobody ever used to think 
of putting their grandparents in a nursing home,'' said Maureen Gladstone, 
62, a nurse on the fifth floor whose grandmother lived with her family 
when she was growing up. ``She helped raise us. Then when she got 
older, we took care of her.'' In the old Mount, everything revolved 
around the staff members and their schedules. The day shift arrived 
at 6 a.m. and started getting everyone up for breakfast, whether they 
wanted to or not. ``We didn't know any better,'' said Ogden, who is 
now a regional director of long-term care and housing for the Sisters 
of Providence. ``Our definition of care was to protect people to the 
point where they had no freedom, no dignity. We didn't want them to 
fall. We didn't want to be hurt by anything. The best thing we could 
think of to do was to put them away.'' State regulators gave the Mount 
top ratings. That was how things worked in nursing homes, and how 
they still work in many. As speculators and profiteers rushed into 
the business, conditions in the worst nursing homes led to scandals 
that helped shape Americans' fear of nursing homes. The scandals also 
prompted Congress to enact the 1987 Nursing Home Reform Law. Conditions 
slowly began to improve. Some health professionals began to talk about 
a new way of looking at nursing homes, one stressing the quality of 
residents' lives. At the Mount, by then operated by the nonprofit 
Sisters of Providence Health System, Ogden and his assistant, Charlene 
Boyd, who has since succeeded him, began working with a team to carry 
out the new philosophy. Each floor was divided into ``neighborhoods'' 
of about 20 residents each with their own dining room and kitchen. 
Anyone could get a snack or a cup of coffee at any time. White walls 
were painted pastel shades and hung with art. Floors were carpeted. 
Residents were no longer automatically tied down at night in the name 
of protecting them. ``The nurses came unglued,'' Ogden said. ``They 
said the patients might fall out of bed. Some did. We picked them 
up and put them back. They slept better.'' Medical diets calibrated 
down to the last gram of sugar and salt were thrown out or modified. 
``I went back to the docs and said, `Does this really matter?' '' 
Ogden said. ``They said, `No, not if you're 85.' '' Supervisory positions 
were eliminated and the money saved went to hire more aides. For all 
the innovations, for all the plants, pets and talk of vision, the 
success of the Mount comes down to the aides. They are the ones who 
spend the most time with the residents, bathing, dressing, feeding, 
changing and talking with them. At night, Ruth Skoog turns to her 
aide, Gloria Alderman, for comfort. ``I say, `Gloria sing me a song; 
I don't feel so good,' '' Mrs. Skoog said the other evening as Ms. 
Alderman, who is a gospel singer, fed her a dinner of pureed food, 
a necessity because of Mrs. Skoog's bowel problems. In another nursing 
home, Mrs. Skoog might be classified as a ``feeder.'' To Ms. Alderman 
and the other aides, Mrs. Skoog is a beauty queen; they all know she 
won the Miss West Seattle crown when she was 18, and they see to it 
that her nails are manicured and her lipstick is fresh. Aides at most 
nursing homes are paid little more than minimum wage. The Mount pays 
about $10 an hour. But pay is just part of the difference. Aides are 
trained in what the Mount calls ``resident-directed care'' _ what 
it means, how to make it work, why the Mount believes in it. Every 
aide is part of a team that cares for a specific group of residents. 
Other staff members, including nurses and social workers, help them 
when they need help. And aides are recognized throughout the year 
with gifts, special days and opportunities to attend professional 
conferences. There is turnover _ about 30 percent a year _ but the 
average nursing home has 100 percent. Many of the aides are from Africa 
and Southeast Asia. They all comment that they never saw a nursing 
home until they came to America. ``We don't have these kinds of facilities,'' 
said Tesfaye Begosa, who is from Ethiopia. ``Whenever your parents 
get old, you just take them to your place.'' The Unconventional: Mixing 
Residents To End Hierarchy Everyone predicted disaster when Ogden 
decided to unlock the 56-bed Alzheimer's ward on the fourth floor 
and mix its residents with everyone else. ``Eighty percent of the 
social workers walked out,'' said one aide, Tamara Allen, who vehemently 
opposed the move but now is so sold on the change that she gives speeches 
about it at conferences. ``We just couldn't imagine how it would be.'' 
That there were problems with the old way, she could not deny. In 
her trademark speech, she describes the caste system that still operates 
in many nursing homes: ``Independent residents look down on the residents 
that need help, and they in turn look down on the residents who are 
confused.'' Maureen Gladstone, the nurse, recalled the fears of ``the 
alerts and non-agitateds'' _ jargon for those without dementia. ``I 
asked them, `What is it about them that bothers you?' '' she said. 
``They were afraid they'd be that way. It's like a mirror.'' But chaos 
did not erupt. On the contrary, Alzheimer's patients became less agitated. 
When those who seemed likely to wander off were fitted with ankle 
bracelets that would signal when they were leaving, and through which 
door. ``They didn't seem to roam around,'' Ms. Gladstone said. ``Just 
the idea that they could go wherever they wanted _ they didn't want 
to anymore.'' Unlocking the fourth floor was an effort to eliminate 
the hierarchy that defines most nursing homes, where floors are organized 
by disability and impairment, forcing frail elderly people who have 
already given up their homes and their communities to move again as 
they decline. ``Everyone was terrified of moving to the fourth floor,'' 
Ms. Boyd said. A Dilemma: Balancing a Range Of People's Needs Vivian 
Grenfell and Marie Swegle were having dinner with five other residents 
at their regular table on the fifth floor. The conversation turned 
to a recent outing to the new Nordstrom's downtown. ``I am not exaggerating, 
it's the most beautiful store I've ever seen,'' said Mrs. Swegle, 
who taught elementary school before she was married, attends mass 
daily in the Mount's chapel and manages to look regal in her neck 
brace and collar, accessorized with a string of pearls. ``I saw a 
hat I liked. It had a turned-up brim, and a little bit of red in it. 
My better sense told me I was getting too old to buy it.'' Another 
woman at the table, who has Alzheimer's, was focused on the corn on 
her plate. ``I just love corn,'' she repeated several times, with 
a radiant smile. ``She fits in beautifully,'' Effie Constantine had 
said earlier of her tablemate. At another table, a woman with dementia 
whose tendency toward foul language has made her something of an outcast 
was crying out: ``Help, I can't walk! Don't undress me! Help!'' ``I 
feel I'm very inadequate,'' she said imploringly to Tamara Allen, 
the aide. Mrs. Allen put her arm around her and stroked her hair. 
``You're not,'' she said. ``You're fine.'' Listened to night after 
night, the ravings of the unmoored have become the background noise 
of the fifth floor, like the television that is sometimes left on. 
Much of it, fortunately, is lost on those residents who are hard of 
hearing. ``I think it's a good thing they mixed in the Alzheimer's 
people,'' Mrs. Swegle volunteered. She recalled a visit she made to 
the old locked fourth floor. ``I went up to see a friend of mine,'' 
she said. ``It frightened me. One woman came at me with a stick. It's 
because they had been shut up together for so long. I think it got 
on their nerves. It's better to be out. ``One of my neighbors came 
down with Alzheimer's,'' she added. ``She's here. I see her every 
once in a while. She makes very sensible remarks.'' Things have been 
more difficult on the third floor, where 87-year-old Maxine Christian's 
dementia causes her to moan and cry out continually. ``What am I going 
to do about Maxine?'' Ms. Heath said the other day in exasperation. 
She had tried changes in medication, lab tests that might detect a 
physical problem, music, a rocking chair, art projects with a recreational 
coordinator, Niki Hopkins. Ms. Heath had spent hours trying to comfort 
Mrs. Christian. ``What's wrong, Maxine?'' she had asked her, over 
and over. Mrs. Christian, a former artist who can no longer paint, 
and whose son died of leukemia at age 45, never had an answer. Ms. 
Heath said she wished she could give Mrs. Christian a private room, 
in part to spare her roommate, but private rooms are few and hard 
to come by at the Mount. In an ideal world, she said, everyone in 
a nursing home could have a private room. Now Ms. Heath had summoned 
Mrs. Christian's husband of 60 years, Ed. Seated at a table in her 
office, the 86-year-old retired electrician wept as she told him she 
had to think of the 40 other residents on the floor. ``She's disrupting 
the community,'' she said. When it comes to Mrs. Christian, apparently, 
the residents are not shy about complaining. ``They're all saying, 
`Can't you do something?' '' ``Is she the worst one you've ever had?'' 
he asked. The answer was no. Ms. Heath, her own eyes watering, put 
her hand on his arm. A week or so later, with still no improvement, 
Ms. Heath said one solution, which she was not crazy about, might 
be to increase Mrs. Christian's anti-anxiety medication. She did not 
want to consider the other alternative, discharging Mrs. Christian 
and leaving her husband to find another nursing home. ``We're just 
going to have to make it work,'' she said. The Adjustment: A New Life, 
With Ups and Downs Adjusting to a nursing home can be more difficult 
for those who are not demented. Six months ago Ruth Skoog, a former 
freelance writer for The Seattle Times, had an apartment of her own 
in the assisted-living half of the Mount. She was a big wheel, serving 
on the all-important food committee and the residents council and 
joining all the organized outings. Then back-to-back strokes partly 
paralyzed her and she crossed the hall into the nursing home. The 
other evening Mrs. Skoog was at dinner on the third floor. ``She's 
got all her marbles,'' she said, paying the ultimate compliment to 
the woman in the wheelchair beside her, Ann Hasslinger, a former marathon 
runner who, at a youthful 43, has advanced multiple sclerosis. The 
same could not be said of many of the women, in their 80s and 90s, 
around them. ``This is appalling,'' Mrs. Skoog said. ``If my husband 
could see me now, he would die. He hated to visit his own mother in 
the nursing home.'' Mrs. Skoog wishes there were more people she could 
talk to, and yet she carries on. She questions aides closely about 
life outside the Mount. Ms. Heath even says her complaining is a sign 
of health. As the former Miss West Seattle went off in her wheelchair 
for her weekly hair appointment, she said, ``One has to keep up one's 
image.'' Nursing homes look different to people depending on their 
age, their health, their stage of life. In their 70s, Dick and Esther 
Gorman made a pledge: No nursing homes. But when the couple turned 
80 together, they began down a path that would lead them to an assisted-living 
apartment at the Mount _ and the understanding that someday they might 
move across the corridor, to the nursing home. In a letter sent to 
all their friends, Gorman related why they began searching for a final 
home and what they learned. Their health, ``while very good was starting 
to show signs of changes typical of 80-year olds,'' he wrote. ``Although 
we were quite sound organically, it had become apparent we were experiencing 
some memory loss, loss of energy, occasional confusion.'' Visiting 
retirement communities and assisted-living facilities, including the 
Mount, ``we found each had its share of quite disabled people and 
that frequently they would be sitting (sometimes sprawled out and/or 
asleep) in the lobby. This was culture shock for us, seeing all these 
old people.'' They decided not to move until they absolutely had to 
_ but soon they reconsidered. Looking at themselves more closely, 
he wrote, ``we began to see that we weren't that far away from being 
those old people whose presence upset us.'' In June 1997 they moved 
to the Mount. Since then, 18 residents the Gormans knew have died. 
``There's a sort of unspoken agreement among people who are here that 
mortality is real, but nothing to worry about,'' said Gorman, who 
is president of the assisted-living residents council. ``You have 
to consider that a part of living is deteriorating.'' And now that 
he makes regular visits to the nursing home to visit friends, including 
Mrs. Skoog, he says it no longer holds the horror that it once did. 
``We're all heading in that direction,'' he said. The death notices 
go up in the corridors every few days, it seems. In the first week 
of November, four residents died. The last, 91-year-old Mildred Burke, 
was the day's featured obituary in The Seattle Times. Ms. Burke had 
helped develop smaller hearing aids and voice boxes, had been a crack 
swimmer, sailor and skier, and had volunteered her time to visit hundreds 
of people in nursing homes before entering one herself. But death 
is not what people at the Mount fear most. For all the fears that 
Americans have of nursing homes, like soldiers in battle the aged 
fear a crippling disability more than death. They are way past American 
society's illusion that youth is eternal. ``Am I going to be bedridden?'' 
said Vivian Grenfell, who hopes her weekly sessions in a pool will 
help ward off that day. ``Is that the next step?'' Soren Dahl, 85, 
says he considers himself lucky to have landed the bed by the window 
in Room 563. He has a spectacular view of Puget Sound, downtown Seattle 
and, beyond, the mountains. Dahl spends hours at the window, tracking 
the planes, the ferries, the lights at night. He invites visitors 
to sit and watch the world with him. How did he get the room with 
the view? The previous occupant, Dahl said matter-of-factly, died. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>