<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981121.0049 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Don't gasp, but bureaucrats are rolling out the welcome mats at some 
of the nation's welfare offices again. They are beckoning the working 
poor and courting the thousands of single mothers abandoning the welfare 
rolls. And the message to those struggling to survive without government 
checks? ``Don't forget to apply for Medicaid and food stamps!'' This 
touting of public charity may seem startling, even contradictory, 
at a time when government officials are pushing work, not welfare. 
But food stamps and Medicaid are considered vital entitlements that 
keep working people off welfare and the newly employed from slipping 
back on. And when federal officials noticed a surprising dip in the 
number of food stamp recipients earlier this year, they prodded states 
to act. In a flurry of recent memos, federal officials told states 
to conduct ``aggressive outreach'' and regional officers to crack 
down on wayward localities. The fear is that local governments may 
be blocking access to food stamps and Medicaid as they persuade people 
to give up the dole, snatching a valuable crutch from welfare mothers 
hobbling toward self-reliance. New York City, for instance, drew intense 
scrutiny earlier this month with its practice of delaying Medicaid 
and food stamp applications until a second visit to the welfare office. 
(Federal law requires them to be supplied without delay.) But officials 
in some states are also wringing their hands over computers that sometimes 
improperly terminate food stamps and Medicaid benefits. And federal 
officials want to clear the clouds of confusion in poor communities 
where some believe that ending old-style welfare means an end to all 
government assistance. Already, the federal government's urgings _ 
coupled with local concerns for the poor _ have persuaded some states 
to do the unthinkable: vigorously hawk public aid. Maryland, where 
colorful brochures about Medicaid and food stamps are stacked in its 
welfare waiting rooms, now plans to mail that information to the 2,500 
single mothers who leave the welfare rolls each month. South Dakota 
has sent hundreds of letters to food stamp recipients to make sure 
they know about Medicaid. And in Wisconsin, which has stationed Medicaid 
and food stamp workers in some hospitals, Milwaukee is considering 
revamping its application process altogether. Instead of meeting first 
with workers who discourage applications for welfare, clients in Milwaukee 
may soon stop first at the desks of officials who will discuss their 
rights to food stamps and Medicaid, a shift sought by advocates for 
the poor. ``We're learning that you need to let people know they're 
eligible,'' said Jean Rogers, an administrator at Wisconsin's Department 
of Workforce Development. ``Both of these issues speak to being able 
to hold a job,'' she said. ``If you're sick, you can't hold down a 
job. If you're hungry the same applies.'' But not everyone has joined 
the rush to embrace food stamps, which are financed entirely by the 
federal government, and Medicaid, which is partly financed by the 
federal government. Some local officials are still ambivalent, particularly 
about pushing food stamps, a benefit tainted, to some, by welfare's 
sour smell of failure. Federal officials have taken pains to distinguish 
between the two. By law, municipalities can discourage people from 
applying for welfare. Food stamps and Medicaid, however, are still 
federal entitlements and applications must be offered without delay. 
But for some officials, the dividing line is still blurry. Texas, 
for instance, gives awards to welfare offices that discourage the 
largest numbers of people from applying for welfare and food stamps. 
(State officials say they are now reconsidering the reward for food 
stamps.) And in New York City, where applications are generally offered 
only on a second visit, officials protest that offering easier access 
to food stamps and Medicaid would damage their efforts to destroy 
the culture of dependency in poor neighborhoods. ``Some states have 
not bought in at a philosophical level that they should make sure 
people get food stamps and Medicaid,'' said Liz Schott, an analyst 
at the Center on Budget and Policy Priorities, a nonprofit research 
group in Washington. For the most part, it's not intentional,'' said 
Ms. Schott, who has studied the issue. ``It's not that they don't 
want people to get food stamps or Medicaid. But this zeal to reduce 
the welfare caseloads hasn't been separated from food stamps and Medicaid.'' 
Such concerns bubbled up earlier this year when advocates for the 
poor began noticing that the number of food stamp recipients had fallen 
by 25 percent since 1996, the year the new welfare law was signed, 
a decline that federal officials say cannot be explained by the improved 
economy. (Comparable Medicaid statistics are not yet available. In 
New York, declines in Medicaid and food stamps have been similar.) 
At first, some officials thought people were finding jobs and no longer 
needed food stamps, said Julie Paradis, an undersecretary at the Department 
of Agriculture. But a closer look at the statistics _ and conversations 
with advocates for the poor _ convinced federal officials that many 
people were simply struggling without benefits, she said. Most local 
officials now believe the downward trend must be slowed, she added. 
Those officials are now reaching out to applicants who are confused 
by the new law or were deterred by overzealous welfare workers, and 
to applicants and to those who are simply too ashamed to admit they 
still need help after finding low-wage work. Hoping to attract people 
too proud to apply for Medicaid because they associate it with the 
stigma of welfare, South Dakota even took the word ``Medicaid'' off 
the covers of its promotional brochures, replacing it with the words 
``medical help.'' ``I'm really heartened by their commitment,'' said 
Ms. Paradis. ``They really view the programs as something that should 
be available to families.'' 
</TEXT>
</DOC>