<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981121.0163 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
A 27-yard field goal by Mike Murawczyk gave an outplayed Yale team 
a 9-7 victory over Harvard Saturday. The field goal came after Yale's 
Jeff Hockenbrock recovered a fumble by Rich Linden on the Crimson 
15-yard line with 3 minutes 4 seconds left to play. Linden had been 
hit hard by Ben Blake while running for a first down. The Bulldogs 
finished with a 6-4 record, 5-2 in the Ivy League, while Harvard is 
4-6, 3-4. Yale did not score until just 5:33 remained in the game, 
on a 9-yard pass from Joe Walland to Derek Bentley. The extra-point 
attempt failed, and Harvard still led by 7-6. The game's first score 
came in the 10th minute of the third quarter, capping a 71-yard Harvard 
drive. Linden, the Crimson quarterback, pushed ahead for the goal 
on third down from the six-inch line and just made the end zone. Then 
Mike Giampaolo kicked the extra point for a 7-0 lead. The key plays 
in the drive were runs by the backup tailback Damon Jones and a pass 
from Linden to tight end Chris Eitzmann that went 16 yards to the 
Elis' two. Harvard on its next possession could not score from the 
Yale two, and then the Crimson missed a short field goal on fourth 
down. The first half was scoreless, Harvard failing to exploit its 
few scoring opportunities while Yale had none. After two periods the 
Crimson had outgained the Bulldogs 188 yards to 63, with nine first 
downs to three for Yale. Harvard's defense deserved credit for holding 
down a Yale offense that had averaged 386 yards per game and 21.9 
points. An erratic and potent crosswind hampered passing and punting. 
Deep passes were problematical while punts went anywhere from 19 to 
53 yards. There were 13 punts in the first half, seven by Harvard. 
Yale's appearance here as a favorite, after winning its last two games, 
marked a swift recovery for the fortunes of the Bulldogs in the Ivy 
League. Last season, and the one before, Yale had finished last in 
the standings and had lost 13 straight league games as this campaign 
began. The Bulldogs' last winning season had come in 1991 and Yale 
had not been in the championship picture since 1989. Last year's record 
was 1-9, and it was 2-8 the year before that. Jack Siedlecki, the 
coach who came to Yale from Amherst last year, was thus repeating 
his history. At both Amherst and Worcester Tech before that, and now 
Yale, Siedlecki had quickly turned losing programs into winning ones. 
Meanwhile, Harvard's season had fallen short of expectations. Last 
year's Crimson squad swept through the Ivy League unbeaten and this 
season 14 starters returned. But Harvard was stunned by Columbia, 
24-0, in its opener and then lost its next two games. A modest winning 
streak of three was followed by two more defeats and a 3-3 Ivy mark. 
Both Harvard and Yale had beaten Princeton this season, so this match 
was for the mythical Big Three championship. Early in the season, 
Chris Menick, Harvard's star tailback who gained 1,267 yards rushing 
as a sophomore last season for an all-time school record, was injured, 
and a sprained left ankle kept him out of two games. But Menick started 
Saturday against Yale. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>