<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981121.0099 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
As judges in Britain deliberate the fate of the one-time Chilean dictator, 
Gen. Augusto Pinochet, the rarefied world of international law has 
been sent into a flurry of activity, with lawyers issuing papers and 
opinions on what they see as a case with enormous legal implications. 
Many scholars and jurists regard the general's unexpected arrest in 
London on charges of genocide and murder, and a request for his extradition 
by Spain, as an unusual chance to test high-minded human rights conventions 
that oblige countries to prosecute great atrocities but are invariably 
ignored. Even when Pol Pot of Cambodia was detained before his death, 
some experts note, no country was willing to seek his extradition 
and try him for his role in the deaths of at least 1 million Cambodians. 
Most important, some experts say, the Pinochet case will test whether 
Britain is willing to let its international human rights commitments 
prevail over a domestic law giving immunity to heads of state. Second, 
they say, it will test whether a former dictator with a disastrous 
human rights record can be tried for crimes against humanity by a 
national court in a country that is not his own. A decision from the 
House of Lords in London is expected on Wednesday. Such trials involving 
former top officials and foreign judges have invariably been held 
in international tribunals _ Panama's former leader, Manuel Noriega, 
was not tried in the United States for crimes against humanity but 
for drug trafficking, racketeering and money laundering. So it was 
considered all the more quixotic when in 1996 Spain's best-known investigating 
judge brought suits against the military leaders of Argentina and 
Chile, where the governing right-wing military mounted particularly 
cruel repressions of the left in the 1970s. The judge, Baltasar Garzon, 
who is famous in Spain for taking on high-profile cases, at first 
aimed his inquiry at the fate of Spanish citizens. Several hundred 
Spaniards or their descendants were tortured, killed or ``disappeared'' 
in the repression. Laws dating back to Spain's colonial empire give 
Spanish courts the right to investigate the plight of their citizens 
abroad. But Garzon reached further. He also invoked a Spanish law 
that gives the courts jurisdiction over a series of crimes ``committed 
by Spaniards or foreigners outside the national territory,'' including 
crimes of terrorism and genocide. The judge used this law _ adopted 
in 1985 but based on previous statutes _ to charge Pinochet with torture, 
terrorism and genocide. And it was this law and a series of international 
laws that Garzon used to order the general's arrest and seek his extradition. 
Experts in Madrid say the Spanish law he invoked essentially reflects 
the international conventions to which Spain is bound. As nations 
sign and ratify conventions and treaties they must adapt their domestic 
laws to their new commitments. And Spain has signed most parts of 
the evolving body of international human rights law that has come 
into being since 1945. The arrest warrant for Pinochet also cites 
nine international conventions and resolutions dealing with human 
rights that the Pinochet regime is said to have violated, including 
the international convention against genocide of 1948 and the convention 
against torture of 1984. The binding conventions invariably stipulate 
that parties must punish people guilty of violations, no matter what 
their rank or status or where the crimes took place. Several of the 
covenants that Pinochet is accused of having violated also deal with 
``crimes against humanity,'' commonly defined as grave human rights 
crimes that are ``systematic and widespread.'' The Spanish judge holds 
that torture, killings and the ``disappearing'' of people were indeed 
systematic and widespread. Further, the judge charges the general 
with genocide because he tried to destroy an entire group of people, 
namely his opponents. The arrest warrant says that the so-called Operation 
Condor was one instrument of the crime. According to a declassified 
State Department document of 1976, Operation Condor is the code name 
for tracking down ``leftists, Communists and Marxists'' in South America. 
It says that ``Chile is the center for Operation Condor'' and that 
other countries, including Argentina, Bolivia, Paraguay and Uruguay, 
and perhaps Brazil, are members. It adds that special Condor teams 
equipped with ``false documents'' can travel anywhere ``to carry out 
sanctions up to assassination.'' The Spanish arrest warrant lists 
97 victims of several nationalities, but how many people died as a 
result of Operation Condor is still being investigated by Garzon. 
Some experts in international law believe that while Garzon has sufficient 
evidence for his charges of torture and terrorism, his charge of genocide 
is the weakest. They argue that events in Chile did not meet the genocide 
definition under international law because people were killed for 
belonging to a political group and not to ``a national, ethnic, racial 
or religious group.'' Garzon has argued that the definition of genocide 
has been evolving and has in several instances included political 
persecution. If genocide does apply, Pinochet will be unable to claim 
immunity, as he has, because the convention makes no exceptions for 
anyone. It says that all parties must ``prevent and punish'' genocide. 
It adds that those accused of committing genocide ``shall be punished, 
whether they are constitutionally responsible rulers, public officials 
or private individuals.'' Britain, Spain and Chile have signed the 
convention. Another United Nations declaration, signed in 1989 and 
dealing with the investigation of extralegal, arbitrary and summary 
executions, says that governments must try suspects or extradite them 
to other countries wanting to try them. It says, ``This principle 
shall apply irrespective of who and where the perpetrators or the 
victims are, their nationalities of where the offense was committed.'' 
But it is the Convention Against Torture, also signed by Britain and 
Spain, as well as Chile, that is seen as particularly relevant in 
the Pinochet case. It says that any country that has signed it must 
put ``the alleged offender'' on trial if he is present on its territory, 
a clause that makes Pinochet vulnerable to British law. The convention 
says that if the country does not try such an offender, it must extradite 
him to a country that will. In this case that would be Spain. International 
lawyers say it is surprising that cases of this kind have not come 
to court before. ``Until now it seemed that if you killed one person, 
you went to jail,'' said Reed Brody, a lawyer with Human Rights Watch 
in New York. ``But if you had the power to murder a thousand people, 
you would also have the power to grant yourself immunity or amnesty, 
as General Pinochet did in Chile. The case of Pinochet is about putting 
a stop to that.'' 
</TEXT>
</DOC>