<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981121.0164 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Lately Steffi Graf, resplendent in her return from September wrist 
surgery, had been the queen of mean on every tennis court she touched, 
knocking off three of the world's top-ranked players. She treated 
her victims, including No. 1 Lindsay Davenport, as if they were little 
more than a bunch of pretenders to her favorite throne. The 12th-ranked 
Graf seemed to have their number, no matter what that number happened 
to be. But Graf's 12-match, two-tournament tear came to a crashing 
halt at Madison Square Garden on Saturday when Davenport, anxious 
to prove that her place at the head of the pecking order is no accident, 
poured on the pressure in the final stages of their Chase Championships 
semifinal and outworked the German, 6-1, 2-6, 6-3. The match took 
one hour 37 minutes to resolve and turned on the sixth game of the 
final set when Graf, who seized just five of the 14 break opportunities 
she was allotted, suffered an untimely glitch in her killer instinct 
and let Davenport escape from a 0-40 deficit. The victory moved the 
22-year-old Davenport, who won her first Grand Slam singles title 
two months ago at the U.S. Open and on Saturday was named the WTA 
Tour's player of the year, into her second finale here. She had not 
been to the title match since Gabriela Sabatini, long since retired, 
defeated her in 1994. For Graf, the loss spoiled her plan to end 1998 
the way she had ended 1996 and four other years on the circuit: as 
champion of her sport's world championship. ``I gave it everything 
I had in the past three weeks, and that was a lot; in the end, I guess 
it was a little too much,'' said Graf, who felt her footwork deteriorated 
after pulling a muscle in the back of her right thigh during that 
all-important sixth game. ``Sure, I'm disappointed. I knew I was really 
close, but I can only look back with a positive attitude.'' Their 
contest began on a note of mutual hesitation. Davenport dropped her 
first service game by blooping a nervous forehand beyond the baseline, 
but Graf was just as indecisive when her turn came to serve. And so, 
after two games, the opening set was knotted at 1-1 and waiting for 
somebody to take charge. That person was Davenport, who has begun 
to admit that holding down the No. 1 ranking comes with the responsibility 
to assert oneself in all matches, especially the high-stakes ones. 
The Californian held with an ace for a 2-1 lead and went ahead by 
3-1 when Graf elbowed a backhand slice into the net at break point. 
Graf's tentative returns gave Davenport an easy hold for 4-1, and 
after dismantling Graf's serve again for a 5-1 advantage, Davenport 
grabbed the set, 6-1. Graf didn't let it go without putting up a little 
fight. On the first set point, she clipped the corner with another 
sliced backhand that Davenport, on the run, blocked back over the 
net and out of bounds. Then a bold forehand pass elicited a netted 
backhand from Davenport, ruining a second set point. But on the third 
set point, the American went toe-to-toe with Graf in a battle of sharp-angled 
forehands: Davenport's hugged the sideline; Graf's reply veered wide. 
Graf has been around too long to be cowed by 6-1 deficits, so she 
simply started the match over in her mind in the second set. Fresh 
starts are something she has had to make a habit of over the course 
of a 15-year career, in which surgery has required seven pit stops, 
including the reconstructive knee surgery that caused her to miss 
this event last year. ``Someone who has done so well in their career, 
they don't just disappear,'' Monica Seles said after Graf dismissed 
her in their quarterfinal here. Seles said Graf and her notorious 
willpower are virtually indestructible: ``She is still in better shape 
than most players, so you always view her that way. In my mind it 
hasn't changed at all.'' What changed in the middle set of Saturday's 
semifinal was Davenport's pinpoint accuracy: Suddenly it belonged 
to Graf, and suddenly Davenport was feeling the burn of the blister 
on her left foot every time Graf's shots tugged her from one side 
of the court to the other. Davenport went down 4-2 when she overhit 
a crosscourt forehand at break point of the sixth game, and after 
allowing Graf to hold serve for a 5-2 lead, Davenport took an injury 
timeout to have her blister sprayed with an analgesic and rewrapped. 
Deeming the second set a lost cause, Davenport played a weak service 
game that gift-wrapped the set for Graf, 6-2, and left the match in 
a state of stalemate. The third set was a showdown. First, Davenport 
broke Graf's serve, but then the 29-year-old Graf, who had a blister 
of her own burning its way through the sole of her left foot, broke 
right back only to falter again in her service game. Down 0-40, Graf 
hung her head and clapped her hands to her hips in frustration after 
Davenport drilled a crisp and unreachable crosscourt backhand over 
the net for a 2-1 edge. Then it was Graf's turn to do the receiving 
and the breaking, and at 15-40, Davenport slapped a forehand into 
the net and match was tied up at 2-2. Graf won the race to see who 
would manage to hold serve first in the final set, and when she had 
ripped away the forehand that gave her a 3-2 lead, a smile replaced 
the sneer that had been plastered on her face since she walked onto 
court to the strains of Springsteen's Hungry Heart. Hunger for more 
titles, in particular the sixth career Championships victory that 
would let her end this comeback season on a three-event unbeaten streak, 
would be a more appropriate description of what drives Graf these 
days. She was incensed with herself for letting Davenport scramble 
out of a 0-40 deficit to hold for 3-3, and the instant Davenport's 
forehand winner ended that game, Graf hustled to the sidelines and 
summoned a trainer to tape her right thigh. Then, after saving one 
break point with a brilliant forehand down-the-line pass, Graf netted 
a forehand on Davenport's second break opportunity, and the limping 
Californian took a 4-3 lead that turned out to be pivotal when she 
backed it up with an ace at game point of the next game for a 5-3 
lead. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>