<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981121.0179 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Chris Dudley looked haggard, like a trader whose stock was stuck on 
a roller coaster. While he managed to emerge upbeat from a negotiating 
session late Friday night, he was like most of his peers: He had no 
idea when he would be paid to play basketball again. ``It's a house 
of cards right now,'' said Dudley, whose Knicks have now lost four 
games to the National Basketball Association's nearly five-month-old 
labor dispute. ``It looks like we're moving in the right direction, 
but everything is so conditional, it could fall apart at any time.'' 
Whether the fear of losing the season motivated them or not, players 
and owners displayed a new urgency. They negotiated face to face for 
almost 10 hours, making compromises on two key economic issues that 
may go a long way toward salvaging a significantly shortened schedule. 
It was not only the longest bargaining session of the lockout, now 
in its 145th day, but also the most productive. ``I would say our 
negotiating committee came in with our pajamas and their negotiating 
committee came in with theirs too,'' NBA Commissioner David Stern 
said. Participants on both sides of the meeting said each had moved 
at least a couple of points off their requested numbers for total 
revenue distribution. The owners wanted no more than 50 percent paid 
out to player salaries, while the players wanted to make as much as 
60 percent of the income. It was unclear what the exact figures were. 
Also, the owners have agreed to accept, with several conditions, the 
framework of an escrow plan. The plan would be put in place in the 
fourth through sixth years of a proposed seven-year agreement, and 
would include players withholding a percentage of their salaries at 
the beginning of the season. If an agreed-upon percentage were exceeded, 
then the fund would be used to pay the owners back. The players had 
offered to withhold as much as 10 percent of their annual salaries 
in those years. No further negotiations were scheduled for the weekend, 
but both sides planned to resume bargaining before Thanksgiving. The 
league and the union were also doubtful that a deal could be struck 
this week, meaning the possibility of playing in 1998 is all but gone. 
If negotiations continued at the current pace, a more likely scenario 
would be an agreement in principle by the first week of December and 
perhaps starting the season the first week of January. ``I'm very 
concerned, but I'm hopeful,'' Stern said Friday when asked if he still 
feared losing the season to labor strife. ``It's quite a hill that 
we have to climb. What we confirmed tonight is that we've got two 
different views of the way we come at the these issues. All I can 
tell you is, their highest and our lowest aren't matching, and that 
means there's still a pretty good gap between us. And that covers 
a lot of issues, and that's going to be a real problem. But the best 
way we can deal with that is the way we're dealing with it.'' It was 
the longest bargaining session since Oct. 28, when Michael Jordan 
tried to broker a deal with Stern and other chief negotiators until 
1 a.m. Since then, the parties have engaged in rhetoric and name-calling 
and done everything but make progress on a new collective bargaining 
agreement. But with genuine concerns over lost games and player salaries, 
the two sides put away their animosity and began to work toward a 
settlement on Friday. After players made the first move _ a change 
to their escrow tax plan _ owners made a counterproposal that included 
the change. The players then came back with yet another offer. In 
the hallways between sessions, owners and players could be seen talking 
congenially with each other. It was a stark contrast to the last meeting 
at the same midtown Manhattan hotel three weeks ago, when at least 
one owner and player engaged in a shouting match during a give-and-take 
session. ``For the first time, we can say we had a productive day,'' 
the deputy commissioner, Russ Granik, said. ``We both realized that 
the season is in jeopardy here and to find out if we can or cannot 
make a deal.''' While there was sincere encouragement, the owners 
and the players seemed to understand they had a long road ahead of 
them before a deal could be struck. ``Both sides want to do something, 
but both sides have some serious issues that they feel real strongly 
about,'' Dudley said. ``It's a frustrating process. I don't want to 
lose the season, but we're getting closer and closer to that time. 
I'm happy with the progress, but it's still definitely a concern.'' 
</TEXT>
</DOC>