<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981121.0178 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Adding the New York Yankees to its ownership of the New York Knicks 
and New York Rangers further would escalate Cablevision Systems' growth 
into one of the most powerful forces in sports and would expand the 
Woodbury, N.Y.-based company's entertainment diversification. Automatically, 
the Yankees would become the best known asset in Cablevision's empire, 
which includes cable systems serving 3.4 million subscribers, Madison 
Square Garden and the Nobody Beats the Wiz electronics chain, which 
it bought out of bankruptcy court. George Steinbrenner was an obscure 
shipbuilder from Cleveland when he and his partners paid $10 million 
to buy the Yankees from CBS in 1973. Owning the 1998 World Series 
champions, who have the most storied history in sports, would give 
Cablevision the national stature it lacks outside the cable industry. 
Not even Steinbrenner could boast of being a three-sport owner, as 
Cablevision could be with a deal, joining an exclusive club with Time 
Warner, which owns the Atlanta Braves, Hawks and Thrashers, a National 
Hockey League expansion team that starts play in the fall of 1999. 
Wayne Huizenga, who owns the Miami Dolphins and Miami Heat, is leaving 
the three-team fraternity with his $150 million sale of the Florida 
Marlins, which still must be approved by Major League Baseball. Other 
two-team owners include Walt Disney Co. (Anaheim Mighty Ducks and 
Angels), Jerry Reinsdorf (Chicago White Sox and Bulls), Paul Allen 
(Seattle Seahawks and Portland Trail Blazers), Abe Pollin (Washington 
Capitals and Wizards) and Thomas Hicks (Texas Rangers and Dallas Stars). 
Charles Dolan, chairman of Cablevision, is the personal antithesis 
of the bombastic Steinbrenner. Dolan is a rare presence at Knicks 
and Rangers games, an owner who never talks about player performance, 
but pushes his management to increase cash flow by increasing usage 
of the arena and adjacent Theater at Madison Square Garden, where 
shows like ``A Christmas Carol'' and ``The Wizard of Oz'' play. Dolan 
understands the value of sports team ownership, but he views owning 
a team as something that can benefit his media holdings. Almost 20 
years ago, he tried to buy the Chicago White Sox. As a personal investment 
with his brother, Dolan tried to buy the expansion Cleveland Browns, 
which sold for $530 million, a record until now. For Steinbrenner, 
the Yankees are a personal and business asset, which have enriched 
him and made him the most famous owner in sports. The possibility 
that he might stay on if Cablevision bought the club, as the overlord 
of the Rangers, Knicks and Yankees, would appear to set the stage 
for a battle with Dave Checketts, president of Madison Square Garden, 
who oversees the teams. Before buying the Garden with ITT for $1.05 
billion in 1994, Cablevision was a powerful cable company with systems 
in New York, Boston, Cleveland, Chicago and other areas, and the owner 
of regional sports channels like SportsChannel New York. But it was 
not viewed as a sports world titan. That has all changed. Owning the 
Knicks and Rangers, the arena they play in, and the MSG Network, which 
carries their games to cable customers in the New York region, offers 
a synergy that has enriched Cablevision with all available advertising 
and sponsorship revenues. (Last year, Cablevision paid $650 million 
to buy out ITT's ownership.) Owning the Yankees would guarantee that 
the Yankees would be seen on MSG in perpetuity, and that no potential 
competitor could snare the team's valuable cable rights with a preemptive 
bid. It also would unburden Cablevision from paying a rights fee. 
MSG is entering the next-to-last year of a $486 million, 12-year deal 
with the Yankees, which will peak at $55.25 million in 2000. But the 
Yankees' bottom line could suffer without an outside party paying 
the largest local rights fee to any team in sports. Strip away $55 
million from the Yankees' revenues, and can this team sustain payrolls 
that are at or near baseball's highest? Presumably, Cablevision would 
not buy the Yankees to play Scrooge on salaries. But Cablevision's 
owning the Yankees would doubtless provide its detractors with more 
ammunition for their charges that the company is monopolizing New 
York sports. Not only would Cablevision own three teams locally, but 
it would also control the cable telecasts of seven teams: the Yankees, 
the Rangers and the Knicks on MSG, and the Nets, the Islanders, the 
Devils and the Mets on Fox Sports New York, a regional service that 
is part of the Fox Sports Net, a joint cable sports venture with the 
Fox/Liberty Networks. It is not apparent how Cablevision's ownership 
of the team would change the ongoing question about a new stadium. 
The Yankee Stadium lease expires after the 2002 season and Steinbrenner 
has stayed uncharacteristically quiet about whether he will stay in 
the Bronx in a renovated ballpark, demand that the city pursue a rocky 
legal path to building a $1 billion stadium on the West Side of Manhattan, 
or move to New Jersey. Wherever the Yankees play, it is very likely 
that Cablevision would use the stadium to market an array of products, 
whether it's phone service; electronics through the Nobody Beats the 
Wiz chain that it acquired last year for $92 million; tickets to events 
at Radio City Music Hall, which it leases through its purchase of 
Radio City Productions, or tickets to theaters like the Ziegfeld or 
Beekman, two of 76 theaters recently acquired for $252 million. All 
those acquisitions, plus the decision to finance the overhaul of ``The 
Scarlet Pimpernel'' musical on Broadway, which reopened earlier this 
month, symbolize Cablevision's emergence as a corporate entertainment 
impresario with enormous tentacles. When Cablevision recently began 
high-definition television telecasts of Rangers games on MSG, it made 
them available inside the Garden's two restaurants and at selected 
Wiz stores, which sell the expensive HDTV sets. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>