<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981121.0112 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
A more unlikely band of guerrillas cannot be imagined than the ermine-caped 
members of Britain's House of Lords. But in a series of rebellious 
acts this month, the venerable senior body has blocked passage of 
a key government bill and vowed to sabotage legislative procedures 
to keep the disputed measure from becoming law when a new parliamentary 
session opens this week. The Lords has voted down and returned the 
legislation to the House of Commons five times, a record of defiance 
that sent historians back centuries to find precedents and that has 
hardened the determination of Prime Minister Tony Blair's Labor government 
to crack down on the peers next year. The issue was a bill to change 
procedures in elections of British representatives in the European 
Parliament in Strasbourg passed by the House of Commons and sent on 
to the Lords for the traditional contemplative endorsement. The upper 
body has the power only to delay, not defeat, legislation passed by 
the Commons, but such concerted disruption as this runs contrary to 
custom. The real impulse behind the rebellion was Blair's resolve 
to strip hereditary peers of their right to vote in the Lords. The 
decision will be formally revealed in the annual announcement of the 
government's legislative program read by the queen at the ceremonial 
opening of the new Parliament on Tuesday. The House of Lords is not 
elected but instead has 435 life peers chosen by prime ministers and 
750 dukes, earls, marquesses, viscounts and barons, whose rights to 
vote in the chamber are passed down from generation to generation. 
It is this latter, largely Conservative, group that is Blair's target, 
and his government said that their role in reversing a Commons majority 
in the voting rights legislation dramatized the argument that they 
are unqualified, undeserving and anachronistic. ``They can use the 
Tory majority they have in the upper house to scupper us and that 
is what they have done,'' Blair said. A spokesman at 10 Downing St. 
called them a ``democratic disgrace,'' and added, ``The truth is that 
the Tory hereditary peers can be wheeled out on any day of the week 
on any issue to defeat the democratically elected government.'' Foreshadowing 
the confrontation expected in the new Parliament, Home Secretary Jack 
Straw said, ``The Tories will rue the day they overreached themselves 
in this way.'' Known as the ``closed list'' form, it is more restrictive 
than the procedures used in most other European countries and has 
drawn criticism as typical of the Labor government's tendency to keep 
its party members in line. William Hague, leader of the Tories, has 
denounced the proposal, saying it gives parties too much control and 
robs voters of their right to vote for individual candidates. ``We 
say it is wrong, that it is undemocratic and that it has never been 
the way we have done things in this country,'' he said. ``We were 
opposed to it yesterday, we are still opposed to it today and they 
will find we will continue to be opposed to it in the future. We are 
not going to cooperate or acquiesce in any way.'' This strategy can 
irritate and inconvenience but not ultimately turn back Labor, which 
has a 179-seat majority in the Commons and can resort to little used 
and complicated parliamentary tactics to force the Lords' hand. Or 
the Lords could now pass the legislation and then tie it up for weeks 
with meddlesome amendments. The blocking tactics of the peers may 
be aimed at delaying reforms long enough to leave the government too 
little time to put procedures in place for the June 9, 1999, European 
elections. They will also cause disruption since Labor has already 
assembled its candidate list under the new regional candidate selection 
process it fully expected to be in place. While the already weak and 
divided Tories and their unproven leaders can win this short-term 
advantage, they run the longer term risk of appearing to be solely 
obstructionist. Labor has already started a campaign to portray them 
as feckless and self-defeating, with Straw saying, ``This is a victory 
for the kamikaze tendency of the Tory party.'' Lord Weatherill, a 
former Conservative speaker of the House of Commons, who is against 
the bill, nevertheless expressed concern that Hague's strategy of 
uncompromising opposition could backfire. ``What will be remembered,'' 
he said, ``is that this unelected House frustrated the will of the 
Commons on five occasions.'' 
</TEXT>
</DOC>