<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981121.0141 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
It wasn't supposed to end this way. Not this personally. Not this 
jarringly. Everyone knew that the legendary Concord Resort Hotel in 
the Catskills' Sullivan County was past its prime, unable to bring 
the tourists back to what was once the crown jewel of the resort area. 
Everyone knew that the hotel was in financial distress and desperate 
to attract buyers. Still, when the Concord closed Nov. 3 after 61 
years under the same family, it hurt more than anyone could have imagined. 
More than 400 people lost their jobs, including many who had full-time 
jobs at the hotel for 40 years. About 60 employees who had been living 
in the hotel suddenly became homeless and found their next meal at 
a soup kitchen. And everyone, it seemed, began flooding local employment 
and welfare offices, looking for guidance and help. ``When you've 
got to change your priorities from `What do we do for our vacation?' 
to `What are we going to do for dinner or to pay the rent?' it changes 
your priorities a lot,'' said Wesley Katz, 41, a former security guard 
at the Concord who was eating lunch at Tom's Kitchen, the only soup 
kitchen in Monticello. ``I'm a diabetic, too, so I have to make sure 
I have some medical coverage.'' The failure of the Concord was marked 
with various elegiac testimonials to the end of what had been a beloved 
institution, but those impressive words have done little for the people 
who sweated to make the Concord run so smoothly. Those people _ the 
waitresses, the busboys, the porters _ are suffering mightily. The 
county has relatively few residents _ about 70,000 _ so its support 
services are small and easily strapped. Although the county has had 
low unemployment, the 400 who lost their jobs at the Concord, when 
added to the 500 other jobs lost in the county this year, have placed 
heavy demands on an economy that was already pinched. For some time, 
it had not been easy to find a job _ not in Kiamesha Lake, the community 
where the Concord is located, not in Monticello, the county seat and 
a village of 6,800, nor in the other nearby communities in the mountain 
region. ``I'm afraid that these people who have hung in there with 
the hotel for so long are going to put a strain on the local economy,'' 
said Monticello Mayor Gary Sommers. ``I don't know what this is going 
to do to the crime level, the homeless level, the welfare level. We're 
very apprehensive, because the ripple effect is unbelievable.'' The 
former Concord workers say that almost all have applied for unemployment 
benefits, and that some have applied for welfare and Medicaid. Karen 
Burns, executive director of the Sullivan County Federation for the 
Homeless, a nonprofit agency that operates Tom's Kitchen, said it 
has been feeding twice as many as normal since the Concord closed. 
The United Way has worked with county and state agencies to set up 
an emergency site to help steer people to jobs and retraining programs. 
A Wal-Mart that is to open next year will help some, said Jonathan 
Drapkin, the county manager, but since winter is approaching, others 
believe that the worst is yet to come. ``I don't think we've seen 
the crunch of what's going to happen,'' said Linda Cellini, chief 
professional officer for the United Way of Sullivan County. ``We don't 
have enough to meet the needs of our county normally, so this extra 
burden on the emergency food and shelter needs is just going to make 
things worse.'' Anyone who has never been to the Catskills may well 
wonder: Why didn't the Concord workers get out earlier? After all, 
there were plenty of warning signs: the hotel's bankruptcy, its pursuit 
of financial suitors, its loss of guests to entertainment sites as 
far away as Atlantic City, N.J., and beyond. But talking about changing 
jobs is usually easier than doing it, especially after you have worked 
at a good-paying job at the same place for so long. More than half 
the employees had put in more than the 10 years required to qualify 
for a union pension. And in years past, some of the workers said, 
they could get by in the Catskills on the $10,000 to $30,000 a year 
they managed to take in at the Concord. And yet, there was something 
else about the Concord that made it more than just a place to draw 
a paycheck. Some employees had come from New York City 90 miles away 
and had found rural life soothing. Others had checkered pasts before 
coming to the Concord, and found a second chance here. Still others 
enjoyed the camaraderie with the long-time guests who returned often 
over the years. They came to know many of them by their first names. 
``We had a lot of good times, and everyone was like family,'' said 
Marilyn Gill, 56, a Queens native who worked as a waitress at the 
Concord for 26 years. ``We really wanted to believe that there would 
be last-minute miracle. We were in denial.'' The hope had been that 
the hotel, which was about $20 million in debt, might make it through 
the holiday season and that an interested investor would snap it up 
and keep it going. But on Nov. 3, Robert Parker, whose family has 
owned the hotel since 1937, made his tearful announcement that the 
hotel would be unable to continue. All the workers lost their jobs 
and benefits with only a few days' notice, but those who were living 
in the hotel, or the adjacent dilapidated bungalows, had to pack their 
belongings and look for shelter. It was an abrupt end for an institution 
that courted performers like Jackie Mason and Buddy Hackett, had appealed 
to people looking for a refuge from New York only 90 miles away, and 
had becomes a popular place for people to get married or celebrate 
a bar mitzvah. But now, only a skeletal staff of about 30 people remain, 
mainly security and maintenance workers. The hotel is tentatively 
scheduled to be auctioned Dec. 2 at U.S. Bankruptcy Court in White 
Plains. And while there has been much talk in the last year about 
potential bidders who might renovate the 1,710-acre resort, no one 
professes to know what will happen. ``It's very hard for me to talk 
about,'' Parker said in a telephone interview, his voice cracking. 
``It's a tremendous effect, psychologically and everything else. When 
you let go employees you've known for 30 years, what do you tell them?'' 
For union employees, the shock has been aggravated by the actions 
of their union, Local 76 of the Hotel and Restaurant Employees and 
Bartenders Union. The workers said the local had refused to allow 
them to draw early from their $6.8 million pension fund. The local 
also says they cannot draw their pensions until they are 65, although 
the contract provide for retirement at 60. They said officials at 
the local maintained that the hotel's closure had nullified the contract. 
Ms. Gill would have to wait another nine years to receive her $550 
a month; it means that Jorge Pelosi, 33, who has worked at the Concord 
as a busboy for 16 years, would have to wait until he is 65 to receive 
a pension of perhaps $250 a month. Union officials did not return 
calls requesting comment. Thursday, more than 150 union employees 
attended a rally of union members, organized by Ms. Gill, Pat Kislowski 
and Joe Blum to challenge the union local leadership. ``Just give 
us something now, because we don't know if there will be any money 
left in the future,'' said Ms. Gill, at the rally at Apollo Plaza, 
a strip mall in Monticello. ``Otherwise, we're all going to be wards 
of the county.'' How much workers can get from the union remains to 
be seen, since they can't afford a lawyer, and they have had little 
help so far from the state Department of Labor. But if anything, the 
rally was more for commiseration than confrontation. Ramon Martinez, 
who turned 60 Thursday, had worked as a chef at the Concord since 
1958. He had hoped to retire soon; more immediately, he had been planning 
to visit his ailing 89-year-old mother in Puerto Rico this winter. 
But not any more. ``It's been a shock, just a shock,'' said a sullen 
Martinez, who has applied for jobs at three hotels in the area. ``I'm 
scared.'' Linda DaCosta, 50, is worried, too. She worked as a waitress 
at the Concord since 1988, but she and the union disagree on how much 
time she has put in; she says 10 years, the union says nine. She has 
had to cut back on some things, like taking her grandson to a store 
to buy a toy, like going out to a restaurant or a movie once in a 
while. ``I can't afford that extra $5 or $10,'' she said. ``People 
ask me, `What's the difference?' and I joke around with them, sort 
of. I say to them, `It's the difference between cat food and tuna 
fish.''' Those hardest hit may be the workers who lived at the Concord. 
When Ernest Parker (bartender, 12 years) and Robert Matthews (cook, 
two years) were forced to leave, they found nothing except a dingy 
room at the Heritage Motel for $140 a week. Both have had no luck 
finding work; both have vouchers from the county for a one-way bus 
ticket to New York City. Charles Bowman, 38, a Brooklyn native who 
had worked in the hotel's dining room for three years, is trying a 
different tack: He is staying in the bungalows illegally, without 
a phone and barely enough heat. An asthmatic who has no car, Bowman 
has to walk about an hour each way to the employment office to look 
at the latest jobs. So far, nothing. Frank Wilson, 52, is also a Brooklyn 
native _ Bedford-Stuyvesant. Until two years ago, he had never left 
home. Then, when he heard there was work in the Catskills, he took 
the next bus and got a job, with room and board, as a porter at the 
Concord. When the hotel closed, he had no car and no family nearby. 
He moved in with a friend. ``This is my first time in a soup kitchen, 
but I do what the Romans do,'' Wilson said softly, after stuffing 
a piece of kielbasa in his mouth at Tom's Kitchen. ``I didn't feel 
I'd end up like this.'' 
</TEXT>
</DOC>