<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981121.0122 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
There is no sign of peace between the government and the Zapatista 
rebels in the southern state of Chiapas, and little reason to hope 
for a settlement anytime soon. Last weekend some of the highest Zapatista 
commanders donned their black masks and traditional Indian regalia 
to come out of hiding and travel here for meetings with their sympathizers 
and with mediators in peace talks. It was the first time they had 
left their clandestine strongholds in two years and their first attempt 
to move things forward with the mediators since talks collapsed in 
late 1996. But as soon as the meetings began the Zapatistas fought 
with the mediators, and the rebels and the government began accusing 
each other of bad faith. An Indian commander in military fatigues 
who goes by the name of Tacho complained that the 29-member Zapatista 
delegation had been given only ``miserable little cots'' with no mattresses 
to sleep on by the mediators, who were in charge of organizing logistics 
for the event. The Zapatistas said that the mediators, federal lawmakers 
drawn from a range of political parties, had also failed to arrange 
adequate security. The International Committee of the Red Cross was 
in charge of setting up a security cordon around the meeting site. 
``We will not allow our Indian peoples to be humiliated ever again,'' 
Tacho said, calling the mediators racist. The offended mediators rejected 
the Zapatistas' charge but rushed to find better accommodations for 
them. Top government officials seized on the incident as a sign that 
the Zapatistas were interested only in publicity, not peace. There 
were, in short, many new indications of the depth of the impasse between 
the government and the peculiar, quasi-guerrilla Indian organization 
in Chiapas. The government says it wants peace but continues to harass 
Zapatista villages, belittle their demands, underestimate the sympathy 
they attract among Mexicans and turn a blind eye to attacks on Zapatista 
sympathizers by government followers. As soon as the Zapatista leaders 
announced their intention to return to public view, the armed forces 
dispatched a platoon to march through a key Zapatista village, making 
a show of contempt for the rebel initiative. A hint of the ambiguity 
of the Zapatistas lies in their appearance. Their leaders, mysterious 
and appealing figures to many Mexicans, wear wide-brimmed straw hats 
topped with cheerfully colored satin ribbons but conceal their faces 
behind forbidding black ski masks. The Zapatistas retain the trappings 
of a military rebel force. Last week Subcommander Marcos, a non-Indian 
who is regarded as the de facto leader of the Zapatista National Liberation 
Army, posed for a photographer once again in full military garb with 
an AK-47 automatic rifle strapped across his chest. By law, as long 
as some form of peace process is under way, the rebels are allowed 
to keep their weapons. But since they staged a weeklong armed uprising 
in January 1994, the Zapatistas have repeatedly declared their commitment 
to political, not military, means. This year, as the rest of Mexico 
was deciding how to share political power in a dozen relatively orderly 
state elections, the Zapatistas staged a tactical withdrawal from 
the stage of public opinion, where they have always been very effective. 
After a massacre of their sympathizers in December 1997 and a series 
of government attacks on Zapatista-run villages this year, Zapatista 
leaders went silent, cutting off communications even with close supporters. 
The meetings here are partly a recognition by the Zapatistas that 
they took their silence too far. In a pensive interview last week 
with the newspaper La Jornada, Marcos acknowledged that his forces 
had been too quick to cut themselves off from potential allies in 
political parties and other unarmed groups. ``When making political 
declarations one tends not to make subtle distinctions,'' he admitted. 
The Zapatistas gathered 2,500 of their most enthusiastic followers 
from all over Mexico to chart a strategy to build national support 
for their proposals for greater political independence for Indian 
peoples. ``You are not alone!'' was the favorite cheer from the floor 
at the inauguration of the talks Friday. But it was not clear that 
the Zapatistas had come up with any new approach during past months. 
The main sticking points are differences between the two sides over 
accords on autonomy for Indian villages that government negotiators 
signed in 1996 and later sought to revise. One irony is that the positions 
are not that far apart and could probably be resolved in serious talks. 
What exists in Chiapas cannot be called war because there is no military 
combat. But there is no sign of what might be called peace. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>