<DOC>
<DOCNO> ABC19981025.1830.1294 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> CAPTION </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Popular state senator Tommy Burke was remembered today in church services 
in Tennessee. Burke was shot to death this week. His political challenger, 
Byron looper, who is still on the ballot, is charged with the Tennessee 
murder. Tennessee is in the southern United States, and FBI statistics 
show, that the highest murder rate is in the country. ABC's Anderson 
Cooper tried to find out why. In rural Louisiana this July, a man 
named elery Clement was convicted of shooting and killing his wife 
and her alleged lover after what was said to be a long and very public 
affair. I think, deep down, a lot of southern men are thinking they 
would have done the same thing. The south may be known for its warmth 
and hospitality, but crime statistics show another side. 43% of the 
murders in the United States occur in the 16 southern states. All 
but one, Delaware, have murder rates higher than the national average. 
Louisiana's is more than twice as high. Criminologists are trying 
to understand why. It can't just be explained by poverty or by unemployment. 
It's not that simple. It's culture? It's culture. Here in the south, 
violence is often not nearly an accepted response, it's an expected 
response in many instances. Sam Hyde, a Louisiana historian, is looking 
for the roots of what he calls "A culture of violence" in the south. 
After the civil war, there was little faith in government, and people 
often took the law into their own hands to defend their honor. Hyde 
says today, personal honor is still a trigger for violence. It's a 
fundamental motivating force here. It is so important that ultimately 
the consequences of one's actions become secondary to the fear of 
public and private humiliation. Studies show the nature of murder 
in rural parts of the south is different than in other parts of the 
country. Here, murder's often personal. Outside the south, most murders 
happen during another crime, like a Robbery. But in the south, murders 
tend to involve people who know each other. Generally, if you get 
shot in the south, you know who shot you. And you know why they shot 
you. But are southerners really different from people in the rest 
of the country? In an experiment at the University of Michigan, a 
psychologist found that southern male students, after being insulted, 
produced more testosterone and behaved more aggressively than northerners, 
who tended to laugh it off. Young men in the south are under enormous 
pressure to exert themselves physically and defend themselves if their 
sense of honor is violated. Which brings us back to southern courtesy. 
Maybe southerners are more polite, at least in part, because it's 
dangerous not to be. Anderson Cooper, ABC News, Hammond, Louisiana. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>