<DOC>
<DOCNO> APW19981025.0910 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Jewish settlers, angered over a new Mideast peace deal which gives 
more land to Palestinians, scuffled with police and took to the streets 
across the West Bank Sunday in protest over an agreement which they 
vowed to scuttle. The road-block demonstrations came several hours 
before Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu returned to Israel hoping 
to convince hardliners the deal he made with Palestinian leader Yasser 
Arafat was the best possible. Arriving in Israel to a red-carpet welcome, 
the Israeli leader said security concessions won from the Palestinians 
during the nine-day summit outside Washington would justify the ceding 
of more West Bank land. ``We are returning after a long and difficult 
effort to bring ... security and peace to Israel,'' he said. ``We 
achieved such a deal _ we achieved the best deal... We did something 
good for the state of Israel.'' In Sunday's wide spread demonstrations 
including one outside of Israel's international airport, following 
Netanyahu's arrival, at least 20 settlers _ who were once Netanyahu's 
staunchest supporters _ were arrested and two police officers were 
hurt. ``With the Lord's help, we will use all of our powers to break 
this agreement,'' said settler leader Ahron Dombe. Settler leaders 
said they would channel their efforts into intense lobbying Monday 
before legislators vote on a no-confidence motion against Netanyahu. 
Debate on the vote is scheduled to begin Monday at 4:00pm (14:00gmt.) 
Near the settlement of Ofra north of Jerusalem, about 50 settlers 
and their supporters rushed past Israeli police and sat cross-legged 
on the highway. Some settlers wrapped in prayer shawls held morning 
services at the roadside. Police also said settlers burned tires at 
the Karme Tsur settlement north of Hebron. ``I'm here to show that 
this is a sad day,'' said Natan El, 38, an engineer, sitting in the 
middle of the main north-south highway through the West Bank. ``We 
are in danger of losing our land, the land we have returned to after 
2,000 years.'' Tensions over the accord also boiled over in the West 
Bank town of Ramallah, where infighting broke out among Arafat's supporters. 
Members of the Palestinian leader's political faction, Fatah, battled 
Palestinian security forces with rocks and bullets. One 16 year-old 
youth shot in the head, later died of his wounds in a Jerusalem hospital. 
The confrontation broke out after Palestinian intelligence agents 
searched Fatah headquarters, looking for illegal weapons. A crackdown 
on unlicensed arms is one of the provisions of the agreement. The 
clash alarmed Palestinian leaders, who fear the pressures of the implementing 
the U.S.-brokered agreement will wind up pitting Palestinian against 
Palestinian. Many of its provisions, such as reining in Islamic militants, 
disarming political groups and halting anti-Israel incitement, are 
extremely unpopular, and will be difficult politically for Arafat's 
government to impose. By a margin of four to one, Israelis surveyed 
in a poll published Sunday in the Yediot Ahronot newspaper supported 
the new agreement with the Palestinians. The poll questioned 505 Israeli 
adults, and had a 4.5 percent margin of error. But politicians across 
the board predicted Netanyahu would face political turmoil as a result 
of the agreement when he brings it before his right-wing Cabinet Monday. 
The agreement signed at the White House Friday calls for an Israeli 
handover of 13.1 percent of the West Bank to Palestinian civilian 
control. That means some Jewish settlements will be surrounded by 
Palestinian-controlled territory, except for access roads. Twelve 
hardliners in Netanyahu's government say they will vote against him 
in upcoming no-confidence motions. Even Foreign Minister Ariel Sharon, 
who leads the right-wing camp in Netanyahu's government and helped 
forge the agreement, said the withdrawal endangered Israel's security 
and would not reveal how he would vote on the deal. Netanyahu has 
only a one-seat majority. Hoping to calm settler fears, the premier 
made overtures to the settler community, but they mostly went unheard. 
``I say now here to our friends listening, you are us, you are us 
and we are you. We love you and we are fighting for you and there 
is no other government that will fight like this,'' Netanyahu said, 
mentioning settler leader Dombe by name. ``I am very, very, very disappointed 
with the prime minister and the ministers who participated in this 
deal,'' Dombe said after the premier's speech. ``Netanyahu is no longer 
the leader of our national camp.'' Dombe said his staff would begin 
opinion samplings among settlers Monday in search of a candidate to 
challenge Netanyahu. In a another development, the militant Palestinian 
Islamic Jihad group said its leader in the Gaza Strip had been arrested 
as part of a renewed crackdown by Arafat's police on militants. In 
a statement, faxed to news agencies, the group said dozens of its 
members had been taken into custody. The larger Hamas group also announced 
that one its West Bank leaders was under arrest and being held in 
a Palestinian jail. Israel announced it had arrested three Hamas members 
suspected of shooting to death two Jewish settlers in August. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>