<DOC>
<DOCNO> APW19981025.0867 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
With a harsh austerity package to be unveiled this week, voters on 
Sunday elected a key ally of President Fernando Henrique Cardoso in 
Brazil's most important state, exit polls showed. An exit poll by 
the respected Ibope organization showed Sao Paulo state Gov. Mario 
Covas was re-elected with 56 percent of the vote, while two-time former 
governor Paulo Maluf had 44 percent. The race in Sao Paulo, Brazil's 
wealthiest and most populous state, was the most closely watched of 
the gubernatorial runoff elections in 12 states and the Federal District. 
The support for Covas, a frugal administrator and friend of Cardoso, 
is a tremendous boost for the president, who is trying to rescue Brazil 
from the global financial crisis. In other important states, however, 
polls showed Cardoso's opponents were winners. In Rio de Janeiro, 
Anthony Garotinho, a radio announcer of the center-left Democratic 
Labor Party, was the apparent victor with 59 percent of the vote, 
Ibope found. Former Rio mayor Cesar Maia, a Cardoso ally, had 41 percent 
and conceded defeat. Former President Itamar Franco, who broke with 
Cardoso during the campaign, won handily in powerful Minas Gerais 
state, Ibope said. Franco was given 59 percent of the vote to 41 percent 
for incumbent Eduardo Azeredo, of Cardoso's Brazilian Social Democracy 
Party. In the southern Rio Grande do Sul, an important farm state, 
Olivio Dutra of the leftist Workers Party apparently wrested the office 
from incumbent Antonio Britto, a Cardoso backer. Dutra had 52 percent 
to Britto's 48 percent, Ibope reported. Results from states with electronic 
voting machines were expected by Monday, while returns from states 
that used paper ballots would take two days longer, electoral officials 
said. Brazil is a victim of the global financial crisis that began 
last year in Asia and shifted to Russia before moving here. In the 
past two months, investors have withdrawn some dlrs 25 billion from 
the country. Cardoso's economic team and the International Monetary 
Fund have spent the past weeks working out ways to slash Brazil's 
deficit of around dlrs 65 billion, or 7 percent of the gross domestic 
product. Many of Cardoso's proposals _ which include spending cuts 
and tax hikes _ require congressional approval, and governors have 
tremendous influence over how legislators vote. They must be tough 
enough to persuade the IMF to approve a dlrs 30 billion rescue package. 
As Brazilians awaited the unveiling of the package, the elections 
became a referendum on the austerity measures. ``Without them, Brazil 
will collapse,'' said Adriano Ramos, a financial analyst in Sao Paulo. 
He voted for incumbent Covas because ``he is better prepared to administrate 
a policy of scarce resources.'' But many voters were unwilling to 
vote for more cuts. Osvaldo Severino Correia, a Rio telecommunications 
technician, showed his paycheck of dlrs 116 (140 reals) a month. After 
taxes, he has just dlrs 95 (113 reals). ``Now they want to take out 
more taxes,'' he said. ``I wouldn't vote for the government candidates 
for anything in the world.'' Although voting is mandatory, observers 
said the turnout seemed low and voters were subdued. Cardoso, who 
was re-elected Oct. 4 by receiving more than half the vote on the 
first ballot, has given Brazilians little choice. Ibope interviewed 
5,500 voters and said the margin of error was 1.7 percent. Army troops 
were deployed in four northern states to ensure peace. In the poor 
northeastern state of Piaui, the government ordered the seizure of 
newspapers and magazines that carried stories critical of incumbent 
Gov. Mao Santa. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>