<DOC>
<DOCNO> APW19981025.0225 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Jewish settlers protesting the new peace accord staged road-blocking 
protests across the West Bank on Sunday. Police said at least 20 settlers 
were arrested and two police officers were hurt. Near the settlement 
of Ofra north of Jerusalem, about 50 settlers and their supporters 
rushed past Israeli police and sat cross-legged on the highway. Some 
settlers wrapped in prayer shawls held morning prayers at the roadside. 
There were similar demonstrations throughout the West Bank. Police 
also said settlers burned tires at the Karme Tsur settlement north 
of Hebron. Israeli Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu was flying home 
from Washington as the settlers, once his staunch supporters, took 
to the streets to express anger over his agreement to turn more West 
Bank land over to the Palestinians in exchange for security concessions. 
``I'm here to show that this is a sad day,'' said Natan El, 38, an 
engineer, sitting in the middle of the main north-south highway through 
the West Bank. ``We are in danger of losing our land, the land we 
have returned to after 2,000 years.'' Meanwhile, Israeli politicians 
from most parties predicted political turmoil in the wake of the signing 
of the agreement. ``This government probably won't survive,'' said 
David Levy, who quit his post as Netanyahu's foreign minister in January. 
Twelve of Netanyahu's supporters in the parliament say they will vote 
against him in upcoming no-confidence motions. Netanyahu has only 
a one-seat majority. The moderate opposition Labor party, which originated 
the peace process with the Palestinians, pledges to back the accord 
in parliament and refrain from voting no confidence in Netanyahu's 
government for two weeks. Sunday's protests marked the first major 
action by the settlers since the signing of the accord, which came 
during the Jewish Sabbath. With orders to keep the roads open, police 
arrested 31 protesters, according to Aharon Domb, head of the settlers' 
council. The police said more than 20 had been arrested but could 
not provide a precise figure. Domb also said 20 settlers, including 
women and children, were injured in clashes with police near the settlement 
of Kadumim. Police could not confirm any settler injuries, but said 
two police were slightly hurt. Israeli police were also on alert for 
possible attacks by Palestinian extremists opposed to the accord, 
according to Israel radio. The agreement signed at the White House 
Friday calls for an Israeli handover of 13.1 percent of the West Bank 
to Palestinian civilian control. That means some Jewish settlements 
will be surrounded by Palestinian-controlled territory, except for 
access roads. ``We hoped this moment would never come,'' said Shlomo 
Filber, a leader of the settlers' movement. Leaders of the settler 
council, including mayors of the various West Bank regions, met at 
the movement's Jerusalem headquarters to talk strategy. Settler spokeswoman 
Yehudit Tayar they were discussing whether and how to try to bring 
down the government. ``As diligently as we worked to elect Mr Netanyahu 
to office, there is a very good chance that we might do the same even 
more diligently to see that the government topple,'' Tayar told The 
Associated Press. In a another development, Palestinian security arrested 
Sheik Hamed Betawi, a Hamas leader from the West Bank town of Nablus. 
According to his family, Betawi, 55, is being held in a Nablus prison. 
During the past several weeks, more than two dozen Hamas activists 
have been arrested. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>