<DOC>
<DOCNO> APW19981025.0397 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Five weeks after separatists declared a cease-fire in their fight 
against Spain, Basque voters faced a decision in regional elections 
Sunday to either reward the pro-independence nationalists or support 
more mainstream parties. Turnout was expected to be high among the 
1.8 million registered voters despite chilly, rainy weather in much 
of this picturesque, wealthy region of northern Spain. Prime Minister 
Jose Maria Aznar's is hoping heavy turnout will give his center-right 
Popular Party and other non-nationalist groups more clout in the Basque 
country to seek a lasting settlement to one of Western Europe's last 
regional conflicts without splitting Spain. The armed separatist group 
ETA, whose name is a Basque-language acronym for Basque Homeland and 
Freedom, has killed nearly 800 people since 1968. It began its truce 
Sept. 18 making this the first regional election held without a threat 
of violence. A key question is how much support the cease-fire will 
attract for the third-placed, pro-ETA Herri Batasuna party, which 
is fielding candidates under a new coalition called Euskal Herritarrok. 
Aznar says there can be no peace process until ETA accepts the results 
of the elections and renounces violence for good. Although ETA has 
called cease-fires before, many Spaniards see this one as the best 
opportunity in years to end the conflict. The elections are for the 
region's 75-seat legislature, which in turn will elect the Basque 
regional president. It is the sixth such election since Spain granted 
the Basque country a broad degree of autonomy 19 years ago. Following 
the death of dictator Francisco Franco in 1975, Spain was divided 
into 17 autonomous regions, although the Madrid government still controls 
most strategic powers, such as foreign affairs and defense. The moderate 
Basque Nationalist Party, which helped negotiate the cease-fire, is 
expected to remain the largest party in the legislature but to fall 
short of an outright majority. It would then need allies to form a 
coalition government. In Vitoria, the clean, handsome town that serves 
as the seat of the Basque government, people braved the cold to vote 
in polling stations guarded by Basque police wearing bright red coats 
and berets and carrying shiny white truncheons. Many said they could 
not remember an election that so clearly pitted the nationalists against 
the non-nationalist camps. They also said that with the ETA cease-fire, 
regardless of who wins, Basques will now feel freer to speak their 
minds. ``The election opens a whole new range of possibilities,'' 
said Ignacio Martinez, a 40-year-old teacher who said he voted for 
Euskal Herritarrok. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>