<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981025.0103 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
After brandishing yet another threat of Western air power, NATO's 
top two generals left Belgrade on Sunday with assurances that Yugoslavia 
will withdraw enough of its forces from the province of Kosovo by 
a Tuesday deadline to avoid punitive air strikes, according to Western 
diplomats. On their third visit to press Western demands for the force 
reductions, and after 18 hours of meetings with President Slobodan 
Milosevic of Yugoslavia and his military chiefs, senior NATO officers 
agreed on the specific military and police units to be withdrawn and 
were promised that the speed of withdrawal will increase, the diplomats 
said. If the promises are kept, they will probably avert a showdown 
between Yugoslavia and NATO that the alliance seems anxious to avoid 
_ not only because it means taking military action against a sovereign 
country but because, Western diplomats say, it would greatly complicate 
efforts to solve the problems in Kosovo peacefully. The first of as 
many as 2,000 international monitors who are to spread out across 
Kosovo are beginning to arrive there. While they may enhance the chances 
of peace, both they and the increasing number of relief workers could 
easily be taken hostage in the event of NATO military action. Gen. 
Wesley Clark, the American who is NATO's supreme commander, and Gen. 
Klaus Naumann, a German who is the alliance's highest ranking European 
officer, arrived here on Saturday to tell Yugoslavia that it must 
move much more quickly to reduce its forces in Kosovo. NATO civilian 
officials said it would not be necessary for all the forces to be 
removed by Tuesday's deadline if the pace of withdrawal quickened 
enough to suggest that they would all be gone soon. ``We know exactly 
the names and locations of every unit we want out of there,'' a NATO 
officer said. Another NATO officer said Yugoslavia would also have 
to remove all its artillery from Kosovo or shift the weapons to a 
narrow area along the border with Albania. ``Those weapons have no 
business where they are because right now they can only be used against 
civilian targets,''the officer said. Western diplomats say that while 
some Yugoslav forces have been withdrawn already, the number is far 
from enough to comply with the agreement reached between the U.S. 
envoy Richard Holbrooke and Milosevic on Oct. 13. To get that agreement, 
NATO also threatened air strikes, then suspended the threat until 
this Tuesday to give Milosevic time to reduce his forces to the level 
demanded by a U.N. resolution. There seems to be little enthusiasm 
for air or missile strikes on Yugoslavia. Speaking on British television 
Sunday, Foreign Secretary Robin Cook indicated that the deadline would 
pass without an order to bomb, Agence France-Presse reported from 
London. ``I think that when on Tuesday we review this, we may well 
come to the conclusion we cannot yet relax our guard, we cannot stand 
down the planes, we need further progress before we relax that order,'' 
Cook said. The United Nations said Yugoslavia must bring down the 
level of police and army forces in Kosovo to what it was in February, 
before a military offensive against ethnic Albanian rebels who want 
Kosovo to be an independent country. Dozens of towns and villages 
were destroyed, and hundreds of people, many of them civilians, were 
killed in the offensive. More than 250,000 civilians who fled during 
the offensive are afraid to return to their homes, and some are living 
in the open. A senior NATO official said that about 25,000 soldiers 
and policemen are still in Kosovo, 10,000 fewer than at the height 
of the offensive, but 9,000 more than Milosevic agreed to. ``A lot 
of these are the same people responsible for the attacks on civilians 
and the looting,'' the NATO official said. ``People quite rightly 
are afraid to go home with these men still in the field. Milosevic 
may not be able to get them all out by the Tuesday deadline, but he 
must pick up the speed of the withdrawal.'' Christopher Hill, the 
U.S. diplomat trying to get a peace agreement between Yugoslav officials 
and ethnic Albanians said on Thursday that there is no chance of serious 
negotiations until Yugoslavia reduces its forces and the fighting 
stops. Threatening military action to make the government reduce its 
forces will not bring peace if the separatist guerrillas continue 
to mount military actions. While Kosovo is part of Serbia and is ruled 
by Serbian officials and security forces, ethnic Albanians make up 
roughly 90 percent of the population. ``No one can expect the Serbs 
to leave and let the KLA take over,'' a senior Western diplomat said, 
referring to the ethnic Albanian Kosovo Liberation Army. On Saturday, 
as an estimated 1,000 soldiers and several artillery pieces were being 
withdrawn from a position guarding one of Kosovo's main roads, a Western 
diplomat said: ''There are strong KLA units all over that area. If 
they want to cut that road, it's now wide open.'' While the level 
of fighting in Kosovo has declined substantially, both sides have 
initiated attacks, diplomats say. Western diplomats concede that while 
they have been able to persuade the Yugoslav government at least to 
begin reducing its forces, they have little with which to threaten 
the guerrillas, who are dispersed in small units and often intermingled 
with civilians. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>