<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981025.0163 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu of Israel, stepping off a plane 
from Washington into a turbulent political arena, plunged directly 
into an aggressive campaign on Sunday both to stay in office and to 
secure support for the new peace accord with the Palestinians. Facing 
vituperative protests by Jewish settlers and the threat of new elections, 
Netanyahu kicked off his campaign right at the Ben Gurion Airport 
Sunday afternoon, mounting a charged defense of what the right wing 
sees as a betrayal of all it stands for: the turnover of more land 
to Palestinian control. In a speech broadcast live on Israeli television, 
he portrayed himself as a reluctant peacemaker and as a kind of warrior 
forced to make stomach-turning strategic decisions. ``Handing over 
even one centimeter or one grain of the soil of the Land of Israel 
to the Palestinian Authority is difficult and agonizing,'' Netanyahu 
said. ``We fought with all our might, we fought like lions, to reduce 
as much as possible, within the framework of Israel's commitments, 
the land that was handed over.'' Appealing directly to his fiercest 
critics, the settlers in the West Bank who have vowed to topple him, 
Netanyahu said, ``You are us and we are you. We love you.'' The sentiment 
fell on closed ears. The settlers formally broke relations with Netanyahu 
on Sunday and announced they were seeking a new candidate. Fanning 
out across roads in the West Bank, they staged rambunctious protests, 
blocking about 30 junctions and locking horns with the Israeli police 
even as they swayed in prayer. Palestinian traffic was successfully 
halted for an hour; 20 settlers were arrested; and two police officers 
were lightly injured. While Yasser Arafat briefed the Algerian president 
in Algiers on the peace agreement Sunday, he faced troubles of his 
own at home, where security officials are waging a crackdown on terrorism, 
illegal weapons and dissent in the wake of the signing. During a violent 
show-down with the local chapter of Arafat's Fatah movement in Ramallah, 
a military intelligence officer shot and killed a 17-year-old boy, 
Wasim Tarifi, from a prominent local family. Tires were burned, stone 
barricades were erected in the heart of downtown, shops were shuttered 
and a general strike was called for Monday. ``This is the worst thing 
that could happen, an internal confrontation and breakdown,'' said 
Hanan Ashrawi, a Palestinian council member who witnessed the shoot-out 
from her home. The confrontation was provoked when hundreds of Fatah 
youth protested following a raid on the organization's local headquarters 
by military intelligence officials, who seized weapons and arrested 
five people. It was part of an upsurge of activity by security officials, 
who have been cracking down on critics of the peace agreement, too. 
On Friday, 11 journalists were detained for seeking an interview with 
the Islamic fundamentalist spiritual leader, Sheik Ahmed Yassin. And 
Palestinian police on Sunday arrested a prominent Muslim cleric, Sheik 
Hamed Bitawi, after he spoke out against the accord on television. 
``The Israelis allow settlers to express their opposition,'' his wife 
told Reuters. ``Why can't we?'' At the airport in Tel Aviv, despite 
the settlers' chilly reception, Netanyahu received not only a formal, 
brass-band welcome but a genuinely enthusiastic one from cabinet ministers 
and from the rank and file of his own Likud Party. This suggested 
that he has successfully moved his political camp onto a new ideological 
terrain where territorial compromise with the Palestinians, long anathema, 
has been accepted as a pragmatic reality. Since the Likud party was 
founded to defend the notion of a ``greater land of Israel'' against 
the Labor Party's willingness to concede territory, Labor leaders 
sounded disoriented Sunday, as if they were trying to rejigger their 
role. In part, they gloated, and in part, they tried hard to insist 
they were still opponents. ``The Likud has given up the idea of the 
greater land of Israel, and adopted the positions of the Labor Party,'' 
Ehud Barak, Labor's leader, said. But he added: ``The state is mired 
in mud. It's time to act toward early elections and establish a government 
that will start pulling us out.'' At the airport and in subsequent 
television interviews, Netanyahu's rhetoric aimed squarely at that 
threat. While his term is due to expire in 2000, he holds a razor-thin 
majority in the Parliament, buoyed by a motley coalition of old Likud, 
new immigrants and the religious right. But with this agreement, the 
coalition, which arose in support of Netanyahu's anti-peace effort 
stand, is fracturing. The Labor Party has promised to grant Netanyahu 
a two-week ``safety net,'' unwilling to topple a government on the 
issue of peace. But after those two weeks are over, they are prepared 
to enter a peculiar alliance with the right to bring down Netanyahu. 
A bill calling for new elections could go to the Parliament as early 
as this week. In his statements Sunday, Netanyahu tried to hammer 
home the idea that his right-wing critics have nowhere else to turn, 
because Labor is the only other option, and wouldn't meet their needs. 
``Every child knows that the Labor party would have already given 
back most of the territory,'' he said. The Labor party cannot be trusted, 
he said, to run the final status negotiations, which will determine 
such thorny issues as borders, the return of refugees and the fate 
of Jerusalem. ``If it runs the final status negotiations,'' Netanyahu 
said, his voice rising, ``a Palestinian state will be established 
on all the territory of the state of Israel, and the Jewish settlements 
will actually be dried up and, in the end, uprooted. ``Who will see 
to it that the border will not reach Tel Aviv, here at this airport?'' 
he continued. ``Who will protect Jerusalem?'' Netanyahu ticked off 
what he described as Israel's gains from Friday's agreement, known 
as ``The Wye Memorandum'' for the conference center in Maryland where 
it was negotiated. He asserted that it greatly improved on the Oslo 
interim peace agreement, containing a timetable for concrete security 
measures by the Palestinian Authority that must be met before Israeli 
withdrawals from the West Bank. ``We plugged many of the holes in 
the Swiss cheese of Oslo,'' he said. The settlers did not buy it. 
As one group took to a bulldozer in an unsuccessful effort to fence 
off a plot of land in an Arab neighborhood in East Jerusalem, the 
leaders held an emergency meeting to plan strategy against Netanyahu. 
``This government is not our government,'' Rabbi Eliezer Waldman said. 
``We have been tricked. It appears that a new leadership is needed 
in Israel.'' The settlers seem to be politically isolated in their 
opposition to the peace agreement. An opinion poll published Sunday 
by the newspaper Yedioth Aharonot showed that 74 percent of Israelis 
support the Wye agreement. ``Greater Israel was buried in this agreement, 
and the formula of land for peace has been accepted by all,'' said 
Leah Rabin, widow of Yitzhak Rabin, the prime minister who was assassinated 
in 1995, two years after signing the Oslo interim peace agreement. 
``This is a full recognition of Yitzhak's path.'' Israeli Army radio 
reported Sunday that the Shin Bet security services had recommended 
tightening security around Netanyahu and the ministers who accompanied 
him to Washington, following threats from extremist elements on the 
Israeli right. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>