<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981025.0220 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Picture, if indeed you can, the kind of castle Dr. Seuss might have 
built had he moonlighted on a Chevrolet assembly line. Cartoonish 
spires of hand-packed muck rise ludicrously over prim New England 
gables while iron bedsteads stand as gates in front of auto-fender 
archways. Doors are made from baby cribs, walls from bricks and bottle 
caps. In every corner, the scraps of industry are pressed into the 
service of its maker's dream. The dreamer was George Daynor, a former 
gold prospector from the Klondike, and his unusual vision was a mansion 
of junk called the Palace of Depression. With just $4 in his pocket, 
Daynor left Alaska in 1929, hitchhiked to Vineland and bought an auto 
dump. From the scrap parts, he built a home of struts and rubber bumpers 
and named it after the economic calamity that beset the nation. More 
than 300,000 people visited Daynor's temple of trash before the city 
razed it after his death in 1964. But if the axle bits and lug nuts 
that made up the place have long since disappeared, the plucky spirit 
that it represents remains. And now, in a starry-eyed but serious 
effort to put this sprawling farm community on the tourist map again, 
city officials here have begun a plan to rebuild the Palace of Depression. 
Today, all that remains of the once proud monument of junk is a crumbling 
exterior wall and a lonely gazebo of stone and mud that served for 
years as a ticket booth. But at its height, the Palace's fame was 
so widespread that Universal Pictures made a short film about it, 
``The Fantastic Castle,'' and the Standard Oil Co. of New Jersey included 
it on its Esso continental road maps. From New York City to southern 
Pennsylvania, headlines blared. ``Builds Palace Out of Old Junk'' 
and ``Transforms Swamp Tract Into Paradise,'' they read. ``In its 
heyday, it was a huge tourist attraction, nationally known,'' said 
Kevin Kirchner, Vineland's director of licenses and inspections, who 
has undertaken the restoration effort. ``I'm hoping that once we rebuild 
the place, it'll actually bring more people into town.'' To that end, 
Kirchner has set in motion a plan to build a detailed replica of the 
original, reconstructing each and every goofy ornament, from the chimney 
made of mud flaps to the wagon-axle hearth. He plans to bring back 
Daynor's Knockout Room, where its builder jokingly offered to help 
those still suffering from their own depressions by dropping a 10-pound 
weight on their heads to batter them back to their senses. Since this 
summer, Kirchner has hired an architect, an engineer and several archeologists 
to help plan for the restoration. Now he is trying to raise the $400,000 
he estimates it will cost to bring the Palace back to life. Besides 
money, however, the biggest obstacle is where to find the perfect 
junk. But like Daynor himself, Kirchner plans to use whatever materials 
are at hand. ``I have body and fender guys standing by,'' he said. 
``And I have welders, too, if we can't find the stuff in a junkyard 
and have to make it ourselves. I figure the Cub Scouts can go out 
searching for tortoise shells and seashells.'' Amid the cornfields 
and tomato patches about 30 miles south of Philadelphia, Vineland 
is the sort of close-knit city where parking regulations are routinely 
ignored and everyone knows your name. With such small-town sociability, 
the Palace of Depression maintains an almost mythic grip on the minds 
of local residents, many of whom recall touring it as children. ``I 
was about 5 years old when my parents first took me through it,'' 
Kirchner said. ``I had nightmares for weeks. But later, as a building 
inspector, I was always curious how the man managed to build that 
thing.'' In ``The Fantastic Castle,'' Daynor comes across as a gnomish 
man, bearded and burly, who is more than pleased to lead visitors 
through his prized possession. He is eccentric, voluble and charming, 
and obviously loves to lecture to the movie cameras. In fact, Daynor 
was a notorious publicity hound, several residents who knew him said, 
the sort of man who mailed greeting cards to scores of newspaper reporters 
every Christmas with a picture of the Palace and its builder. In one 
of his stranger public moments, in 1952, he accused two agents of 
the Cuban government of ambushing him in a taxi outside the Waldorf-Astoria 
Hotel and stealing back a suitcase filled with the one million Cuban 
pesos he said he had just won in the Cuban National Lottery. New York 
City detectives later said they had no record of his presence in the 
city on the night he claimed the theft occurred. Five years later, 
he was convicted of obstruction of justice and jailed for a year for 
lying to federal agents investigating the abduction of a 4-month-old 
Long Island boy, Peter Weinberger. In a brazen publicity stunt, Daynor 
had told the agents that the kidnappers had been to the Palace of 
Depression four days after the baby disappeared, an utter lie. He 
had simply been following the case in the newspaper and wanted to 
generate headlines. Like the original builder, Kirchner said he initially 
suffered the ridicule of city officials. But in a recent interview, 
Mayor Anthony Campanella said he was thrilled that the Palace of Depression 
might come back to life. ``We're largely a farming community down 
here with a fairly thriving glass industry,'' the mayor said, ``but 
outside that there's really nothing for the tourists.'' Other small 
towns have managed to ignite their tourist industries with off-kilter 
attractions. Vineland is hoping that the Palace of Depression can 
attain the same sort of wacky acclaim achieved by Cadillac Ranch, 
a half-dozen or so rusting Cadillacs plunged hood-deep in the scrub 
grass off Interstate 40 in Amarillo, Texas, or Carhenge, a life-sized 
replica of Stonehenge made from junkers, which lies in a field off 
Federal Highway 385 two miles north of Alliance, Neb. And plenty of 
other people here share Kirchner's confidence that the plan will succeed. 
``It'll rejuvenate our city and put us back on the map internationally,'' 
said Cumberland County Sheriff James Forcinito, who was born and raised 
in Vineland. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>