<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981025.0201 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
In the Jets' new era, as they continue to escape from their twilight 
zone, they take advantage of the breaks instead of being victimized 
by them. Their 28-3 victory over the Falcons on Sunday was a major 
step forward for this franchise, a second-straight triumph over a 
pretty good team, and the fourth victory in the last five games. The 
Jets' record is now 4-3, putting them in a tie with New England for 
second place in the American Football Conference East, one game behind 
the Miami Dolphins. Luck? Perhaps there was some for the Jets, who 
faced and battered the oldest quarterback ever to start a National 
Football League game, 44-year-old Steve DeBerg. He was starting for 
the first time in five years because Chris Chandler has a sore left 
shoulder. And dumb luck, too? Perhaps. Coach Bill Parcells, angry 
at the rookie free safety Kevin Williams for being late to a meeting 
on Saturday night, banished him to the bench. So Jerome Henderson, 
who hadn't started since last year, discovered on Sunday morning at 
the Meadowlands that he was going to be the free safety. He pounced 
on a DeBerg fumble in the second quarter, returned it for a touchdown 
that put the Jets ahead by 14-0 and forced the Falcons into an uncomfortable 
game plan _ employing DeBerg to try to get them back. ``It was the 
kind of bounce you dream about,'' said Henderson. There was a dream-like 
quality about the game for most of the crowd of more than 70,000 fans 
and several Jet players. Vinny Testaverde continued his Hollywood-like 
comeback by tossing a pair of touchdowns, Curtis Martin continued 
his 100-yard rushing production, Mo Lewis played linebacker like an 
all pro and the defense held the previously dangerous Jamal Anderson 
to only 46 yards on 19 carries. Decent teams are supposed to take 
advantage of other teams' problems, and the Jets showed the willing, 
but overmatched DeBerg nothing but animosity. They blitzed him from 
the opening series, they wound up sacking him three times in three 
quarters, they intercepted him once and forced him to fumble once, 
leading to the pivotal touchdown. Meanwhile, Testaverde understood 
exactly how important this day was. For the first time in 10 years, 
his career touchdowns-to-interception differential is now in positive 
territory. ``I'm plus-2,'' he said with a smile when asked about that 
record. The 34-year-old admitted that he had been hounded by his history 
of having more interceptions than touchdowns. This season, though, 
he has tossed 11 touchdowns to one interception. Of course, having 
Martin produce a fourth straight game of 100 rushing yards _ something 
no Jet runner had done in 13 years _ meant that Testaverde was not 
confined to flinging the football downfield. Testaverde is now 4-0 
as the Jets' starter _ no other quarterback in team history can make 
that statement _ and in each start, Martin amassed more than 100 rushing 
yards. Even Parcells was, well, if not pleased, at least upbeat. ``I'm 
very happy we won,'' he said, ``I guess you can't tell that.'' His 
Jets reached what he had set out as a goal two games ago _ capturing 
five games of a six-game stretch. Last Monday night, the Jets toppled 
a fine Patriots team and on Sunday they defeated a Falcons club that 
was 5-1 coming into the game. Next Sunday the Jets play the Chiefs 
in Kansas City, a place that often overwhelms visitors. So Parcells 
wasn't completely a sweetheart with his club after Sunday's thrashing. 
``I told guys we still got players who need the whip and I don't have 
the energy to whip them,'' he said. Parcells said Sunday that Williams 
``was late last night for the meeting. That's fine. But I'm not going 
to have any rookies late for the meeting. So he can just sit on the 
bench.'' There were also pre-game exhortations by the veteran running 
back/tight end Keith Byars and linebacker Bryan Cox. ``We knew the 
defense had to make points,'' said Cox. ``We hadn't done it all year.'' 
Cox started for James Farrior, who had not practiced well enough for 
Parcells. First, the defense stuffed Anderson, who was held to no 
gain in a two-carry stretch on the opening drive. When the Jets got 
the ball for their second series, they embarked on an 86-yard march 
that culminated with a 2-yard scoring run by Martin. And then, on 
the opening drive of the second quarter, DeBerg found himself sandwiched 
between defensive backs _ Victor Green blitzing from one side, Henderson 
coming from the other. Green sacked him, DeBerg fumbled and there 
was Henderson plucking the ball off the ground in stride and dashing 
53 yards for the score. Nothing worked for the Falcons. Anderson had 
only 25 yards by halftime, averaging a mere 2.3 yards a carry. DeBerg 
got little yardage on his completions. All the Falcons got out of 
the half _ and the game, it turned out _ was a field goal from the 
second-oldest player on the team, 38-year-old Morten Andersen, on 
the last play of the first half. But that was quickly negated after 
halftime on a big play by Keyshawn Johnson, who had dropped two passes 
earlier. Johnson used his 6-foot-3-inch height to reach a toss from 
Testaverde over cornerback Ray Buchanan, who is 6 inches shorter. 
It was a 12-yard score that put the Jets ahead by 21-3. DeBerg was 
forced to pass, and on the next series a deflection was picked off 
by Lewis. That positioned a Testaverde-to-Byars 22-yard scoring pass 
that was so easy that Byars strolled into the end zone the final 6 
yards. It prompted a standing ovation, a roar from the crowd of ``Jets, 
Jets, Jets, Jets.'' But it wasn't a plea for something to happen, 
as the chant has been so often over the years. Instead, it was an 
anthem from fans who usually had been too nervous to think of better 
days. That crushing score also marked the end of DeBerg's day. He 
was replaced by a second-year man, Tony Graziani, who is 20 years 
younger. Meanwhile, Glenn Foley, the player replaced by Testaverde 
two games ago, came in during the final two minutes and kneeled down 
as the Jets ran out the clock. On the sideline, Williams, who got 
in for a few plays, watched. ``Winning,'' said the chastised rookie 
later, ``always makes everything easier.'' 
</TEXT>
</DOC>