<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981025.0099 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
As competition for pipeline routes out of the oil-rich Caspian Sea 
basin intensifies, Turkey announced new restrictions over the weekend 
on use of the Bosporus, the strategic waterway that divides Europe 
and Asia. Foreign Minister Ismail Cem said 4,500 tankers passed through 
last year, and the straits will not be able to handle that number 
next year. ``Turkey will not grant any priority to oil tankers,'' 
Cem said in a statement issued Saturday. ``It has the right and duty 
to take all measures to protect the ecological system, history, cultural 
heritage and safety of those who live along the straits.'' In case 
oil executives missed his message, Cem pointed out that these new 
measures ``could slow down current traffic.'' Turkey's announcement 
was the latest move in a high-stakes rivalry among regional and world 
powers for influence in the volatile Caspian region. Political pressures 
are mounting as major oil companies prepare to decide where they want 
to lay the main export pipeline for their Caspian crude. Policy makers 
in Washington and elsewhere believe the decision could have long-term 
strategic implications for the region, which is made up of former 
Soviet states wedged between Iran and Russia. Turkey and the United 
States are waging a last-minute campaign to persuade oil companies 
to build their pipeline along a route that would favor Western interests. 
Oil companies are resisting because they say such a pipeline would 
cost too much to build. Turkish officials have evidently decided to 
warn oil companies that they cannot count on sending their tankers 
through the Bosporus if they use an alternate route. Turkey says that 
because the 19-mile channel runs through the center of Istanbul, which 
is home to more than 10 million people, increases in tanker traffic 
are impossible. Last week, Clinton administration officials summoned 
top oil executives from Amoco, Chevron and other companies active 
in the Caspian to a meeting in Washington at which they laid out the 
case for their favored pipeline. It would run from the Azerbaijani 
capital of Baku, where the Caspian oil boom is centered, across Georgia 
and Turkey to the Turkish port of Ceyhan on the Mediterranean. The 
administration favors this route because it would strengthen Turkey 
while pulling Azerbaijan and Georgia away from the Russian sphere 
of influence and toward the West. It would also keep Caspian oil out 
of Iran and bring it to a port within easy sailing distance of Israel. 
Both Russia and Iran oppose the Baku-Ceyhan route, and each has offered 
an alternative of its own. Each bidder claims its alternative is cheapest. 
President Clinton's special envoy to the Caspian region, Richard Morningstar, 
is scheduled to arrive in Istanbul on Monday for a round of meetings 
at which he will press oil executives to look more favorably on the 
Baku-Ceyhan route. Oil executives say they want to build a pipeline 
along that route, but that given low oil prices and the years it will 
take before Caspian oil is flowing in large amounts, they cannot commit 
several billion dollars to it immediately. The oil companies are reportedly 
leaning toward building a shorter route running from Baku to the Georgian 
port of Supsa on the Black Sea. From there the crude might be shipped 
through the Bosporus to the Mediterranean and the open ocean beyond. 
Turkey's environmental argument dovetails neatly with its desire to 
promote the Baku-Ceyhan pipeline route. If the Turks and Americans 
can convince oil companies that the Bosporus is already full to capacity, 
prospects for the Baku-Ceyhan pipeline would improve. The legality 
of the tighter regulations that Turkey has announced may be questionable, 
however. Under a convention signed in 1936, Turkey has very limited 
power to regulate traffic on the Bosporus. Apparently by coincidence, 
Turkey's announcement came only hours after an oil tanker collided 
with another vessel on the Bosporus. No oil was spilled. Port officials 
said a tanker of Turkish registry, the Osman Bahri, reported trouble 
with its steering mechanism on Friday night, and soon afterward collided 
with an anchored water tanker. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>