<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981025.0171 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
For the last eight years, Georgia has boomed, and it has done so under 
Democratic rule. The state has created jobs faster than any state 
east of the Mississippi. Its population has exploded by 16 percent, 
the highest growth in the South. It has eliminated the state tax on 
groceries. Its 5-year-old lottery has provided college scholarships 
for 319,000 college students and prekindergarten classes for 246,000 
others. But deep problems have gone unaddressed under Democratic rule 
as well. The state's educational system remains troubled, with Georgia 
students ranking 49th this year on the SATs. Atlanta, the city that 
has driven the state's economic growth, has become clogged with traffic 
and soiled by dirty air and water. And so this year's race for governor, 
in a state that seems to grow more Republican by the day, has centered 
on whether Georgia's glass is half full or half empty. Have the Democrats 
earned the right to add to their 126 years of uninterrupted rule, 
or has this state, like much of the South, become so Republican that 
party labels will obscure considerations of governmental experience? 
The race between Roy Barnes, a longtime Democratic legislator, and 
his Republican opponent, Guy Millner, an entrepreneur, has taken on 
national significance because Georgia is the only state that has not 
elected a Republican governor since Reconstruction. Barnes, 50, represents 
Cobb County, an Atlanta suburb that is heavily Republican. He presents 
himself as a qualified steward of the state's recent progress. Millner, 
62, who lives in Atlanta's toniest neighborhood, offers himself as 
an agent of change who will protect the most successful Democratic 
programs while shaking up a government that has rarely felt threatened. 
``We're trying to take the beach,'' Millner said Sunday in a debate 
that was televised by Atlanta's WSB. ``This is a campaign going against 
a Democratic monopoly that's been in our state for a long time.'' 
Barnes counters that it is Democrats who have made Georgia the magnet 
it is today. He has tethered himself tightly to Georgia's immensely 
popular governor, Zell Miller, who is retiring after two terms and 
who has endorsed Barnes in television advertisements. ``I don't see 
all those negative things that Guy Millner sees about Georgia,'' Barnes 
told Democrats at a fund-raising dinner in Atlanta last week. ``I 
see a Georgia that prospers.'' Millner, a founder and board member 
of Norell Corp., a temporary-services firm, has narrowly lost runs 
for governor and U.S. senator in the last four years. Barnes is a 
one-time loser, having lost to Miller in the 1990 gubernatorial primary. 
A lawyer and businessman, he has spent 22 years in the General Assembly, 
developing a record that is considered conservative within his party. 
He voted against the establishment of a Martin Luther King Jr. holiday, 
a vote he says he regrets. He also initially opposed the state lottery, 
though he has become an enthusiastic supporter of its educational 
benefits. The race has been expensive and hard fought, with accusations 
of racism and lying and a barrage of negative advertisements produced 
by both sides. Both campaigns expect to spend close to $10 million. 
Millner, whose wealth was estimated at $167 million this summer, is 
likely to provide at least half of his campaign's funding, while Barnes 
has contributed about $850,000 of his own money. The most recent independent 
polling gave Millner a lead of 45 percent to 42 percent, a statistical 
dead heat. Strategists on both sides report that the numbers have 
gone essentially unchanged for weeks, with party loyalists already 
committed and few issues seeming to move undecided voters. ``You can 
drop an atom bomb and nothing happens,'' said Raymond Strother, Barnes' 
media consultant. This weekend, Millner began running television advertisements 
accusing Barnes of supporting racial quotas. Barnes responded that 
he has always opposed quotas, though he voted against a bill this 
year that would have ended affirmative action in the state. The new 
advertisement, and Millner's constant criticism of the city of Atlanta, 
which has a black mayor, have prompted Barnes to accuse his opponent 
of ``playing the race card'' in a state that has prospered largely 
because it has avoided divisive racial conflicts. On the issues, Millner 
has proposed eliminating Georgia's tax on automobile tags. He also 
says he wants to reduce class sizes in Georgia schools by hiring 7,500 
new teachers. To pay for those expensive proposals, Millner maintains 
that he can use a businessman's approach to cut 7 percent from the 
state budget. At the heart of Barnes' campaign have been his proposals 
to lower residential property taxes and to give managed-care consumers 
a greater choice of doctors. He scoffs at Millner's contention that 
he can find enough waste in the state budget to pay for his proposals, 
saying it demonstrates his lack of experience in state government. 
``He doesn't understand that these things actually cost money,'' Barnes 
said in Sunday's debate. Noting that Georgia's most recent governors 
have come from the General Assembly, he added, ``It's experience in 
running the state that makes us prosperous.'' To reinforce that point, 
Barnes asked Millner on Sunday to explain how the state's revenue 
estimates were determined, a question that gave Millner some trouble. 
In other recent forums, Millner has fumbled when asked to explain 
important bills and to state how many legislators Georgia has. Millner 
acknowledged Sunday that Barnes ``can tell you every bill number line 
by line, and I applaud that.'' But, he added, ``Is that what is needed?'' 
And he said that after more than a century of one-party rule, Georgia 
needs a leader who will ask why new things cannot be tried. ``Yes, 
I'm Pollyanna,'' he said. ``I'm not willing to say we can't do it.'' 
</TEXT>
</DOC>