<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981025.0062 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
The 1992-95 war in Bosnia-Herzegovina left an indelible imprint on 
most of the foreign journalists who covered it. Serbian shelling of 
defenseless cities, brutal concentration camps and, above all, ethnic 
cleansing could not be forgotten, and many journalists sought to sum 
up their experiences in books. Understandably, the quality varied 
from transient reports resting between hard covers to powerful first-hand 
accounts enhanced by an enlarging vision. In the latter category, 
among others, one thinks of the Americans Roy Gutman, David Rieff 
and Laura Silber, and Martin Bell and Misha Glenny of Britain Chuck 
Sudetic's superb ``Blood and Vengeance'' joins that short list and 
is essential reading for anyone who wants to understand the war in 
Bosnia. The book masterfully traces in masterly fashion the course 
of the larger war through its impact on one Muslim family, and Sudetic's 
magnifying approach illuminates both the darker corners and the larger 
framework of the conflict. The Muslim family whose tragic destiny 
he chronicles is that of Huso and Hiba Celik and their three sons 
and a daughter. Related to the family by marriage, Sudetic is an American 
of Croatian descent who arrived in Yugoslavia in 1990 and covered 
the fighting in Croatia and Bosnia for The New York Times from 1990 
to 1995. Over the following years, he returned to the former Yugoslavia 
in an effort to ascertain the fate of the Celiks, who had been driven 
by Serbian ethnic cleansing from their mountain village of Kupusovici 
to the nearby eastern Bosnian mining town of Srebrenica, one of the 
U.N. safe areas. Through the histories of the extended Celik family 
and their neighbors, Serb and Muslim alike, Sudetic draws a compelling 
portrait of life in the ancient Bosnian villages and towns along the 
Drina River, for centuries the border between Bosnia and Serbia. He 
records with a novelist's eye and a journalist's terse prose the lazy 
rhythms of country life. But these historical sections are not a nostalgic 
country idyll. Sudetic also records ``life along a troubled border,'' 
the mutual fears and antagonisms, as well as the persisting blood 
feuds. He notes without comment that both the grandfather and father 
of Huso Celik died violent deaths: his grandfather, a conscript in 
the Austrian Army, was killed by Serbian neighbors at the beginning 
of World War I; his father, a farmer, was killed by Serbian guerrillas 
in World War II. Huso and his family's turn came in the spring of 
1992 when, after an ill-fated referendum on Bosnian independence, 
Serbian-inspired violence exploded. Little reported upon at the time, 
in eastern Bosnia the Bosnian Serb leaders and their mentors in Belgrade 
were carrying out a calculated plan to create an ethnically based 
Bosnian Serb Republic _ Republika Srpska, they called it _ next door 
to Serbia. Ethnically based meant ethnic cleansing for these majority-Muslim 
areas. The early parts of ``Blood and Vengeance'' focus on the fighting 
in 1992-93, culminating in the declaration of Srebrenica as a safe 
area by the U. N. Security Council in April 1993. Sudetic is particularly 
critical of the permanent members of the council, for he sees their 
decision as a cynical ploy to avoid decisive politico-military action, 
thereby turning Srebrenica into ``something worse than a concentration 
camp.'' Like thousands of other Muslims, Huso and most of the Celik 
family huddled in Srebrenica for years, surviving on humanitarian 
aid until the Bosnian Serb army launched a large-scale attack and 
took the town in July 1995. The capture of the Srebrenica safe area, 
with U.N. peacekeeping troops standing by impotently, forms the calamitous 
denouement of ``Blood and Vengeance.'' Sudetic recounts in detail 
the events leading up to the fall of the town and the subsequent massacres 
of the Muslims, overwhelmingly civilians, who had sought refuge there, 
the largest mass murder in Europe since the end of World War II. Huso 
Celik and his son-in-law, Muhamed, along with 7,000 to 8,000 other 
Muslim men, were rounded up and taken away by the Bosnian Serb forces 
of Gen. Ratko Mladic and have not been seen again. Almost certainly 
they are dead. Huso's four children survived the Srebrenica massacres. 
His daughter and two sons went to live in Canada, and another son 
resettled in ``a characterless place'' south of Sarajevo, a former 
Serbian area now part of the Muslim-Croat Federation that makes up 
half of a divided Bosnia and Herzegovina. The Celik family has not 
returned home. Sudetic does not cavil at their decision, noting that 
the Dayton peace accords ``left the Bosnian Serb nationalists . . 
. the very thugs who had started the violence in the first place'' 
in de facto control of the other half of Bosnia, including Srebrenica 
and other former Muslim-majority towns in eastern Bosnia. Nor is the 
Celik family unique. In the three years since Dayton, somewhat fewer 
than 30,000 of those expelled have returned to their original homes, 
and they have almost all been Bosnian Croats and Bosnian Serbs who 
have gone to Muslim-controlled areas. Of the more than 250,000 Muslims 
expelled, the principal victims of the war, virtually none have returned 
to their former homes in what is now the Republika Srpska. Has ethnic 
cleansing been ratified? Has aggression been rewarded? Unsurprisingly, 
there are more villains than heroes in ``Blood and Vengeance.'' The 
villains are headed by the Serbian, now Yugoslav, president, Slobodan 
Milosevic, ``the prime mover'' of the Yugoslav disaster, closely followed 
by Mladic. There are others as well: President Franjo Tudjman of Croatia; 
some nationalist Muslim leaders; and feckless U.N.officials like Yasushi 
Akashi, the secretary-general's special representative in the former 
Yugoslavia. Among the few heroes are the last U.N. military commander 
in Bosnia, Gen. Rupert Smith of Britain, as well as the nameless ordinary 
Bosnians who behaved decently amid the prevailing bestiality. The 
book is not without its imperfections. The eye-blurring profusion 
of names makes it read at times like Dostoyevsky on an off day, in 
spite of a 14-page listing of ``main characters.'' Some of Sudetic's 
historical material is of the potted variety. One would also like 
to have been told why the brutal but effective Muslim military commander 
of Srebrenica, Naser Oric, was flown out to safety shortly before 
the final Serbian assault. The Celik family tree has a confusing error, 
and one map places their home village in Serbia. But these are minor 
points. Sudetic tells us that in ``Blood and Vengeance'' he sought 
to delve beneath surface events and to uncover ``the deep structure'' 
of the Bosnian war. In this vital narrative he has succeeded magnificently. 
PUBLICATION NOTES: `BLOOD AND VENGEANCE: ONE FAMILY'S STORY OF THE 
WAR IN BOSNIA.' By Chuck Sudetic. Illustrated. 393 pages. W.W. Norton. 
$26.95. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>