<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981025.0105 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
The principal's office in the little country school here has a gleaming 
new bell and loudspeaker system to broadcast messages and summon the 
student body from recess. But it would be simpler to yell through 
the window for Daiki Saito to come in. Daiki, an impetuous 7-year-old 
with a mischievous sparkle in black eyes that dance beneath bushy 
eyebrows, is the only student in the entire school. This boxy, cream-colored 
schoolhouse is a monument to Japan's commitment to equality _ and 
also to Japanese inefficiency. Daiki is the sole child living in this 
little village surrounded by forests in the foothills of Mount Fuji, 
but the government spent more than $100,000 renovating an abandoned 
old schoolhouse for Daiki and then assigned him his own first grade 
teacher and principal. It costs $175,000 a year to run Daiki's school. 
As Japan struggles to revive its economy and avert a global recession, 
it is under enormous pressure to make itself more efficient and thus 
stimulate a new burst of economic growth. But it finds itself profoundly 
torn, for efficiency would come at the price of egalitarianism and 
other values that many Japanese regard as at least as important as 
economic growth. ``Nowadays, everybody calls for reforms and efficiency,'' 
said Tomishige Yazaki, Daiki's principal. ``But if we just pursue 
efficiency, the world would become a very dry place, with no sensitivity.'' 
Japan is often denounced as recalcitrant and paralyzed as its economy 
sinks into its worst recession in six decades, and it is true that 
Japanese leaders have spent years denying the existence of economic 
nettles instead of grasping them. But in some respects this is a principled 
paralysis. Japan's economic catastrophe has harmed all of Asia and 
arises largely from political incompetence, endemic corruption, webs 
of relationships that misallocate resources and a parliamentary system 
that hugely overrepresents the most backward parts of the country. 
Some of Japan's most serious delays, such as confronting its bad debts 
and banking instability, have involved more paralysis than principle. 
Yet while everyone around the globe is complaining about how bad Japan 
is, in other respects the problem is that it has been too good. Economists 
have long known of the ``paradox of thrift,'' which states that although 
it is admirable to save, a country that saves too much ends up hurting 
itself. That is one of Japan's ailments, but more broadly it is being 
pummeled by what might be called a ``paradox of virtue.'' The economy 
is in deep recession in part for reasons that, in an old-fashioned 
way, seem honorable: a passion for prudent fiscal planning, for stamping 
out inflation, for saving for the future and perhaps most important 
of all, concern for the human flotsam of capitalism and for equality 
for all citizens. Japan's commitment to equality is intricately linked 
in at least two ways to its economic crisis _ and the world's. First, 
it is producing a welfare state for the inefficient, leading to a 
growing misallocation of resources in the world's second-largest economy. 
Second, the impulse to improve the quality of life in remote areas 
by building tiny schools and countless mountain roads has helped send 
costs spiraling out of control. Soaring budget deficits and concern 
about how to pay for the retirement of Japan's baby boomers led the 
government to raise taxes last year. There is now broad agreement 
that the tax increase was a fatal misstep that plunged Japan into 
recession. But even if its timing was catastrophic, Japan was trying 
to do what economists believe is in principle the right thing: reduce 
budget deficits and plan for the aging of the baby-boom generation. 
All industrialized countries face this challenge but most have put 
off the hard decisions, while Japan's leaders last year ignored its 
economic weakness and confronted the problem by raising taxes. In 
retrospect, this was as foolish as it was well-intentioned, and the 
results were calamitous: Japan's economy fell to pieces, and the government 
now says that economic output will contract this fiscal year for the 
second year in a row. The stock market is at a 12-year low, and Japan's 
biggest banks _ eight of which have assets worth as much as the entire 
Russian gross national product _ are wobbling. ``Japan has found itself 
in the position of fighting the last major economic war, the Great 
Depression,'' said Adam Posen, a scholar at the Institute for International 
Economics in Washington and author of a new book on Japan's economy. 
``And its government has chosen to pursue the strategy that lost that 
war.'' Posen and many other economists here and abroad recommend a 
gigantic fiscal stimulus, such as a huge new spending program coupled 
with tax cuts. Japan has reluctantly taken steps in that direction, 
but it has dithered because huge spending increases seem so, well, 
irresponsible. Japan finds itself hampered as well in its monetary 
policy, because in the past it attacked inflation so relentlessly 
that interest rates are extremely low. That makes it difficult to 
ease monetary policy by lowering rates further, and so some experts 
are urging Japan to get out of this box by pledging to be irresponsible 
and taking steps to nurture inflation. The upshot is that for a diligent, 
serious nation like Japan, the present economic crisis is a nightmare: 
it is being scolded on all sides and advised that it must be more 
fiscally reckless and monetarily irresponsible. A fiscal or monetary 
stimulus may rescue Japan in the short run, but most economists here 
and abroad say that in the longer term Japan must restructure its 
economy and pay much more attention to efficiency rather than equality. 
Yet the calls for efficiency run smack into the egalitarianism that 
has been a national ideology since the end of World War II, when a 
defeated Japan was told of the evils of its traditions of authoritarianism 
and hierarchy. Many economists and business leaders say that an obsession 
with equality is stifling Japan. Take the government's building projects. 
They are partly a way of showing thanks to construction companies, 
which contribute mightily to the Liberal Democrats. Yet these projects 
also seem to reflect an egalitarian commitment to improve the lives 
of people in remote areas. On Ikarajima, a sleepy little islet in 
southern Japan that is home to only 350 people, a dazzling new $125 
million steel bridge rises like a mirage, to connect one end of the 
island with a neighboring island. The bridge, built in 1996 to replace 
a ferry that used to take 15 minutes, cost $357,000 for each resident 
of Ikarajima. That led to some sniping about waste of money, and so 
plans for a $250 million bridge on the other side of Ikarajima have 
been put on hold for now. ``The island people have been eagerly waiting 
for this new bridge, but now because of reports of waste, they are 
deprived even of their dreams,'' Kenzo Uehara, a town official on 
the island, said. ``I don't know that you can criticize these projects 
just by the logic of numbers.'' One of the most breathtaking economic 
inefficiencies is the expenditure on tiny schools with just a handful 
of students. While Daiki's case is unusual, another school near Ichinosetakahashi 
also has just a single pupil, and so does a school in the southern 
city of Kumamoto. The Education Ministry says it does not know how 
many single-student schools there are in Japan. But it says that the 
country has 3,324 elementary schools _ 14 percent of the total _ with 
fewer than 50 students in all grades put together. Why run an entire 
school for a single student, regardless of cost? The main reason is 
obliviousness to costs, coupled with a feeling of obligation to rural 
communities that want their children to have a neighborhood school 
just like city kids. But Japan's sometimes rigid bureaucracy can also 
be a factor. In Daiki's case, the neighboring town operates an elementary 
school just 20 minutes away. But the authorities say that because 
that school falls under a different administrative region, it is inconceivable 
that Daiki go there. ``It might be less costly, and we would be happy 
to make such an arrangement if it were possible,'' said Tadashi Michibayashi, 
an official in the Enzan board of education. ``But we in the administration 
have to draw the line somewhere.'' Of the various elements of egalitarianism, 
Japan is particularly proud of its even distribution of income. The 
richest fifth of the population in Japan enjoys a total income four 
times as great as that of the poorest fifth _ compared to almost nine 
times as much in the United States. Several global studies have found 
that an egalitarian distribution of income helps promote economic 
growth within a country. But by most counts Japan takes it too far. 
Japan relies on 65 percent marginal tax rates _ its tax system is 
among the most progressive in the world _ and Japanese companies suppress 
income differentials by paying employees according to seniority rather 
than merit. These tax rates and corporate practices reflect a psychology 
of egalitarianism, many say, that has tended to suppress entrepreneurship 
and hold back the most talented sector of the population. ``When I 
was here in high school, there were four classes of about 50 kids 
each in my 11th-grade class,'' said Robert Alan Feldman, who first 
came to Japan as an exchange student and is now chief economist at 
Morgan Stanley in Tokyo. ``And as I looked around, it struck me that 
there were a couple of really bright kids in each class, and a bunch 
of medium kids and a bunch of dumb kids. And I asked the teacher, 
`Well, why don't you track the kids in some way, like have a bright 
class?' '' ``And he gave me an answer I'll never forget. He said: 
`It wouldn't be democratic.' And I thought, gee, these people define 
democracy very differently.'' More broadly, Japan seems troubled by 
economic changes that are beneficial overall but that make losers 
out of some people. Creating losers would upset the society's ``wa,'' 
or harmony, a value that has been central to Japanese society at least 
since Prince Shotoku in 604 proclaimed a constitution decreeing ``Wa 
must be respected.'' This emphasis on wa often impresses visitors, 
but it also results in paralysis. Japan has difficulty carrying out 
changes that benefit the majority but that are vigorously opposed 
by a small group of prospective losers. ``Japan is a society of consensus, 
and as long as 30 percent of the population holds out against a decision, 
the government will not act,'' said Yoshio Hatano, a former ambassador 
to the United Nations. The tensions between the United States and 
Japan thus seem to arise from not just Tokyo's political paralysis 
but more fundamentally from a set of enormously different attitudes 
and values, not just about economics but about life itself. ``We are 
at two ends of the spectrum, the U.S. and Japan,'' said Masaru Yoshitomi, 
one of Japan's leading economists. Yoshitomi noted that Japan's egalitarianism 
runs so deep that when schoolchildren take part in Sports Day activities, 
the prizes often go not just to the winners of the races but to absolutely 
every child who takes part. He suggested that this takes equality 
too far, breeding cohesion but suppressing the excellence that drives 
a modern economy. ``There are no outstanding people in Japan,'' Yoshitomi 
said, only partly joking, ``and that has to change.'' 
</TEXT>
</DOC>