<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981025.0175 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Chuck Schumer had just graduated from Harvard Law School, earning 
a passport to the kind of wealth and freedom from worry that his parents 
could only imagine, when he broke the news to them that he had hatched 
a different plan. As the family drove from the courtyards of Cambridge, 
Mass., back to their narrow three-bedroom house in the Flatbush section 
of Brooklyn, Abe and Selma Schumer's oldest son announced that he 
would not hunker down to study for the bar exam. Instead, he would 
wake before dawn to stand outside subway stations. He would stay out 
past dusk to ring doorbells. There was an open seat representing his 
area of Brooklyn in the New York state Assembly, and Schumer intended 
to win it. Only partly in jest, Selma Schumer urged her friends not 
to vote for him. ``We thought he was crazy,'' she said, speaking for 
both herself and her husband, who worked as an exterminator. ``He 
had wonderful job offers. With good money! We were impressed.'' But 
her son was intent, instinctively sensing what he really wanted and 
knowing that he could get it. He was just 23 years old, and he never 
looked back. Schumer won that election, and every one after it. He 
left the state Assembly to enter Congress when he was only 30. Now 
47, he is waging the most critical campaign of his career, trying 
to do what several other Democrats before him failed to: unseat Sen. 
Alfonse D'Amato, the Republican who has represented New York in the 
U.S. Senate for 18 years. And he is bringing to that quest the same 
confidence, sense of purpose and knack for political positioning that 
he carried with him on that ride back from Cambridge in the summer 
of 1974. He is also bringing a set of sharp political tools that he 
has honed ever since. One is the ability to master complex issues 
and make them understandable to average voters, as he demonstrated 
in the televised debates with D'Amato this last weekend. Another is 
an eagerness to take credit for successful initiatives, even those 
for which he is not entirely responsible. Schumer has never been ambivalent 
about his goals and, like his rival, he has never been less than cunning 
in attaining them. His political ascent has been steady and methodical; 
his political evolution has been just as canny. He entered the Assembly 
as a something of a reformer, a youthful antidote to the corruption 
epitomized by the gathering storm clouds of Watergate. A proud bearer 
of liberal Democratic standards in the late 1970s and 1980s, he emphasized 
more moderate positions in the 1990s, as liberalism fell out of vogue 
and he contemplated a run for governor or senator. Either race would 
require the favor of a statewide electorate more conservative than 
the constituents in his congressional district in New York City, and 
Schumer's recent record suggests that he appreciated that. He became 
an ardent crime fighter, a zealous consumer advocate and a stubborn 
enemy of fraud and waste in the food stamps program, seizing issues 
that appealed to a broad range of voters across the political divide. 
Schumer said any change in his political persona was a response to 
the needs and concerns of the people in Brooklyn and Queens whom he 
represented and the result of growing older. ``Am I more conservative 
than I was 20 years ago?'' he wondered aloud one recent morning as 
he ate a bowl of oatmeal in the dining room inside the U.S. Capitol. 
``Sure. But it's been a gradual process.'' He added that few people 
remained utterly fixed in their opinions through time, and portrayed 
his flexibility as something preferable to the intellectual rigidity 
of some politicians. ``I don't like people who think they got the 
message from on high,'' he said. ``I don't like ideologues from the 
left or the right.'' But many colleagues and political analysts said 
there has been obvious calculation in the arc of Schumer's career, 
a painstaking preparation for this moment. ``I think he's cherry-picked 
some issues very, very carefully to prevent himself from being pigeonholed 
as a stereotypical liberal,'' said Charles Cook Jr., editor of The 
Cook Political Report, a nonpartisan journal. Cook pointed to Schumer's 
support for the death penalty, which he opposed earlier in his career. 
``This is something that would be absolutely unacceptable for any 
good liberal,'' Cook said. The unquestioned constants through Schumer's 
career have been his formidable intelligence and, perhaps even more 
so, his determination to prevail. That extraordinary drive has not 
always won him the affection of colleagues, some of whom dislike Schumer 
for what they and their staff members describe as an egomania and 
crass self-promotion that stand out even on Capitol Hill. Schumer 
is far from the most popular legislator there. But even those peers 
who find his intensity off-putting respect what he has accomplished 
and agree that it has been pivotal in his success as a legislator 
and politician. He may not have followed the precise course his parents 
hoped for, but he stayed true to the size of their ambitions for him. 
In a 1986 book, his sister, Fran Schumer, a journalist, wrote: ``Ever 
since he was 8, my older brother has wanted to recreate in the world 
his position in our family _ president of the Schumers, favorite son 
of the United States.'' ``His first bid for higher office, to be president 
of our junior high school, failed,'' she continued. ``But he beefed 
up his act so it would never happen again.'' When a young Schumer 
discussed his decision to run for elective office, he characterized 
politics less as a calling than as a career choice, a profession that 
he felt would suit his personality. Finding such a fit was vitally 
important to him, because he and his siblings had watched their father, 
the owner of a small exterminating company, toil six days a week at 
a job that gave him security but no pleasure. ``Compared to the tragedies 
that other people had in their lives, it was nothing,'' Schumer acknowledged. 
``But it had a real impact on me. My father was such a decent man 
and he had this huge albatross around his neck, which was the business. 
'' The Schumer family, Jewish and solidly middle class, lived on a 
street where all of the houses looked pretty much alike. Charles Ellis 
Schumer, born on Nov. 23, 1950, was the oldest of three children, 
followed by Fran and then a younger brother, Robert. Selma Schumer 
stayed home to raise the children and went to work as a teacher only 
after they grew older. Schumer excelled from the start. He reliably 
aced tests, graduated first in his class at James Madison High School 
and won admission to Harvard, which he began in the fall of 1967. 
It was a time of heated political activity, the apogee of protests 
over the Vietnam War and racial discrimination, and Schumer was quickly 
swept up in that heady moment. He joined the Young Democrats Club, 
rising to its presidency in his junior year. Several classmates recalled 
that it was trendier to belong to the Students for a Democratic Society, 
a radical group. But they said Schumer was never one to storm barricades 
or occupy buildings. Even then, they said, he was suspicious of such 
righteousness, pragmatic and committed to working within the system, 
not trying to overthrow it. He was also a bit of a square, rooted 
firmly in Flatbush and holding tightly and proudly to its accent and 
a frumpy manner that sometimes drew ribbing from peers. Carol Kellermann, 
who met him at Harvard, worked in his Congressional office and remains 
one of his closest friends, said she could not remember him even wearing 
jeans. Schumer said he did not smoke marijuana either. ``It was illegal,'' 
he explained. As his fascination with politics grew, he chose social 
studies as a major, wrote his senior thesis on ways that Congress 
could function more efficiently and sought internships with legislators 
and political groups. He was falling into a career without fully realizing 
it. He said politics promised to indulge his interest in solving problems 
and helping people, his affinity for debate and his desire to educate. 
Friends said it promised to indulge something else as well: Schumer's 
yen for attention. ``He very much thrives on approval from the outside 
world,'' Ms. Kellermann said. ``He likes being noticed.'' In both 
his bid to enter the Assembly and the niche he carved for himself 
there, Schumer cast himself as a reform Democrat, eager to restore 
integrity to government and make it more responsive to people's needs. 
He also displayed the signature traits that colleagues attribute to 
him to this day: a conspicuous assertiveness, an obvious conviction 
in his own abilities and a skill for seizing issues in a manner that 
got his name in the newspapers and face on television. Older Assemblymen 
like Mel Miller and Stanley Fink, who each subsequently served as 
Assembly speakers, did not know quite what to make of him. ``He was 
a snot-nose,'' Miller remembered. ``Stanley said to me, `We got to 
get rid of this snotty kid.''' But gradually, they revised that opinion 
of Schumer. ``When you got past the somewhat pushiness and the somewhat 
arrogance,'' Miller said, ``there was talent there and a willingness 
to work.'' Assembly office was a veritable mill of exhaustively researched 
reports on subjects ranging from the slow response time of ambulances 
in New York City to the high prices that asphalt contractors charged 
the city. Simultaneously, he forged an identity as an ardent defender 
of civil liberties and ally of tenants bucking what they saw as the 
tyranny of landlords. While Schumer's energy usually served his purposes, 
it at times threatened to undermine them. After his election to the 
U.S. House of Representatives in 1980, he became the target of federal 
and local investigations into accusations that he had improperly used 
his Assembly staff to work on his congressional campaign. Some former 
congressional staff members said the investigations, which were ultimately 
dropped, were fueled in part by the resentments of exhausted employees 
whom Schumer had pushed to the brink. They described Schumer as a 
sometimes overbearing boss with an untempered desire to get ahead. 
Schumer acknowledged that he was eager to make his mark. ``Congress 
was a revelation to me,'' he said. ``Huge areas of endeavor had no 
experts. I said, `I'm going to become the expert in housing, in banking.' 
And there were no real experts in Congress.'' In a subsequent interview, 
Schumer recalled his thrill at becoming ``the expert, in the whole 
United States Congress.'' ``And knowledge,'' he said, ``was power.'' 
Schumer had run for Congress in part on a pledge to bring more federal 
dollars back home, and as a young congressman, he was often a champion 
of better programs and more consideration for poor and middle-class 
people in his district. Among his earliest accomplishments was helping 
to fight off a Senate attempt to cut housing subsidies to cities with 
rent control and helping to write a housing rehabilitation bill that 
promoted home ownership in poor neighborhoods. But colleagues said 
that in Congress, as in college, Schumer never truly embraced the 
left. And there were striking examples of moderation in his record 
from the 1980s, like his key support for a bill that toughened restrictions 
against illegal immigration. It was in the 1990s, however, as the 
Republican revolution brewed, President Clinton emerged as a new-style 
Democrat, and Schumer eyed statewide office, that his more moderate 
streak truly came to the fore. To a large extent, the alteration of 
Schumer's persona was a function of emphasis as much as philosophical 
conversion. Across a wide spectrum of issues, he was still among the 
House's more liberal Democrats. He consistently drew the same high 
ratings that he had in the 1980s from such liberal advocacy groups 
as the Americans for Democratic Action, and he consistently drew the 
same low ratings from conservative groups that promoted tax cuts. 
He voted against both the balanced-budget amendment and the 1996 bill 
that restricted welfare benefits. His record on women's rights and 
abortion rights, which had always been strong, remained so. But there 
were certain crusades _ most notably, crime prevention _ that placed 
him closer to the center. Schumer's growing attention to crime was 
logical, given his assignment from 1991 to 1995 as the chairman of 
the House's crime subcommittee. But he used that position to adopt 
a number of tough-on-crime stances not typically associated with liberals. 
Schumer said he was heeding the frustrations of voters in his district. 
``I felt the anger and the anguish of my constituents _ beautiful, 
hard-working people,'' he said. ``Their car would be stolen, their 
home would be burglarized, someone would be mugged. I said, `Let's 
try to stop the crime problem.' It was one of my goals from the day 
I got to Congress, but I didn't have enough seniority until I became 
head of the crime committee.'' The sweeping 1994 crime bill that Schumer 
helped write expanded the applicability of the death penalty to scores 
of federal crimes, provided billions of dollars for new prison construction 
and put tens of thousands of additional police officers on the nation's 
streets. But it also stressed prevention, funneling money to programs 
like drug counseling for inmates. He fought for the inclusion of a 
ban on the sale of assault weapons in the crime bill and also spearheaded 
passage of the Brady Bill, which required a waiting period for the 
purchase of a handgun. There were additional positions that cast Schumer 
in a moderate light. He supported the line-item veto and voted in 
favor of a bill to ban the recognition of marriages between homosexuals. 
Meanwhile, in interviews, he took to berating the Democratic Party 
for losing touch with ordinary Americans and to describing himself 
as an ``angry centrist.'' Several political analysts said he was restyling 
himself for purely political purposes, a charge fueled by his demonstrated 
fondness for self-promotion. His colleagues and their staff members 
even coined a phrase for what they said was Schumer's habit of trumping 
or pre-empting colleagues' efforts: to Schume. But many of them declined 
to discuss their true feelings about Schumer for attribution, noting 
that he could soon be in a position to make them regret it. Other 
colleagues countered that Schumer was the object of envy, an assessment 
with which he seemed to agree. ``That's one of my little plights in 
life,'' he said. ``People have always been, you know, jealous.'' But 
it may not be that simple. For a while in 1995, he and former Representative 
Susan Molinari, a Republican from Staten Island, shared a recurring 
spot on a New York City newscast. Ms. Molinari recalled that during 
one program, when she was about to tell viewers that she was expecting 
a baby, Schumer interrupted, handing her a baby gift and congratulating 
her. ``I was announcing being pregnant,'' Ms. Molinari said, ``and 
Chuck stole the line.'' Although Schumer's profile has grown dramatically 
over the last two decades, his demeanor has changed little. He still 
carries Flatbush in his voice and his parents' unpretentious, thrifty 
ways in his life style. He presents a fascinating dichotomy, at once 
striving to move beyond his origins and staying comfortably tethered 
to them. For a while, when he was younger, Schumer flirted with glamour, 
going out with women who were richer and blonder than the ones with 
whom he had grown up. In the late 1970s, he briefly dated the gossip 
reporter Claudia Cohen, who had a widely publicized romance with D'Amato 
just a few years ago. But Schumer settled down in 1980 with Iris Weinshall, 
a cabdriver's daughter who was also raised in Brooklyn. She works 
as a deputy commissioner in the New York City Department of Citywide 
Administrative Services, and the couple live with their two daughters, 
Alison, 9, and Jessica, 14, in a 10th-floor, three-bedroom apartment 
in Park Slope, Brooklyn, that they bought in 1983 for just $157,000. 
Schumer is content to slurp down a bowl of cold cereal for dinner 
and has been known to wear the same suit day after day. Mrs. Schumer 
said he constantly forgets to make appointments to get his hair cut. 
Earlier in his career, before she intervened, he would sometimes grab 
a pair of ordinary scissors and trim the misbehaving tufts himself. 
``Even now, I see him looking in the mirror and bemoaning not being 
able to get a haircut,'' Mrs. Schumer said. ``And I say, `Don't even 
think about it.''' Schumer admitted that it was somewhat out of character 
when several years ago he got a modest hair transplant to fill denuded 
patches toward the front of his scalp. He prides himself on abhorring 
ostentation, and his living arrangement in Washington, a city he deliberately 
flees every weekend to rejoin his family, reflects that. When Congress 
is in session, he shares a small town house on Capitol Hill with three 
other lawmakers, with his rent of $500 a month buying him a fraternity-style 
atmosphere and no privacy at all. Rep. George Miller, D-Cal., and 
Sen. Richard Durbin, D-Ill., each sleep in one of the two upstairs 
bedrooms; Schumer shares the downstairs living room with Rep. Sam 
Gejdenson, D-Conn. Schumer's roommates say he is almost always the 
last one to leave his office and return to the town house at night; 
he is sometimes the first one up in the morning as well. There are 
always new tasks to tackle, new missions to launch, and Schumer never 
does anything halfway. Anthony Weiner, a New York City councilman 
who once worked on Schumer's congressional staff, remembered how the 
softball games between ``Schumer's Boomers'' and the staffs of other 
members of Congress would grind to a temporary halt whenever Schumer 
dropped by. ``We'd always have to suspend the game,'' Weiner said, 
``because he would want to bat over and over again until he got a 
great hit.'' Grounding out was patently unacceptable. Sometimes even 
a single would not suffice. Schumer would remain standing over home 
plate, swinging and swinging for something big. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>