<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981025.0159 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Patty Murray swept into the U.S. Senate in 1992's ``Year of the Woman'' 
in the wake of national outrage over the all-male Senate Judiciary 
Committee's handling of sexual harassment accusations against a Supreme 
Court nominee. Six years later, in her re-election campaign, a woman 
is once again standing up for feminist values on the campaign trail 
_ ``fighting against lechers in the work place who hit on young women,'' 
as she puts it. But the candidate saying these things is not Ms. Murray, 
a Democrat, who says she must remain an ``impartial juror'' in case 
President Clinton is impeached. Instead, it is her conservative Republican 
opponent, Rep. Linda Smith, whose ire is on high alert. ``The feminist 
movement,'' Ms. Smith says, ``needs to stand up against any man who 
would use women like pieces of meat like our president has.'' For 
just the third time in the nation's history, two women are running 
against each other for the Senate. In California and Illinois, other 
women elected to the Senate with Ms. Murray are in serious danger 
of losing to men this year. But Washington state, which boasts the 
highest percentage of women in the state Legislature of any state, 
is certain to send a woman back to the Senate. It is just that voters 
here are facing a choice between two very different women. In some 
ways, the race between Ms. Murray and Ms. Smith, both 48, is a vivid 
illustration of the increasing political prominence of women, whose 
numbers are at an all-time high in both the U.S. House (54) and Senate 
(nine). But even as both candidates cite their experience as working 
mothers and talk eloquently about the importance of having a woman's 
perspective in the Senate, it is clear that they have wide differences 
over just what it means to have that perspective. Ms. Smith's challenge 
reflects the fact that even as Democratic women who hold office or 
are candidates still outnumber their Republican counterparts, the 
gap has been closing in recent years, according to statistics compiled 
by the Center for the American Woman and Politics at Rutgers University's 
Eagleton Institute. (In House and Senate elections on Nov. 3, 82 Democrats 
and 49 Republicans on the ballot are women, an overall number that 
ties a record set in 1996.) In short, the politics of women circa 
1998 looks much more complicated and ideologically diverse than it 
did six years ago. Just having more women elected to office does not 
necessarily guarantee that any particular policies will be favored 
in Congress. Ms. Murray, for instance, is one of the most reliable 
abortion-rights supporters in the Senate, while Smith is staunchly 
anti-abortion, and they have clashed strongly over the issue during 
this campaign, especially on whether to outlaw the procedure that 
its critics call partial-birth abortion. In a recent debate in Seattle, 
Ms. Murray said that no woman wants to find out late in her pregnancy 
that continuing it could threaten her life or health, and she said 
that criminalizing a decision for abortion at that point would be 
totally unwarranted. ``We, the Congress, shouldn't be the ones telling 
her she should go to jail,'' Ms. Murray said. ``That decision should 
be made between her, her doctor and her faith.'' But Ms. Smith castigated 
Ms. Murray as one of the ``radical senators'' who favored the ``barbaric 
practice'' of late-term abortion. And she has consistently expressed 
her own opposition to all abortions, including cases of rape or incest. 
Then there is the matter of Clinton's relationship with a White House 
intern, one that Ms. Smith, who is from the Vancouver area in southwest 
Washington, has sought to cast as an albatross around Ms. Murray's 
neck. ``She said of Clarence Thomas stronger things, that he should 
not serve, and she said of Packwood very strong things, that he should 
step down,'' Ms. Smith said in an interview of Ms. Murray's reactions 
to earlier cases involving a Supreme Court nominee and a U.S. senator 
facing accusations of harassing behavior toward women. ``You treat 
this issue equally, and if you've got a man abusing the power, taking 
advantage of younger women who are subordinates, then you speak out 
consistently.'' Still, there is not much evidence here that Ms. Murray 
has been seriously damaged by Ms. Smith's attacks on the issue. Ms. 
Murray has said several times that she is ``disappointed'' in the 
president's behavior but, unlike Ms. Smith, who has both suggested 
that the president resign and supported his impeachment, Ms. Murray 
argues that it is inappropriate for someone who may cast a Senate 
vote in an impeachment trial to be so adamant on the issue. And so 
far in this race, most analysts continue to see much evidence that 
Ms. Murray has the upper hand. The most recent statewide poll, conducted 
by Mason-Dixon Political/Media Research Inc., shows Ms. Murray leading 
Ms. Smith by 51 percent to 38 percent. Ms. Smith, who has never lost 
an election and has made something of a career for herself of toppling 
seemingly entrenched Democratic opponents, says she is undaunted by 
the polls. Ms. Murray has more money, for several reasons, at least 
one of which reflects just how much partisan stereotypes have been 
turned topsy-turvy in this race. While Republicans are often seen 
as the favored candidates of corporate interests, the reverse is true 
here, in no small part because Ms. Smith remains a bitter foe of some 
of the biggest free-trade pacts negotiated by Congress in recent years, 
a position that riles many business leaders here in one of the nation's 
most trade-dependent states. Ms. Smith is a caustic critic of China, 
which she accuses of flooding the American market with ``slave-labor 
camp goods,'' and she is the only member of the state's congressional 
delegation to vote against continuing normal trade status for the 
nation. That is a position that her supporters cast as one of tremendous 
courage, and for which some human-rights groups have praised her, 
but it is also one that Ms. Murray describes as both naive and harmful 
to the state's economic interests. ``We aren't going to have our wheat 
or apples in China if we stop trading with them, as Linda has voted 
to do,'' Ms. Murray said in the Seattle debate. And speaking before 
a group of approving Rotarians here in this Seattle suburb the other 
day, Ms. Murray repeated her frequent contention that the best way 
to affect human rights in China is to continue trade and dialogue 
with Chinese leaders, not to close the door to a relationship with 
them. Ms. Smith's ability to generate campaign money is also severely 
hampered by another stand she says she has taken on principle. She 
is a strong proponent of overhauling campaign-finance laws, and her 
sharp criticism of Sen. Mitch McConnell, R-Ky., who is a chief opponent 
of such legislation, has hurt her in the campaign pocketbook. McConnell, 
who heads the National Republican Senatorial Committee, could give 
as much as $540,000 to Ms. Smith's campaign, which is well behind 
Ms. Murray's in terms of campaign commercials running on state airwaves. 
But even as it has poured more than $1 million into California state 
Treasurer Matt Fong's bid to unseat Sen. Barbara Boxer, the Democratic 
incumbent, the national Republicans have given only a little more 
than $100,000 to Ms. Smith. For all their ideological differences, 
Ms. Murray and Ms. Smith, who served together in the Washington state 
Senate, share many intriguing similarities in their careers. Both 
come from working-class backgrounds and took an interest in a local 
issue _ schools, in Ms. Murray's case, and high taxes, in Ms. Smith's 
_ and turned it into a signature cause that helped propel them into 
office. And both have stunned seemingly entrenched incumbents in making 
it there. Smith, a grandmother of six whose husband, Vern, is a locomotive 
engineer, waged a successful write-in campaign in 1994 to become the 
Republican candidate in the 3rd Congressional District, encompassing 
the southwestern part of the state. She has relied on an extensive, 
intensely dedicated cadre of volunteers, which she calls ``Linda's 
army,'' and whose members tend to share her conservative, Christian 
beliefs. Ms. Murray, on the other hand, rode her experience as a school-board 
member in suburban Seattle to the state Legislature, and, virtually 
unknown in most of the state, she cruised to a remarkable victory 
in the 1992 Senate race after the incumbent Democrat stumbled over 
sexual-harassment accusations. In that campaign, Ms. Murray recalled 
that she had once been dismissed by a male politician as ``just a 
mom in tennis shoes'' who couldn't get anything major accomplished, 
and she turned that tag line on its head, embracing the shoes and 
turning them into perhaps the most memorable political image of the 
``Year of the Woman.'' The shoes are still a powerful symbol, and 
when she traveled to Emily Dickinson Elementary School in Redmond, 
Wash., the other day, the parent-teacher committee presented her with 
a pair of tennis shoes to sign for their school auction. While Ms. 
Murray is known for her low-key style, Ms. Smith is a far more bombastic 
speaker and she revels in her maverick image: One of a handful of 
Republicans who voted against Newt Gingrich's re-election as House 
speaker, she once likened the speaker to a fat child who gobbles up 
everybody else's food (she later apologized). As the challenger, Ms. 
Smith has almost surely been hurt by the amount of time she has had 
to spend back in Washington, D.C., this fall as Congress labored to 
come up with a budget. It is time she could have used to campaign 
more and, just as critically, raise funds to get her ads on the air, 
but she said that she has no regrets about missed opportunities. ``You 
just have to keep priorities right,'' she said in an interview. ``And 
my job is to try to keep track of what was going on back there. ``I 
couldn't come home and do that,'' she added. ``So I decided that I 
would make that choice. It would be a sacrifice but I would rather 
lose than not do what I am supposed to be doing.'' 
</TEXT>
</DOC>