<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981025.0081 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
It has been almost two years since I was last summoned to the land 
of Andor or asked to contemplate the conspiracies tearing apart Tar 
Valon. In that time, I have hardly given a thought to Darkfriends 
and the Forsaken, to the Dragon Reborn or the Age of Legends. And 
the manners and mythologies of the desert-dwelling Aiel or the seafaring 
Seanchan have come to seem the half-remembered stuff of dreams. But 
having already read almost 6,000 pages about these fantastical lands 
and beings, who could turn away from another mere 600 in ``The Path 
of Daggers'' (Tor/Doherty), the newly published eighth and far-from-last 
volume in Robert Jordan's ``Wheel of Time'' fantasy epic? More than 
7 million copies of these tomes have been sold in North America; more 
than 100,000 copies of each volume are sold in paperback each year, 
and the series is translated into 16 languages. ``Wheel'' demands 
an almost religious attention from its readers and seems to get it. 
There is an Internet Usenet group devoted to speculations about its 
plot lines and its puzzles, its female priesthood and its Messianic 
figure who may well destroy the known world before he saves it. The 
glossaries and plot summaries found on various Internet sites are 
almost required reading before picking up this latest volume, which 
assumes that after two years of ordinary life one retains an intimate 
acquaintance with these varied cultures, their ancient tongues, magical 
powers, political intrigues and a multicultural cast of thousands. 
The younger devotees of the series, who seem to be legion, have a 
habit of dutifully rereading the complete gospel before each addition. 
I assumed, in fact, that those on the cusp of adulthood formed the 
core of this audience. I was, after all, inducted into the first volume, 
``The Eye of the World,'' on the urgings of one of my children. And 
there is a coming of age quality to the entire series, in which innocents 
are gradually led into the heart of esoteric knowledge. One also has 
to suspend some well-honed critical faculties when entering this odd 
realm, as if the reader had agreed to become engrossed in a decade-long 
strategic game whose rules are unfolding in the midst of play and 
whose end will not be in sight before the millennium's end. Abandon 
reality, all ye who enter here. Escape is, after all, one of the appealing 
aspects of fantasy fiction, a genre spawned by J.R.R. Tolkien, and 
now dominated by Jordan. Fantasy creates a world with a seemingly 
autonomous set of laws, establishes premises for its invented cultures, 
makes sharp boundaries between Good and Evil and then sets the wheels 
in motion. Fantasy fiction is mechanical (and characters can become 
cogs), but it is also magical, evoking a realm of lost knowledge. 
Power is at stake, and out of struggles for power come cataclysmic 
battles. It is no accident that Jordan, who was in New York last week 
to begin promoting his new book, was drawn to the genre with its mixture 
of system and strategy. He received a degree in physics at the Citadel 
in South Carolina and served two tours of duty in Vietnam, winning 
the Distinguished Flying Cross and other medals. ``Wheel'' draws on 
both his abstract knowledge and concrete experience; he creates a 
universe simple enough to master and then challenges the characters 
to do the same in meticulously choreographed battles against chaos 
and dissolution. Meanwhile, readers have taken the challenge so seriously 
that there are some who, in New Agish devotion, think the books really 
are histories of alternative realities. In an interview, Jordan mentioned 
one Malaysian medical student who expressed a desire to abandon his 
training in order to become the author's spiritual disciple. He was 
swiftly discouraged. But fantasy fiction, for all its artificial premises 
and cartoonish book jackets, is not as simple as it seems, nor is 
its audience. The 450 cognoscenti who turned out for Jordan's book 
signing at a Barnes &AMP; Noble last week were not easily classifiable 
by age. His publisher claims a broad spread of readers, and Jordan 
tells of a letter he received from an 88-year-old fan who urged him 
to write faster. And Jordan, who on the book jacket gives off the 
aura of a self-styled character who would not be out of place among 
the itinerant wanderers and warriors of the books, in real-world flesh 
is more like a slightly eccentric Southern storyteller who reads Dorothy 
Sayers and Jared Diamond, Louis L'Amour and Jane Austen; who is both 
proud and a bit wary of the fanaticism of his followers. In fact, 
what may be most interesting is how his books, particularly this one, 
strain against the limitations of the fantasy epic. The genre's standard 
setting is a pre-modern, even medieval universe, with guilds and taverns, 
horse-drawn carts and monasteries. It is governed not by technology 
or science, but by myth and faith and custom. This pastoral world, 
with its clans, villages and shires, may have already lost some of 
its ancient wisdom, but it is about to lose much more: the forces 
of Darkness are massing. That great enemy also resembles what we think 
of as modernity. It has no patience for long apprenticeship and mastery. 
It supplants the subtleties of magic with the brutalities of power. 
It promises disintegration and chaos. In this way the genre is atavistic; 
nation building and tradition are its themes. But it is also mournful 
and resigned, recognizing that even as Darkness is fended off transformations 
are inevitable. The evils that modernity threatens may be overcome, 
but nothing will be left untouched. The genre's founding masterworks 
by Tolkien, who fought in World War I, were begun on the eve of Britain's 
entry into World War II and are fraught with nostalgia. Jordan, the 
Vietnam vet, is creating an American, late-20th-century counterpart. 
But something different is also happening in Jordan's series, where 
nostalgia is replaced by somberness. The latest book in particular 
would hardly stand as fantasy fiction on its own. There has even been 
some early, qualified complaint among fans that intrigue is getting 
the upper hand as the saga turns inward. More than any other of his 
volumes, it is less concerned with the battle of good and evil than 
with chronicling the social transformations being wrought by the approaching 
apocalypse. Cultures long isolated are coming into contact. The courtly 
hierarchies of one are challenged by the clans and strict rituals 
of another or the institutional pride of a third. Ancient traditions 
of inheritance and leadership are undone. Refugees, traitors, traders 
and soldiers permanently scar the social landscape. All this is taking 
place at the very moment when unity is most needed to defeat a demonic 
enemy. But even if unity is achieved, the old ways will be destroyed. 
It is as if, in the midst of spinning his web, Jordan had turned fantasy 
fiction into a game of anthropological Risk played out in the post-modern 
age. There are precedents: even the Wizard Gandalf must unite the 
disparate forces of Tolkien's Middle Earth to defeat Mordor. But in 
the ``Wheel of Time,'' the promise of the great battles, which are 
still a book or two or three away, is less a matter of fantasy than 
of surety, for even in victory what will remain will be a world as 
messy, unsettled and full of cultural conflict as our own. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>