<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981025.0161 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
It was not the 5 inches of gray muck that covered their once-green 
lawn or even their water-sopped mobile home _ its floors gone, its 
furniture ruined _ that disheartened Bob Dagnall and Dawn Kawzinsky. 
One month after Hurricane Georges pushed 6 feet of water across the 
sea-level Sands subdivision, leaving the couple an uninhabitable shell 
with a $39,000 mortgage, they learned that rebuilding here would require 
a special home on 12-foot pillars on a downsized lot. The likely cost, 
under present codes, is $80,000. Their insurance may pay only $12,500. 
``The day before the storm, we were legal,'' said Dagnall, a mechanic. 
``Today, it's a no-win situation.'' For people in the Florida Keys, 
Georges revealed the fragility of a 100-mile archipelago connected 
to the mainland by wires, a pipe and a single highway. In scattered 
places on Big Pine Key, 30 miles from Key West, power is still out, 
water is unsafe to drink and hundreds are homeless. But the hurricane 
also exposed here what Bob Herman, director of growth management for 
Monroe County calls ``sins of yesterday'': grandfathered or unenforced 
sanitation, and building and flood regulations that, for years, allowed 
uncontrolled and unsafe development. Herman said the storm damaged 
150 to 200 mobile homes so badly that they would require new building 
permits, kicking in federal regulations for elevated foundations in 
flood zones and state requirements to replace any illegal cesspools 
with $8,000 septic systems. The storm also flooded scores of illegal 
ground-floor apartments in raised houses. ``There may be 6,000 of 
these mother-in-law rooms, many of them rented to people who work 
in the tourist business,'' Herman said. After the storm, the Federal 
Emergency Management Agency provided temporary housing for 1,600 people. 
To help homeowners recover, Monroe County is allowing them to spend 
up to $2,500 for storm repairs without a permit. But there is evidence 
that some residents are hurriedly patching up homes and apartments 
to avoid the tougher regulations. There is also political pressure 
to relax codes for people already hard-hit. In Key West, for example, 
a high-profile fight is under way to preserve the 11 surviving floating 
homes on the quaint but controversial Houseboat Row. Before the hurricane, 
its 26 units dumped raw sewage into shallow water along a seawall. 
``The storm is an opportunity for this community to make some important 
decisions about their future, as we try to reconstruct ourselves,'' 
said Jack Teague, the state Health Department's environmental administrator 
in the Keys. ``The question will be `Will we use it to improve ourselves 
or simply perpetuate the problems that we've been facing before the 
storm?''' Environmental groups say the storm only made obvious their 
long-standing argument that the Keys are overdeveloped. ``The fact 
is, these waste water systems are leaching into canals and near-shore 
waters every day,'' said David Holtz, the local representative of 
the Center for Marine Conservation. The Environmental Protection Agency 
estimates that 4,000 illegal cesspools remain in the Keys, but studies 
show that conventional septic drain fields also leak into the sea 
within 12 to 24 hours after a toilet is flushed. When they were built 
in the 1950s and 1960s, homeowners routinely knocked a hole in the 
bottom of septic tanks to prevent the tanks from floating out of the 
ground during storm surges, said Gene Shinn of the U.S. Geological 
Survey, who grew up in the Keys. Last week, Shinn told a federal task 
force led by Interior Secretary Bruce Babbitt that the sewage is contributing 
to the decline of the Keys coral reef, visited by 1.5 million tourists 
a year. The waste issue has become more urgent after preliminary findings 
by scientists working for the environmental agency that virus pathogens 
from waste water exist in sea water near shore. Dr. Joan Rose of the 
University of South Florida said levels are high enough that residents 
who swim year-round in canals contaminated by septic systems are likely 
to get sick. A coalition of government agencies and environmental 
groups has asked a reluctant Congress for $200 million to build central 
sewer systems in the Keys. They argue that the law creating the Florida 
Keys National Marine Sanctuary in 1990 demands federal protection 
of its waters. ``Too many people have put in too many illegal fixtures, 
and that has to be corrected. The party's over,'' said John Hankinson 
Jr., the environmental agency's regional administrator who chairs 
the group. If Congress declines, the coalition is suggesting a toll 
on U.S. 1, the highway built by the federal government to encourage 
visitors after the Depression. The road, paralleled by power lines 
and a water pipe from the mainland, fueled growth in the 1960s. By 
1976, whole islands had been stripped of vegetation and hundreds of 
miles of canals had been dug for developments. That year, the state 
took legal control of Keys growth, although lawsuits delayed a growth 
management plan until last year. Under the county's growth-management 
plan, 255 new homes can be built a year outside Key West, provided 
each homeowner pays for the removal of a cesspool somewhere in the 
county. All construction has been halted on Big Pine Key. The plan 
also requires a study, now being carried out by the Army Corps of 
Engineers, to determine the Keys' carrying capacity, or the number 
of residents and tourists it would take to irreversibly harm the environment. 
Although Georges caused widespread devastation, for some residents 
its timing was impeccable. Donna Hastie, for one, is looking forward 
to a new home to replace a trailer crushed by a tree on a tiny lot 
in the Saddlebunch Keys. Ms. Hastie, who works as a controller for 
a restaurant, had just received a notice to replace her cesspool. 
She expects to get a federal low-interest loan that will cover both 
the cost of a new home 8 feet off the ground and a new aerobic waste-water 
system. ``If a disaster can ever come at a good time,'' Ms. Hastie 
said, ``this was it.'' 
</TEXT>
</DOC>