<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981025.0181 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Moderates came out ahead of separatists Sunday in regional elections 
in the northern Basque region that were closely watched for their 
impact on peace prospects after the Basque guerrilla group ETA began 
a cease-fire last month. The center-right Basque Nationalist Party, 
which has led the regional Parliament for 18 years, won 28 percent 
of the vote total and 21 seats out of 75, but fell short of a majority, 
as it has in the past. It is likely to make a governing pact with 
a Madrid-based national party that wants to keep the prosperous northern 
Basque region firmly within Spain. The Basque Parliament remained 
fragmented among seven parties. But the leftist independence coalition 
Euskal Heritarrok, or Basque Citizens, considered to be the political 
wing of ETA, capitalized on the cease-fire and won 18 percent, the 
third-largest total. In Madrid, the governing conservatives and the 
opposition Socialists sought to pose the campaign as a choice between 
risky Basque self-determination and the secure path of Spain's 1978 
Constitution, which has permitted home rule. The Basque region has 
had its own Parliament since 1980, and also has taxing power and a 
6,000-member regional police force Rosa Diez, a Socialist leader, 
said election results showed the Basques ``don't want adventures but 
a stable framework.'' Each of the competing parties tried to present 
itself as the best guarantor of a permanent peace in the three-province 
Basque region. The opening of the acclaimed Bilbao Guggenheim Museum 
there last year has become a symbol of the region's economic and cultural 
resurgence that might be cemented with a permanent end to separatist 
violence. ETA, whose initials in the Basque language stand for Basque 
Homeland and Liberty, announced its first ``indefinite'' cease-fire 
in a September 16 communique. It cited ``unique opportunities'' for 
peace after 30 years of guerrilla attacks that have been blamed for 
800 deaths. Political leaders in Madrid say the rebels were pressured 
by arrests of their commandos and by street demonstrations demanding 
peace, while they also drew inspiration from the recent peace accord 
in Northern Ireland. In a sign that the results of the Basque vote 
were not likely to jeopardize the fledgling peace initiative, a masked 
man identified as an ETA spokesman said, in a British Broadcasting 
Corporation television interview on Saturday that the unilateral cease-fire 
was ``firm and serious.'' But the conservative prime minister, Jose 
Maria Aznar, has vowed not to negotiate with ETA until it permanently 
renounces violence and lays downs its arms _ steps the rebels have 
not taken. Aznar's Popular Party was the other big winner in the Basque 
elections, with the second-highest number of votes. Euskal Heritarrok, 
which has not formally condemned ETA's violence, was widely considered 
an unlikely partner in the new Basque government despite its third-place 
finish. The group is the successor to Herri Batasuna, or Popular Unity, 
which changed its name before the campaign, apparently fearing it 
might be declared illegal. Last December, the Supreme Court sentenced 
the entire 23-member leadership of Herri Batasuna to seven years in 
jail for collaborating with the ETA. On Saturday, Aznar blasted a 
statement by the ETA spokesman in the BBC broadcast that the rebels 
would not apologize for the separatist violence, calling it an ``insult 
to the memory of the victims of terrorism.'' The masked spokesman 
had said that, ``It is the Spanish state which should be asking for 
forgiveness, for denying our people self-expression and the right 
to exist.'' The two-week campaign in the Basque region, home to 2.1 
million people who comprise just 5 percent of Spain's population, 
ended on a harsh note with the Basque Nationalist Party's president 
contending that the two big Madrid-based parties had tried to strike 
fear in the voters in its campaigning. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>