<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981025.0111 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Despite this year's peace accord and efforts by Protestant and Catholic 
leaders to persuade it to disarm, the Irish Republican Army continues 
to maintain a huge secret arsenal, according to Irish and British 
officials and other experts. The overwhelmingly Catholic IRA, the 
officials and experts said in a series of interviews, still has enough 
machine guns, automatic rifles and Semtex explosive to carry on well 
into the new century what it calls ``the armed struggle'' to force 
the British authorities out of Northern Ireland, the predominantly 
Protestant British province to the north. Twice in recent months the 
outlawed guerrilla group has said that it will not disarm. The IRA's 
political wing, Sinn Fein, notes, accurately, that the Belfast agreement, 
approved last spring, does not require disarmament, known here as 
``decommissioning,'' until the agreement is fully enacted in the spring 
of 2000. The officials and experts said that while some token disarmament 
may take place in coming months, the IRA is virtually certain to retain 
enough weapons to mount a new offensive if it becomes dissatisfied 
with the progress of the new peace agreement. In the meantime, though, 
the IRA has declared itself committed to a cease-fire for the last 
15 months. ``They have enough resources to continue the war, if they 
want, for some decades, even if there is some token decommissioning,'' 
said Andy Wood, a political consultant and former information director 
for the British government in Northern Ireland. He and other officials 
said the IRA position was rooted in the traditional Irish rebel belief 
in ``keeping a pike in the thatch,'' in case peace efforts collapse, 
which they all have since the current violence began 29 years ago. 
On Sunday, Prime Minister Bertie Ahern of Ireland said that because 
of the dispute over disarmament, the two governments and the northern 
political parties would miss the Oct. 31 deadline for the creation 
of a new North-South Ministerial Council. The council, which is to 
give the Irish Republic more influence in the affairs of the North, 
was one of the major concessions made in the peace agreement to the 
Catholics of the IRA and Sinn Fein. A disarmament commission headed 
by Gen. John de Chastelain, former chief of the Canadian armed forces 
and former ambassador to the United States, is believed to be suggesting 
two ways of disarming with Sinn Fein. One plan foresees the destruction 
of weapons to be verified by neutral experts. The other would have 
the IRA tell officials where they can find arms dumps and destroy 
them. De Chastelain and other officials would then decide whether 
the amount of arms offered for destruction fulfilled the requirements 
of the Belfast agreement. Officials said they did not expect any disarmament 
to take place before the end of the year. ``I'm fed up,'' said Monica 
McWilliams, a member of the new Northern Ireland Assembly from the 
Women's Coalition, made up of Catholics and Protestants. ``What are 
they waiting for? This stuff costs a lot of money. Do they want to 
sell it? Are they afraid to lose their assets? But how can you legitimately 
sell Semtex?'' ``I was elected four months ago,'' she continued. ``But 
instead of governing and leading I'm sitting around waiting.'' The 
disarmament issue has been blocking political progress for months 
as the principal Protestant leader in Northern Ireland, First Minister 
David Trimble, insists that some disarmament must begin before Sinn 
Fein is allowed to take part fully in the new Assembly created by 
the agreement and intended to give more power to Catholics in Ulster. 
Gerry Adams, the Sinn Fein president, notes that there is no time 
deadline for disarmament in the Belfast agreement. That is where the 
Northern Ireland peace effort has been stuck. Meanwhile, the officials 
and experts provided an ominous picture of the IRA's military power. 
Since 1969, when the sectarian violence erupted in the province, the 
IRA has killed more than half of the 3,200 victims of the conflict, 
including about 800 British soldiers and police officers. They have 
lost about 300 of their guerrillas. Their arms are hidden in bunkers 
and tunnels on both sides of the border, but mostly here in the Irish 
Republic. The arsenal, estimated at 100 tons, includes several tons 
of Semtex, the explosive used to give added power to homemade bombs. 
Some of the weapons are buried in holes and caves in farmland in lightly 
populated areas in the Irish counties of Louth and Cavan. A year ago, 
the police discovered an underground practice shooting range. The 
Irish police and army have found dozens of arms caches over the years, 
and often seem able to make such finds at a politically opportune 
moment, to reassure the public when the peace process seems particularly 
threatened, or at the time of an important meeting between London 
and Dublin. There is a suspicion among experts that the Irish sometimes 
get tips from informers, but do not act immediately. The Irish police 
and army are occasionally alerted to arms caches by civilian hikers 
and picnickers who report that they heard shooting in the hills and 
meadows. Other discoveries have been made after the police notice 
or are informed of electric lights burning late at a usually derelict, 
uninhabited farmhouse. In such hiding places, IRA operatives, using 
ordinary coffee grinders, pulverize nitrate fertilizer widely used 
in farming and mix in sugar to control the burn rate of the eventual 
blast. A few pounds of Semtex adds to the bomb's power. A video-cassette-sized 
packet of Semtex can blow a car to smithereens. In August in the town 
of Omagh, in Northern Ireland, such a bomb placed by an IRA splinter 
group killed 29 people. The IRA denounced the attack, but retains 
the means to make a bomb of its own if it became impatient about the 
peace effort. In 1996, the IRA became impatient with the stalled peace 
talks and killed two people and caused millions of dollars in damage 
with an explosion in the Docklands area of London. Within 10 days, 
the British government made a significant political concession. The 
skilled use of Semtex has rendered obsolete IRA weapons like the ``drogue 
bomb,'' an armor-piercing projectile, used against police and army 
vehicles, made from a baked-bean can with a copper nose. Protestant 
guerrillas, by comparison, are only lightly armed. At the start of 
the conflict, some of them were still using Martini-Henri rifles, 
so old that the guns are noted by Rudyard Kipling in a poem on the 
Zulu War. The IRA arsenal comes largely, officials said, from shipments 
from Libya in the early 1980s. The Libyan leader, Muammar el-Gadhafi, 
said publicly that he was arming the IRA as a response to the decision 
by Margaret Thatcher, then prime minister, to help the U.S. bombing 
raids on Libya. At least three shiploads of machine guns, surface-to-air 
missiles and Kalashnikov rifles arrived undetected in the Irish Republic. 
In 1987, the French intercepted a Panama-registered ship, the Eksund, 
bound for Ireland with several tons of weaponry. The estimates of 
the present arsenal are based partly on what was found on that ship. 
``Never underestimate the impact of folk memory on the psychology 
of Republicanism,'' said Paul Arthur, a politics professor at Ulster 
University in Belfast. ``The Republican attitude toward decommissioning 
is more emotional than a matter of security. Fathers tell sons what 
happened in the earlier generation. The natural tendency was and is 
to be fundamentally suspicious of the British.'' 
</TEXT>
</DOC>