<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981025.0138 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
As one of the founders of the Museum of Modern Art, Abby Aldrich Rockefeller 
was steadfast in her conviction that the institution be devoted only 
to new art. When she wrote her will a year before her death in 1948, 
she remained true to her vision. Mrs. Rockefeller left the Modern 
four important drawings, two by van Gogh and two by Seurat, that have 
become among the most prized works in its collection, but the bequest 
was subject to a curious stipulation. After 50 years, when in Mrs. 
Rockefeller's estimation the drawings would no longer be considered 
new, the will specified that the Modern had to give the works to specific 
rival institutions that did not have the same exclusive commitment 
to art of the moment. The dreaded day arrived earlier this month, 
and the Modern was forced to send the van Goghs, which together are 
valued at more than $40 million, 30 blocks north to the Metropolitan 
Museum of Art. The Seurats, together worth about $1.5 million, were 
shipped to the Art Institute of Chicago. ``They're irreplaceable,'' 
said Glenn Lowry, director of the Museum of Modern Art, who described 
the loss of the drawings as ``painful.'' Philippe de Montebello, director 
of the Metropolitan, refrained from crowing. ``The important thing 
is that they're staying in New York and joining the largest group 
of van Goghs on this hemisphere,'' he said. The Met's collection now 
includes 18 paintings and six drawings by van Gogh. That Mrs. Rockefeller's 
wishes are unusual is an understatement. Few museum bequests come 
with such specific strings attached. Museum officials said she made 
no other bequests with such conditions. Mrs. Rockefeller was the wife 
of financier John D. Rockefeller Jr., a major benefactor of the Metropolitan. 
She founded the Modern with Mary Quinn Sullivan and Lillie P. Bliss 
in 1929. They hired Alfred H. Barr Jr. and his structuring helped 
define the mission of the Modern. Mrs. Rockefeller's will addressed 
just that. In her eyes, anything that was not new or of the moment 
did not belong in an institution that called itself modern; such works 
would be better suited for a museum like the Met, with its encyclopedic 
collection of world art. Thus the Met is the new owner of a haunting 
scene of the ``Hospital Corridor at St.-Remy,'' an 1889 gouache in 
rich tones of ochre depicting the hospital's bleak, deserted hallways 
that van Gogh made for his brother, Theo, while the artist was a patient 
there. The other drawing, ``Street at Stes.-Maries,'' which van Gogh 
made a year earlier, shows a row of cottages along a narrow street 
leading to the Mediterranean, with a sailboat drawn only as a distant 
speck. The drawing, with its signature swirls and hatchings, is considered 
by experts to be a first-rate example of the artist's masterly use 
of pen and ink. The decision to send the Seurats to the Art Institute 
of Chicago was understandable. The drawings are studies for Seurat's 
masterpiece ``Sunday Afternoon on the Island of La Grande Jatte'' 
(1884-1886), which was among several important paintings given to 
the Art Institute by Frederick Clay Bartlett, a Chicago collector, 
in 1926. The painting has become an iconic image for the museum. ``We 
already own two large crayon drawings of trees that were studies for 
the painting, as well as an oil sketch that was an early idea for 
the painting,'' said Teri Edelstein, deputy director of the Art Institute. 
``But until now we didn't have any figures, so this is particularly 
exciting for us. The Museum of Modern Art was obviously Mrs. Rockefeller's 
passion, and she wanted audiences there to enjoy these drawings, but 
ultimately she realized they belonged with the painting.'' More than 
a year ago, officials at the Met and the Art Institute sent the Modern 
friendly notes reminding the museum that the clock was ticking. ``It 
was all very collegial,'' said Colta Ives, a curator in the drawings 
and prints department at the Met. ``Many of us feel we're working 
in tandem with a sister institution.'' Collegial, perhaps, but through 
the years, all the institutions involved have broadened the time span 
of their collections and become more competitive in courting important 
collectors for gifts and bequests. So parting with prized drawings 
hurt the Modern. ``Why doesn't the Met give us the drawings on permanent 
loan?'' Lowry asked when told that the Met sympathized with its loss. 
Officials at the Met responded that the Modern was welcome to borrow 
the works at any time. Lowry added that ``had Abby Aldrich Rockefeller 
been alive today, it would have been unlikely she would have given 
them to the Met'' because the roles of the Met and the Modern have 
changed dramatically since her death. ``Remember, in those days the 
Modern was supposed to stay modern,'' said William S. Lieberman, chairman 
of the Metropolitan's 20th-century art department. At least that was 
what Lieberman and his colleagues strove for when he was hired by 
Mrs. Rockefeller as a young curator at the Modern in the early 1940s. 
``The Modern has become a historic museum, which was not its original 
mission,'' he said. But 1947, the year Mrs. Rockefeller wrote her 
will, was a soul-searching period for three New York museums: the 
Metropolitan, the Modern and the Whitney Museum of American Art. And 
had things gone as planned, their fates would have been inextricably 
linked. Indeed, for a brief moment that year the institutions formally 
agreed that the Whitney would merge with the Metropolitan, its collection 
joining an expanded American wing at the Met. Meanwhile, the Met and 
the Modern would each play a distinct role. Officials at both museums 
were then eager to pool their collections, the Met being devoted primarily 
to the ``visual arts of the past,'' as the agreement read, and the 
Modern to the ``encouragement and study of the visual arts of the 
present and recent past.'' The thinking was that the healthiest way 
for the Modern to stay modern would be to routinely sell older works 
that could be considered classics in order to raise money to acquire 
new works. The agreement made definite distinctions between modern 
and classic art. Modern art was ``any painting, drawing, print or 
sculpture by a living artist and any such work of art by a deceased 
artist which is still significant in the contemporary movement in 
art.'' ``Classic art,'' as the agreement called it, included ``all 
other paintings, drawings, prints or sculpture which have become part 
of the cultural history of mankind.'' Under the agreement, the Met 
lent the Modern a Maillol sculpture, ``Chained Action,'' and a Picasso 
portrait of Gertrude Stein, works considered too avant-garde for the 
Met. (The works ultimately went back to the Met.) A long list of paintings 
that included some of the Modern's prized Cezannes, Matisses, Picassos 
and Seurats were to be sold to the Met. But by the early 1950s, the 
agreement unraveled. Although the Met acquired about a dozen works, 
including two Picassos, ``Woman in White'' and ``La Coiffure,'' the 
identities of the two institutions had already begun to change. At 
the same time, pragmatic considerations had come to the fore, like 
the market value of the art, which had escalated since the agreement 
was made. The Rockefellers were one of this country's greatest philanthropic 
couples and their gifts were often defined by their art collections. 
The Modern was her passion, the Met was his. He gave the museum numerous 
works of Chinese and ancient Near Eastern art, and his most prominent 
gift was the Cloisters, the museum of medieval art in Fort Tryon Park 
in upper Manhattan. The gift included medieval art (the unicorn tapestries, 
for example), land on which to build and the remnants of chapels, 
cathedrals and monasteries from Europe that were combined to become 
the Cloisters. Rockefeller even bought a large stretch of the Palisades 
on the west side of the Hudson River to preserve the museum's view. 
Given this strong link to the Met and following the spirit of the 
agreement, it is understandable that Mrs. Rockefeller decided that 
the Met should have the van Goghs. The Met and the Art Institute of 
Chicago are planning exhibitions that include their new treasures. 
Though the Art Institute has not set a date, the Met plans to show 
five of its van Gogh drawings in the Robert Wood Johnson Jr. Gallery 
for Prints and Drawings from Dec. 1 to Feb. 7. Also on view at the 
same time, in the nearby 19th-century European paintings and sculpture 
galleries, will be 12 of the museum's van Gogh's paintings. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>