<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981025.0121 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Microsoft Corp.'s defense in the antitrust trial that began last week 
boils down to one question: Where's the harm? John Warden, Microsoft's 
lead lawyer, never quite uttered those words. But he nonetheless posed 
the question in hundreds of ways in his raspy baritone drawl during 
three days of cross-examining the government's lead witness, James 
Barksdale, executive of Netscape Communications Corp. The Justice 
Department and 20 states accuse Microsoft of being a new-age monopolist, 
bullying other companies so that it could stifle competition in the 
Internet software market. Netscape, the early leader in the market 
for software used to browse the World Wide Web, was the main target 
of Microsoft's illegal campaign, the government contends. Warden used 
his combative cross-examination of Barksdale as a forum for trying 
to make Microsoft's case. With his pointed questions, Warden sought 
to establish that while Microsoft was assuredly aggressive and powerful, 
there was scant evidence that its behavior resulted in the effects 
that classic antitrust doctrine deems illegal _ namely, raising prices 
or restricting output so that consumers suffer. The government contends 
that Microsoft bundled its Internet Explorer browser with its industry-standard 
Windows operating system and gave the browser away free to crush Netscape. 
Microsoft replies that it folded its browser into its operating system 
as a convenience to consumers. Warden tried to drive home the point 
with a sarcastic question: ``Mr. Barksdale, do you think consumers 
would be better off if Microsoft had not given the browser away free, 
in your hypothetical world?'' Barksdale replied that in the long run 
he thought consumers would benefit if Microsoft had not made the browser 
free because the move had eliminated the incentives for other companies 
to enter the browser market with innovative products. Still, Warden 
made his point: To side with the government, a court must favor a 
would-have-been world of hypothetically greater innovation instead 
of the present, which has not yet created widespread consumer dissatisfaction. 
Where's the harm? From every imaginable angle of interrogation, Warden 
hit the same theme. The government has contended that through exclusionary 
deals with computer makers and gateway services to the Internet like 
America Online, Microsoft made it more difficult and expensive for 
Netscape to distribute its browser. Microsoft's power to engage in 
this exclusionary behavior, the government adds, derives from the 
``chokehold'' monopoly the company enjoys because 90 percent of all 
personal computers run the Windows operating system. But isn't it 
true, Warden asked pointedly, that 26 million copies of Netscape's 
browser were downloaded over the Internet during the first eight months 
of this year? ``I wouldn't dispute the number,'' Barksdale replied. 
Warden then introduced internal Netscape documents showing that the 
company plans to distribute 159 million copies of its browser over 
the next 12 months. He asked Barksdale for an estimate of the number 
of Web sites from which computer users can download Netscape software, 
and Barksdale replied that there were said to be more than 20,000 
such Web sites. ``Isn't it true,'' Warden asked, ``that any home user 
who has a PC and an Internet connection may freely choose at no cost 
Netscape's Web-browsing software?'' Barksdale replied testily, and 
reasonably, that most people don't take the time and trouble to download 
software. That, he said, gives Microsoft a big advantage because of 
its deals making Internet Explorer the main browser offered by leading 
personal computer companies and America Online, which are the key 
distribution channels to home users. Still, Warden's point was made. 
Microsoft's monopoly appears to be a pretty leaky chokehold, at least 
when it comes to software distribution in the Internet era. Where's 
the harm? And Warden got personal with Barksdale. Microsoft's strategy 
against Netscape may have been to ``cut off their air supply,'' in 
the memorable phrase of one senior Microsoft executive. And competing 
with Microsoft has been difficult, but the result could scarcely be 
characterized as financial ruin for Netscape and its leaders. Warden 
asked Barksdale to calculate the value of his Netscape shares. More 
than $100 million, he replied. Where's the harm? With this line of 
defense, antitrust experts say, Microsoft is playing a strong hand. 
As William Kovacic, a visiting professor at the George Washington 
University Law School observes: Since the mid-1970s, when the United 
States began facing more global economic competition, federal courts 
have tended to view big companies as engines of innovation and economic 
efficiency that should be left alone, unless their behavior can be 
proved to harm consumers. The judgment of the courts, Kovacic notes, 
has been that the antitrust laws should not be used to put ``saddlebags 
on thoroughbreds.'' But in its case, the government is asking the 
court to weigh considerations beyond the current welfare of consumers 
and health of the industry that Microsoft dominates. ``The Justice 
Department is saying that we want the race of modern capitalism to 
be a fast one, but we also want to make sure that the winner succeeds 
because he is the fastest runner not because he tripped the guy next 
to him,'' said Carl Shapiro, a professor at the University of California 
at Berkeley and a former senior official in the Justice Department's 
antitrust division. The government has contended that in specific 
meetings with Netscape, Intel and Apple Computer, for example, Microsoft 
sought to intimidate rivals and bully its partners to help it curb 
competition. Look closely at what Microsoft did, the prosecutors say, 
and the picture that emerges is of a monopolist at work, illegally 
using its market power to squelch competition. Microsoft's strategy 
for refuting these contentions is twofold: fiercely dispute the Justice 
Department's evidence by mustering any available e-mail or snippet 
of deposition testimony that can be used to undermine the government's 
interpretation of events, and constantly return to the theme that 
even if Microsoft behaved badly, there is little evidence to show 
that the economy or consumers were hurt as a result. The linchpin 
of the Microsoft defense is that, yes, the company may be big, powerful 
and even nasty at times _ ``the antitrust laws are not a code of civility 
in business,'' Warden reminded the court _ but the company presides 
over a sector of the economy for which it is hard to argue that the 
``dead hand of monopoly'' is at work. In other words, Microsoft is 
asking: Where's the harm? 
</TEXT>
</DOC>