<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981025.0190 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
The New York Times said in an editorial on Monday, Oct. 26: Here are 
our endorsements for some of the more competitive races in New Jersey. 
7th District (parts of Union, Somerset, Middlesex and Essex counties): 
Choosing between Rep. Bob Franks and his Democratic challenger, Maryanne 
Connelly, is difficult. Franks, a three-term Republican, is generally 
regarded as a moderate in a party caucus that is woefully short of 
moderation. As chairman of the House Subcommittee on Railroads, he 
is in a key position for the mass-transit-dependent metropolitan area. 
But Ms. Connelly, the mayor of Fanwood and a retired AT&AMP;T executive, 
is firmer in her support for civil liberties and abortion rights. 
In the end, though, Franks is the better choice. He is among the relatively 
small group of moderate Republicans who have come together at key 
moments to restrain the House leadership's worst instincts and make 
progress toward campaign-finance reform. Franks, after a shaky start, 
was a sturdy supporter of the Shays-Meehan campaign-finance reform 
bill. He has been a strong voice for the region's troubled port and 
aggressive in defending the older industrial areas of the Midwest 
and Northeast against the growing influence of the South and West. 
Despite our differences with Franks, he gets our endorsement. 8th 
District (Passaic and Essex counties): Rep. Bill Pascrell Jr., a Democrat, 
and Matt Kirnan, the young Republican lawyer challenging him, are 
surprisingly close on the issues, and unpredictable in their opinions. 
Kirnan says he would have voted for the stronger Democratic version 
of the patients' rights bill. Pascrell joined Republicans to approve 
a ban on needle exchanges to combat AIDS in Washington. Both men say 
they are generally pro-choice but support a ban on so-called partial 
birth abortion. Both express particular concern for the troubled cities 
in their district. Pascrell has the glad-handing demeanor of a veteran 
politician and Kirnan, who is mayor of Verona, nevertheless has the 
wide-eyed openness of a newcomer. Both are appealing candidates, but 
by a narrow margin our endorsement goes to Pascrell due to his superior 
experience and our concern about Kirnan's constitutionally dubious 
support for vouchers for parochial schools. 9th District (parts of 
Bergen and Hudson counties): Rep. Steven Rothman, a Democrat, describes 
this race as a fight between ``a moderate fiscal conservative and 
an ultra-right, extreme Republican.'' Rothman, who sometimes seems 
to weigh the political advantages of his words too carefully, may 
be a bit more liberal than his description suggests. But he is not 
far from the mark about his opponent, Steve Lonegan. Lonegan, the 
mayor of Bogota, has a compelling personal story. Legally blind due 
to a degenerative eye disease, he struggled to get an education and 
find a job. He not only prospered as a salesman, but was able to develop 
his own thriving business. Unfortunately, Lonegan's success in overcoming 
his handicap on his own seems to have turned him against government 
programs. We admire Lonegan's success story, but we endorse Rothman. 
12th District (Hunterdon County and parts of Mercer, Middlesex, Somerset 
and Monmouth counties): The Democratic challenger, Rush Holt, is perhaps 
most famous for his radio ads, which feature a recording of the incumbent, 
Michael Pappas, singing a tribute to Kenneth Starr, the independent 
counsel. But Holt deserves support for more than his skill at attention-grabbing 
advertising. The son of a U.S. senator, he made his own career as 
a scientist. He has worked on nuclear weapons proliferation for the 
State Department, on environmental protection in New York City and 
most recently as assistant director of the Princeton Plasma Physics 
Laboratory. Although he has never held public office, Holt has had 
an extensive career in community service, particularly in the areas 
of environment and education. Pappas, a freshman Republican, has a 
record that is far more conservative than the district he represents. 
He was one of only two New Jersey representatives to vote against 
the bipartisan Shays-Meehan campaign-finance reform bill. Holt gets 
our endorsement. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>