<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981025.0122 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Standing upon the flattened ground where a federal office building 
stood until a bomb brought it down more than three years ago, Vice 
President Al Gore broke ground Sunday on a memorial to the 168 people 
killed as well as the ordinary people who helped Oklahoma City's physical 
and spiritual rebuilding. ``Today we gather to seek the light, to 
find in this soil, nourished with a million tears, the harvest of 
God's healing grace,'' Gore said before he and about two dozen local, 
state and federal officials, as well as relatives of some who were 
killed, dug out the first shovelfuls of dirt. The Oklahoma City National 
Memorial, which is planned to include an empty chair for everyone 
who died, a reflecting pool and a National Memorial Institute for 
the Prevention of Terrorism and Violence, is expected to open late 
next year. Former Secretary of Defense Dick Cheney, who is serving 
as national fund-raising chairman for the memorial, said officials 
have raised about $18 million of the $24.1 million needed to build 
the project. At once, the scene of the ground-breaking was haunting 
and hopeful. Still surrounding the three acres where the Alfred P. 
Murrah Federal Building once stood were shells of other places devastated 
by the blast, including a YMCA and the main office of The Oklahoma 
City Journal-Record, a local newspaper. The temporary stage from which 
Gore, Attorney General Janet Reno, Gov. Frank Keating and other officials 
spoke was erected almost at the very spot where a Ryder rental truck 
was parked at 9:02 a.m. on April 19, 1995, when it disintegrated from 
the power of the bomb it carried. Arlene Blanchard, who worked at 
the U.S. Army recruiting office in the Murrah building and spoke on 
behalf of the victims, said the day of the explosion would ``burn 
hot in the hearts, minds, bodies and souls of many Americans across 
this nation.'' There were other reminders of the tragedy, ones that 
symbolize the spirit of Oklahomans who have vowed not to let the worst 
act of domestic terrorism in the nation's history blunt the memories 
of those who died. A chain-link fence surrounding the site that grew 
to life with cards, flowers and other condolences will become part 
of the memorial. So will a small elm tree nearby that survived the 
blast. Locals have named it the Survivor Tree. Unmentioned by name 
through the ceremonies were the two men responsible for the bombing. 
One, Timothy McVeigh, was found guilty of conspiracy and murder in 
a federal trial last year in Denver and was sentenced to death; the 
other, Terry Nichols, was convicted of conspiracy and involuntary 
manslaughter and was sentenced to life without the possibility of 
parole. But their acts provided Gore and Ms. Reno yet another opportunity 
to promote the federal government's efforts against all forms of terrorist 
activity. The budget signed last week included an increase of nearly 
$3 billion to combat terrorism, largely as a result of the recent 
bombings of U.S. embassies in Nairobi and Dar Es-Saalam, but also, 
Gore said, as a result of the bombing here. `'We will not back down 
in the face of terrorism,'' Ms. Reno said. `'We will carry on and 
do our duty to the country and the people we serve, and we will not 
be intimidated by terrorists.'' For Gore, the trip to Oklahoma City 
was one of his few outside Washington in recent months for nonpolitical 
purposes. Indeed, but for the administration officials who traveled 
here with him, he was virtually surrounded by Oklahoma Republicans 
through the ceremonies, including Keating, Sen. Don Nickles and Reps. 
J.C. Watts, Ernest Istook and Frank Lucas. Oklahoma's entire congressional 
delegation is Republican, and all those running for re-election this 
year _ six House members and Nickles _ are expected to defeat their 
Democratic opponents without much trouble. Even so, Gore made a point 
of the nonpartisan nature of efforts to help Oklahoma heal. He praised 
the strength of all the ordinary citizens who pitched in and credited 
Republicans for helping the administration win the extra money to 
fight terrorism. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>