<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981025.0224 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
College football will officially embrace the computer age when the 
Bowl Championship Series ranking is released for the first time Monday 
and another prefix is added to the alphabet soup of polls and calculations 
already in place to determine the best team in the land. There is 
The Associated Press Poll representing the news media vote; the ESPN/USA 
Today poll, which tallies the coaches' votes; and, of course, there 
is The New York Times computer ranking, which often seems to represent 
unfashionable thinking. This week, the Times' ranking puts Texas at 
No. 18 _ defying both the news media types and field generals who 
have left them out of their Top 25. Now comes the BCS ranking. It's 
mission is simple: to insure that the No. 1 team faces the No. 2 team 
in a national title game, this year at the Fiesta Bowl. Its methodology, 
though, is anything but simple. The BCS ranking will be compiled by 
averaging the three aforementioned rankings with two other computer 
rankings, putting a numerical value on strength of schedule and factoring 
in a team's number of losses. At first glance, the whole formula rattles 
the human hardware. But strip away the high-tech vernacular and what 
is left is an argument that has been raging on barstools since the 
days of leather helmets. Who is No. 1? Who have they played? Who is 
second best? Now, how to determine that? The BCS ranking has decided 
on decimal points and data. The better way is to analyze defenses 
and game dates. Last year, the co-national champions, Michigan and 
Nebraska, had the first- and fifth-best defenses in the nation. Over 
the weekend, each of the five remaining contenders for the national 
title won. Ohio State (7-0) beat Northwestern, 36-10, and U.C.L.A. 
(6-0) bested California, 28-16, to remain No. 1 and No. 2 in the news 
media and coaches polls. But don't be surprised when Monday's BCS 
ranking moves the Bruins ahead of the Buckeyes, as the Times computer 
did this weekend. UCLA opponents are a combined 27-10. Ohio State's 
are 27-15 as a result of a down year in the Big Ten and Saturday's 
losses by West Virginia and Missouri _ both early-season victims of 
the Buckeyes. Ohio State has held its last four opponents to 80 yards 
rushing or less, has the nation's No. 2-ranked defense (giving up 
229.1 yards a game) and has only one true test left _ Michigan on 
Nov. 21. UCLA finishes the year with Washington, crosstown rival Southern 
Cal and then Miami on Dec. 5 in a game that was postponed because 
of Hurricane Georges. ``We feel like a gunslinger,'' UCLA Coach Bob 
Toledo said. ``Everybody is out to get us. We have to be ready. There's 
pressure, but I'd rather have that than the alternative.'' He conceded 
that he would like to have a defense better than the one ranked 91st 
in the nation and yielding a whopping 408 yards a game. Twice, the 
Bears moved inside the UCLA 2-yard line, but the Bruins managed to 
force a turnover and make a goal-line stand. ``The defense rose to 
the occasion,'' said Toledo, who has privately challenged his players 
to quit testing the fates _ especially after a 41-38 overtime victory 
last week against Oregon. The two other highly rated unbeaten teams 
continued their winning ways: Tennessee (6-0) beat Alabama, 35-18, 
and Kansas State (7-0) beat Iowa State, 52-7. The Vols remain No. 
3 in the news media poll and are ranked No. 4 by the coaches; the 
Wildcats are No. 4 with the writers and broadcasters and No. 3 with 
the coaches. The Times ranking, again a precursor to the BCS, moved 
Tennessee ahead of Kansas State on strength of schedule. Still, Kansas 
State appears to be the stronger of the two. The Wildcats lead the 
nation in scoring defense, averaging 8.1 points a game, and are fourth 
in total defense. However, Kansas State has to do what it hasn't been 
able to for 29 years: beat Nebraska on Nov. 14. If that happens, the 
Wildcats have to beat Texas A&AMP;M (No. 7 in the Times ranking) in 
the Big 12 championship game. That didn't look as if it would be difficult 
while the Aggies were losing their opener to Florida State. But they 
have since won seven straight, including a decisive thumping of Nebraska. 
What can you say about the Vols? They have beaten good teams in Syracuse, 
Georgia and Florida _ though it took overtime. ``We've had to fight 
for every win, four of the five at least,'' Tennessee Coach Phillip 
Fulmer said. ``We have to continue to do that, continue to fly around, 
make plays and tackle well.'' Tennessee's only remaining ranked opponent 
is unbeaten Arkansas (10th in the Times ranking). The Volunteers may 
have to beat the Razorbacks twice _ on Nov. 14 and perhaps again in 
the Southeastern Conference championship game. A bigger hump, however, 
may be Tim Couch and Kentucky. The Vols, who play Kentucky on Nov. 
21, are 60th in the nation in pass defense and have given up 119 points 
in the air. Then, there is once-beaten Florida State, which is poised 
to pick up the pieces when any, or all, of the four higher-ranked 
teams lose. By whipping Georgia Tech, 34-7, the Seminoles moved up 
to No. 5 in the AP poll. They boast a stronger opponents' record _ 
32-19 _ than those ahead of them. The Seminoles have games left against 
Florida and Virginia _ both in all polls' top 15. But more important, 
they have the best defense in the country, giving up just 212.3 yards 
a game. After giving up an 18-play, 80-yard touchdown drive to the 
Yellow Jackets in the first quarter, they held a team that averages 
more than 40 points a game to just 67 yards. In 1993, the Seminoles 
lost early in the year to Notre Dame before running the table and 
winning the national championship. In the beginning of the year, Coach 
Bobby Bowden insisted one loss wouldn't eliminate a team from the 
title game. He's betting a top-ranked defense can overcome more than 
decimal points and data. ``You're playing now for No. 2,'' he said 
of the BCS ranking. ``You just got to get to the game.'' Don't be 
surprised if he does. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>