<DOC>
<DOCNO> ABC19981027.1830.1196 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> CAPTION </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
This week we're taking "A closer look" at space, with John Glenn and 
the others preparing for their shuttle launch on Thursday. In Florida 
today, it was fairly routine, equipment check, medical exam, even 
some time with their respective families. In the old days, astronauts 
didn't get a lot of last-minute time with their families. Today the 
space agency unveiled what they called deep space microprobes. They 
are scheduled to be launched in January. They will be crashed deliberately 
into Mars, so as to test the durability, very small instruments that 
will be needed to explore Mars and continue the search for other life. 
Here's ABC's Ned Potter. Our first encounter with alien life may not 
happen in some distant corner of the universe, but soon, on a bracing 
night in the Utah desert in April 2008. That's when NASA hopes to 
bring back a robot ship with the first one-pound sample of soil from 
Mars. There's something about the possibility that maybe life started 
elsewhere, i think, that just fascinates almost everybody. Scientists 
are scouring the solar system for evidence of life. Next year they 
will send a probe called "stardust" to return samples from the tail 
of a Comet. They're talking to oceanographers about how to reach the 
ice-covered waters of Jupiter's Moon europa. And what if they actually 
do find something? That's no small question. America's only past experience 
is with the Apollo Moon rocks, now sealed inside building 31n at the 
Johnson space center. Once we suit up, we're pretty effectively covered. 
To get into the lar lab tod needs protective clothing, vacuum in an 
airlock, and then scientists can only touch the samples through special 
glove boxes. Look at that glassy surface. All this is to protect the 
samples from human contamination. We want to study the Moon. We don't 
want to study what the earth can do to Moon samples. The reverse problem 
is perhaps trickier -- how to protect us from whatever the space probes 
bring back on the tiny but not zero chance that something in them 
could do us harm. Whether or not we find life on Mars is not perhaps 
the central question. We're looking to find what conditions promote 
life. But life is hardy stuff. It even survives in spacecraft parts 
that have been out there and back. And, of course, there may be past 
life inside that famous Martian meteorite. So have bmuch more carel 
wh we brinthgs FM MA, and obviously, we will be. The samples will 
be welded in a metal canister for the 300 million-mile trip home. 
And if there's the slightest sign of a leak, the ship won't even be 
allowed to land on earth. Especially after people talking about life 
on Mars being a distinct possibility, we've got to be really careful 
there, and we're not taking any of that lightly at all. Scientists 
will treat the rocks with the same care they would the ebola virus. 
Because the prospect of life in space is at once terrifying and tantalizing. 
Yes, there's a small chance it's harmful, but its discovery could 
be one of the greatest of all time. Ned Potter, ABC News, Johnson 
space center, Houston. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>