<DOC>
<DOCNO> APW19981027.0230 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Rabbis leading a tearful funeral procession for a Jewish settler killed 
by suspected Palestinian militants demanded Tuesday that Prime Minister 
Benjamin Netanyahu go back on his promise to withdraw from West Bank 
land. ``Mister prime minister, fix what you have ruined. There is 
still time for repentance,'' said Rabbi Eliezer Waldman, a spiritual 
leader of the Kiryat Arba settlement, where the victim, 29-year-old 
Danny Vargas, lived. Some 1,500 mourners, many with tears streaming 
down their cheeks, walked quietly behind the hearse passing through 
the settlement just outside the West Bank town of Hebron. Vargas' 
killing Monday in the nearby West Bank town of Hebron put the new 
Israeli-Palestinian peace agreement to a first test. A centerpiece 
of the agreement is a pledge by the Palestinians to work harder to 
prevent attacks on Israel and rein in militants. In a sign of change, 
Palestinian security forces cooperated with their Israeli counterparts 
in trying to catch Vargas' killers who fled into the Palestinian-run 
sector of divided Hebron. However, Israeli troops also imposed a curfew 
on the area in downtown Hebron they control, barring some 30,000 Palestinians 
there from leaving their homes. The army also sealed the city, and 
Palestinians were not allowed to enter or leave. The restrictions 
embittered many Palestinians who had hoped that life would improve 
as a result of the peace agreement. ``We thought that we could now 
go to Gaza, but we cannot even leave our homes,'' said Hebron resident 
Khalil Jaberi, 26, referring to a provision in the accord for a new 
land route for Palestinians between the West Bank and Gaza Strip. 
embittered many P In the northern West Bank, meanwhile, hundreds of 
Palestinians clashed with Israeli troops on the outskirts of the Balata 
and Askar refugee camps to protest Monday's killing of a 65-year-old 
Palestinian whose body was found outside a Jewish settlement. s fired 
tear gas and rubber bullets to disperse Palestinian stone throwers, 
and two Palestinians were injured. Monday's victim, Mohammed Zalmout, 
was bludgeoned to death, and Israeli police received an anonymous 
call saying his body could be found near the gate of the Itamar settlement. 
Israeli police reportedly were searching for a suspect, a young Israeli 
man. In several West Bank towns, meanwhile, the Fatah group of Palestinian 
leader Yasser Arafat enforced a general strike to press demands for 
the trial and execution of Palestinian military intelligence agents 
responsible for the death of a Fatah activist. In the town of Nablus, 
Fatah supporters fired in the air and burned tires in a show of force. 
The dispute The dispute began Sunday when military intelligence raided 
Fatah offices in the West Bank town of Ramallah, seizing files and 
weapons. When Fatah activists threw stones in protest, military intelligence 
opened fire, killing 16-year-old Wissam Tarifi. Fatah leaders want 
Tarifi's killers to be tried and executed. They also seek the ouster 
of the head of military intelligence, Moussa Arafat, a distant relative 
of the Palestinian leader. Arafat is abroad and will only return on 
Wednesday. He needs Fatah's support to shape public opinion and he 
may have to act quickly to quell the growing rebellion of his loyalists. 
In a similar case in August, Fatah demanded that Arafat order the 
execution of two Palestinian policemen convicted of killing two Fatah 
activists in a personal dispute. Arafat complied and ordered the defendants 
be sent before a firing squad in the first execution in the autonomous 
areas. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>