<DOC>
<DOCNO> APW19981027.1114 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Government forces drew back Tuesday from former Kosovo battlefronts, 
holding off the threat of NATO airstrikes. The Alliance decided to 
maintain the threat indefinitely to press for a political solution 
to the crisis. ``We have instructed our military to remain prepared 
... and maintain forces,'' NATO Secretary General Javier Solana said 
in Brussels, Belgium, as the 1900 GMT deadline passed. Private radio 
station B-92 quoted Serb sources as saying the withdrawal was complete 
and that government forces in Kosovo were back to the level before 
Yugoslav President Slobodan Milosevic launched his crackdown against 
ethnic Albanian militants on Feb. 28. In Washington, White House spokesman 
Joe Lockhart said reports from the field indicated Milosevic was in 
``substantial compliance'' with terms of the Kosovo peace agreement. 
``Well over 90 percent of the security force reinforcements'' have 
been withdrawn, major road blocks have been dismantled and heavy weapons 
have been returned to garrison, Lockhart said. ``As we see this substantial 
compliance, we also need to make sure that coming into compliance 
isn't the only issue. We need to send the message that he needs to 
stay in compliance.'' Hundreds of people died and nearly 300,000 have 
been driven from their homes in fighting since Milosevic sent in troops 
to battle ethnic Albanian separatists in Kosovo. Ethnic Albanians 
make up 90 percent of Kosovo's population, and most want independence. 
Kosovo is a province of Serbia, the dominant republic in Yugoslavia. 
The 16-nation NATO alliance had threatened to launch airstrikes unless 
Milosevic halted his crackdown and cuts his forces to levels in place 
before the conflict began. In Malisevo, a former rebel stronghold 
50 kilometers (30 miles) southwest of the provincial capital, Pristina, 
hundreds of ethnic Albanians filled the streets Tuesday, visiting 
homes and shops they abandoned when Serb forces overran the town in 
July. The crowds vanished after bursts of automatic gunfire rang out 
when a small convoy of armored police vehicles rolled into town. Serb 
police said the shots came from somewhere in the village and they 
did not return fire. About two kilometers (a mile) north of town, 
uniformed guerrillas inspected bunkers vacated by Serb police and 
found a grenade tied to a tree, with a trip wire set as a booby trap. 
Such threats prevent most refugees in Kosovo from returning home. 
But many have come out of the wilderness because of the approaching 
winter to stay with friends and relatives in safe towns, said U.N. 
refugee official Kris Janowski. He said about 10,000 are still in 
the woods. Osman Mazreku, a villager in Malisevo, said he fled to 
a nearby town nearly three months ago with his wife, mother and three 
children. His elderly father stayed behind, was arrested by police 
and has not been seen since, Mazreku said. ``He said 'I'm old and 
they won't do anything to me,''' Mazreku said. ``I was afraid something 
like this would happen.'' The top floor of the family's two-story 
house had been gutted by flames. Clothing, valuables and garbage were 
strewn across the ground floor. ``I'm sorry to see my house in this 
condition, but I'm happy to be alive,'' he said. ``I hope they'll 
let me live here.'' The ability of refugees to return to their homes 
before the advent of winter is critical to the success of international 
efforts to bring peace to the troubled province. Despite the apparent 
success in persuading Milosevic to withdraw his forces, Western powers 
insisted that NATO must keep up its guard to prevent renewed fighting 
and encourage talks between Milosevic and ethnic Albanians on Kosovo's 
future. Western powers want Milosevic to grant substantial autonomy 
to Kosovo, which he abolished in 1989. But they oppose independence 
as demanded by ethnic Albanians, fearing that would lead to similar 
demands in other Balkan countries with large ethnic Albanian communities. 
British Foreign Secretary Robin Cook, speaking in a BBC interview, 
warned NATO should not drop its guard despite ``serious progress'' 
by Milosevic. ``He still has some way to go and it may well be wise 
for us to keep that threat hanging over him,'' Cook said. In Geneva, 
a spokesman for the ethnic Albanian Kosovo Liberation Army, Bardhyl 
Mahmuti, called the Yugoslav troop movements nothing more than an 
``illusion.'' Ethnic Albanians maintain the government troops are 
withdrawing only temporarily and want NATO to strike. Evidence of 
the Serb withdrawal included the abandoned Komorane checkpoint outside 
Pristina and signs of more movement among villagers. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>