<DOC>
<DOCNO> APW19981027.0802 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Showing resolve to keep their side of the new peace agreement with 
Israel, Palestinian security forces on Tuesday arrested two Palestinian 
suspects in the grisly killing of a Jewish settler in the West Bank 
town of Hebron. A roadside stone memorial set up settlers Tuesday 
in the spot where 29-year-old Danny Vargas was dumped from his car 
by his killers a day before bore the inscription ``avenge the blood.'' 
In a second funeral Tuesday, some 3,000 Palestinians buried an elderly 
Palestinian, Mohammed Zalout, who was bludgeoned to death a day before 
near a Jewish settlement of Itamar in the northern West Bank, apparently 
by an Israeli extremist. The crowd chanted ``revenge, revenge,'' and 
the Israeli army declared Palestinian towns in the West Bank off-limits 
to Israelis, apparently because of concern about possible revenge 
attacks. Despite the latest violence, Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu 
said he was determined to withdraw troops from 13 percent of the West 
Bank over the next 12 weeks, as promised. ``The only thing that can 
prevent the implementation of the agreement is if the (Israeli) Cabinet 
does not approve it, or if the Palestinians do not fulfill it,'' Netanyahu 
said. However, Netanyahu was evasive when asked whether he would freeze 
a withdrawal if parliament passes an early elections bill that was 
approved Monday for a first reading by parliament. Israeli media speculated 
Tuesday that Netanyahu might try to discourage the dovish opposition 
from backing the bill by declaring that in the event of early elections 
he would suspend the pullback. Netanyahu said he would not relate 
to the possibility of spring elections because he hoped ``it will 
not happen.'' The most vocal critics of Netanyahu have been Jewish 
settlers and their representatives in parliament. At Vargas' open 
grave, politicians and friends delivering eulogies demanded that Netanyahu 
go back on his promise to withdraw from West Bank land. ``You promised 
us peace and security, and we have neither,'' said legislator Rehavam 
Zeevi from the far-right opposition party Moledet, referring to Netanyahu. 
His speech was punctuated by shouts of ``wage war'' by some of the 
mourners. Monday's two killings put the new peace agreement to a first 
test. A centerpiece of the agreement is a pledge by the Palestinians 
to work harder to rein in militants. Demonstrating a new attitude, 
Palestinian security forces who had suspended cooperation with Israel 
for most of the past 17 months on Tuesday arrested two Hebron men 
in the Vargas killing. Ahmed Tibi, a spokesman for Arafat, said one 
of the men was suspected of having shot Vargas and the other of having 
been an accomplice. The two suspects also confessed to killing a Jewish 
seminary student earlier this month near the communal farm of Ora 
south of Jerusalem, Tibi said. Israel army radio identified the main 
suspect as Jamal Jadallah and said he denied he had any ties to the 
Islamic militant group Hamas, the main opponent to peace with Israel. 
Despite the new cooperation, Israeli troops reacted harshly to the 
Vargas killing, clamping a curfew on the downtown area of Hebron they 
control and sealing the city so Palestinians could not leave or enter. 
The curfew barred some 30,000 Palestinians from leaving their homes. 
During the crackdown, troops entered a girls' elementary school and 
ordered the students, some of them crying, to go home. Since August, 
downtown Hebron residents have already been under curfew twice for 
a total of three weeks, and the new restrictions embittered many Palestinians. 
``We thought that we could now go to Gaza, but we cannot even leave 
our homes,'' said Khalil Jaberi, 26, referring to a provision in the 
accord for a new land route for Palestinians between the West Bank 
and Gaza Strip. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>