<DOC>
<DOCNO> APW19981027.0472 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Government forces scrambled Tuesday to meet a NATO deadline for pulling 
back in Kosovo, and hundreds of people returned to their homes here 
for the first time in months now that most of the police and soldiers 
have gone. Private radio station B-92 quoted Serb sources as saying 
the withdrawal was complete and that government forces in Kosovo were 
back to the level before Yugoslav President Slobodan Milosevic launched 
his crackdown against ethnic Albanian militants on Feb. 28. International 
observers traveled through the majority Albanian province Tuesday 
to try to verify those claims. U.S. officials in Washington say the 
Clinton administration wants verification before declaring that Milosevic 
satisfied the terms of the deal he accepted to end the crisis. ``We 
want to make sure the movements are a real withdrawal and not a reconfiguration 
(of forces),'' White House spokesman Joe Lockhart said. The 16-nation 
NATO alliance has threatened to launch airstrikes unless Milosevic 
halts his crackdown and cuts his forces to levels in place before 
the conflict began. NATO ambassadors were to meet later Tuesday in 
Brussels, Belgium, hours before the 1900 GMT deadline for Milosevic 
to comply. In Belgrade, the special U.S. mediator for Kosovo, Christopher 
Hill, said that based on reports from the field, ``we are seeing substantial 
movement'' but he stopped short of declaring the withdrawal complete. 
``There is an effort to reconfigure the security forces in a way that 
we truly hope will reduce the violence substantially,'' Hill said. 
``We also hope this reconfiguration, moving around of forces, will 
help resolve the issue of the displaced... people who are afraid to 
come back to their villages.'' That appeared to indicate that the 
United States was pushing Milosevic not only to draw down his forces 
in the province but was also dictating where the remaining troops 
could be stationed. In Geneva, Switzerland, the overseas spokesman 
of the ethnic Albanian Kosovo Liberation Army, Bardhyl Mahmuti, called 
the Yugoslav troop movements nothing more than an ``illusion'' of 
actual withdrawals. Ethnic Albanians had been urging NATO to strike 
Serb forces to change the balance of power in the conflict. Evidence 
of the Serb withdrawal Tuesday included the abandoned Komorane checkpoint 
outside Pristina and signs of more movement among villagers. In Malisevo, 
a former rebel stronghold 50 kilometers (30 miles) southwest of Pristina, 
hundreds of ethnic Albanians filled the streets on Tuesday morning, 
revisiting for the first time the homes and shops they abandoned when 
Serb forces overran the town July 28. Osman Mazreku said he fled to 
nearby Belanica village on July 28 with his wife, mother and three 
children. His father chose to remain behind, was arrested by police 
and has not been seen since, according to Mazreku. ``He said `I'm 
old and they won't do anything to me,' '' Mazreku said. ``I was afraid 
something like this would happen but he was determined'' to stay. 
The top floor of Mazreku's two-story house had been gutted by fire, 
and clothing and garbage were strewn across the ground floor. ``I'm 
sorry to see my house in this condition, but I'm happy to be alive,'' 
he said. ``That's all that matters. I hope they'll let me live here 
now.'' But no one planned to stay the night or bring their families 
back until police vacated a building on edge of the village. As if 
to underscore the uncertainty, the streets emptied after a short burst 
of automatic rifle fire when a small convoy of armored police vehicles 
arrived to reinforce the police presence at the building. Serb police 
said the shots came from somewhere in the village but they did not 
return the fire. About three kilometers (1.5 miles) north of the town, 
uniformed KLA guerrillas inspected bunkers vacated by departing Serb 
police and found a grenade tied to a tree with a trip wire set as 
a booby trap. Such threats prevent most of remaining displaced people 
in Kosovo from returning home. But many have come out of the wilderness 
because of the approaching winter to stay with friends and relatives 
in safe towns, said U.N. refugee official Kris Janowski. He put the 
number of people still living in the woods at about 10,000. ``It's 
not an ideal situation but it's not a situation where we'll see people 
starving or freezing to death,'' Janowski said. Ethnic Albanians make 
up 90 percent of Kosovo's population, and most want independence. 
Kosovo is a province of Serbia, the main republic in Yugoslavia. Hundreds 
of people died and nearly 300,000 have been driven from their homes 
in seven months of fighting since Milosevic launched the crackdown. 
As the withdrawal accelerated, Kosovo's Serb governor, Veljko Odalovic, 
thanked the police for ``bringing peace to Kosovo'' and pledged the 
province will be defended from ethnic Albanian ``terrorists'' with 
or without the police. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>