<DOC>
<DOCNO> APW19981027.0197 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Boris Yeltsin checked into a sanatorium Tuesday, a day after doctors 
ordered him to cancel yet another foreign trip because of high blood 
pressure and extreme fatigue. Yeltsin's announcement Monday that he 
would not make the one-day trip to Austria fueled speculation about 
his ability to stay in office and guide Russia through its worst economic 
crisis in the post-Soviet era. Prime Minister Yevgeny Primakov went 
to Vienna in Yeltsin's place to meet with European Union leaders and 
international lenders. Yeltsin's office said Monday the 67-year-old 
Russian leader was suffering from an ``asthenic condition.'' Asthenia 
refers to a lack of physical strength. Yeltsin's blood pressure was 
also unstable and doctors recommended a vacation, presidential spokesman 
Dmitry Yakushkin said. On Tuesday, Yeltsin checked into the Barvikha 
sanatorium near Moscow, the Interfax news agency reported, citing 
Yakushkin. Yeltsin has stayed there in the past, including when he 
was recovering from multiple heart bypass surgery in 1996. Yakushkin 
said Yeltsin would undergo ``a course of restoration treatment,'' 
Interfax reported. The length of his stay depends on the treatment 
scheduled, he said, without elaborating. ``This is perhaps the first 
time recently when the president has listened to his doctors' advice,'' 
Yeltsin aid Oleg Sysuyev said Monday on the Russian TV program ``Hero 
of the Day.'' ``The president is not ill enough to be considered incapable 
of working,'' he said. Yeltsin's recent ailments have heightened calls 
for his resignation. If he were to step down _ though he insists he 
won't _ he would be replaced by Primakov, who would be required to 
call new elections within three months. Primakov has been prime minister 
for only six weeks and has yet to produce his own blueprint to deal 
with the country's deep-rooted economic problems. But he is widely 
respected by all political factions and is seen as a stabilizing influence 
at a time when Yeltsin has receded into the background. Communist 
leader Gennady Zyuganov said Tuesday that Yeltsin's aides are ``mocking'' 
Russians by insisting he has no crippling illness. ``Mr. Yeltsin's 
inability to work has been obvious to us for quite a long time,'' 
Zyuganov said at a news conference. He called for Yeltsin to undergo 
an independent medical exam and for the results to be made public. 
Primakov held talks with Yeltsin at the president's Gorky-9 country 
residence outside of Moscow before leaving for Vienna, Yeltsin's press 
service said. Yeltsin authorized him to tell European Union officials 
about the government's plan to cope with the latest economic crisis, 
Yakushkin said, according to the ITAR-Tass news agency. For several 
months now, Yeltsin has rarely put in full days at the Kremlin, spending 
most of his time at his country residences. Yeltsin has been weakened 
by recurring health problems, But the president and his doctors insist 
that he'll serve out the rest of his term, set to end in the summer 
of 2000, and deny he has crippling health problems. Still, Yeltsin 
clearly lacks the energy he displayed in his early years in office. 
Potential candidates in the 2000 presidential race have already begun 
an informal campaign to replace Yeltsin. Leading contenders include 
Moscow Mayor Yuri Luzhkov, Communist Party leader Gennady Zyuganov 
and Alexander Lebed, a former general and now governor of a vast Siberian 
region. Russian newspapers have speculated that Yeltsin is afflicted 
with Alzheimer's or Parkinson's disease, but their reports are based 
simply on his public appearances, not on medical examinations. Yeltsin 
cannot point to any major accomplishments since he was re-elected 
in 1996, yet many warn his resignation would trigger a political crisis 
on top of Russia's economic turmoil. Yeltsin was forced to cut short 
a trip to Central Asia earlier this month because of a respiratory 
infection. He has already canceled a visit to Malaysia that was planned 
for next month, but a visit to India in December was still on his 
schedule. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>