<DOC>
<DOCNO> APW19981027.0476 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Making good on a promise of renewed security cooperation with Israel, 
Palestinian agents on Tuesday arrested two suspects in the killing 
of a Jewish settler, a spokesman for Palestinian leader Yasser Arafat 
said. The victim, 29-year-old security guard Danny Vargas from the 
Jewish settlement of Kiryat Arba, was shot dead Monday in the town 
of Hebron in an apparent attack by Palestinian militants. Later Monday, 
a 65-year-old Palestinian man was bludgeoned to death, and Israeli 
police reportedly were searching for a suspect, a young Israeli man. 
Vargas' killing and the slaying of Mohammed Zalout, apparently by 
a Jewish extremist, tested the new Israeli-Palestinian peace agreement. 
At Vargas' open grave, politicians and friends delivering eulogies 
demanded Tuesday that Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu go back on 
his promise to withdraw from West Bank land. ``You promised us peace 
and security, and we have neither,'' said legislator Rehavam Zeevi 
from the far-right opposition party Moledet, referring to Netanyahu. 
His speech was punctuated by shouts of ``wage war'' by some of the 
mourners. A centerpiece of the agreement, which calls for an Israeli 
troop withdrawal from 13 percent of the West Bank, is a pledge by 
the Palestinians to work harder to rein in militants. Demonstrating 
a new attitude, Palestinian security forces who had suspended cooperation 
with Israel for most of the past 17 months arrested two suspects Tuesday 
in the Vargas killing. Ahmed Tibi, a spokesman for Arafat, said the 
two men are residents of Hebron, but Tibi did not say whether they 
had ties to a Palestinian political faction. The two suspects also 
confessed to killing a Jewish seminary student this month near the 
communal farm of Ora south of Jerusalem, Tibi said. Netanyahu condemned 
Monday's two slayings and said he was determined to carry out the 
peace agreement _ despite violence and opposition from Israeli hard-liners. 
``The only thing that can prevent the implementation of the agreement 
is if the (Israeli) Cabinet does not approve it, or if the Palestinians 
do not fulfill it,'' Netanyahu said. The Cabinet was to convene Thursday, 
and the peace agreement was expected to win narrow approval. In troubled 
Hebron Israeli troops enforced a curfew on the downtown area they 
control, barring some 30,000 Palestinians there from leaving their 
homes. The army also sealed the city, and Palestinians were not allowed 
to enter or leave. The restrictions, coming after the settler killing, 
embittered many Palestinians who had hoped that life would improve 
as a result of the peace agreement. ``We thought that we could now 
go to Gaza, but we cannot even leave our homes,'' said Hebron resident 
Khalil Jaberi, 26, referring to a provision in the accord for a new 
land route for Palestinians between the West Bank and Gaza Strip. 
In the northern West Bank, hundreds of Palestinians clashed with Israeli 
troops near the Balata and Askar refugee camps to protest Monday's 
killing of Zalout. Soldiers fired tear gas and rubber bullets to disperse 
Palestinian stone throwers, and two Palestinians were injured. Meanwhile, 
Netanyahu tried to assure Jewish settlers that they would be safe, 
saying that none of the 144 settlements would become isolated enclaves 
as a result of the troop withdrawal and that the main north-south 
highway would remain under full Israeli control. Netanyahu also said 
the United States had promised to deliver clarifications on the new 
Palestinian security plan by the end of the week. An Israeli official, 
speaking on condition of anonymity, said Israel was also expecting 
the U.S. administration to make statements bolstering Netanyahu's 
position, including his opposition to a unilateral Palestinian declaration 
of statehood after the autonomy period ends in May 1999. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>