<DOC>
<DOCNO> CNN19981027.1600.0051 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> CAPTION </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
It looks like Americans are beginning to show their concern over the 
global economic turmoil. This month consumer confidence tumbled to 
its lowest level in nearly two years. The conference board, a private 
research group, says its consumer confidence index fell nine points. 
A drop indicates fewer people are likely to make a big purchase, such 
as a Home or major appliance. It also means fewer people may plan 
a vacation, and there is an expectation of fewer jobs and lower paychecks. 
Joining us now to discuss these latest economic projections is Kathleen 
madigan, the economic editor of "business week" magazine. Miss madigan, 
thanks for joining us. Good afternoon, how are you? Good. Does this 
latest report mean consumers are going to be more careful when they 
are shopping for the basics? Oh, well probably not for the basics, 
I mean I always use the analogy that consumers spending and confidence 
is kind of like how we feel about our weight, and we may say we need 
to lose weight, that doesn't mean we go out and go on a diet. The 
same way, consumers say they're worried about the economy, but that 
doesn't mean that they immediately cut back on their spending. What 
does it mean? How are they going to change or how are we going to 
change, rather? Well, I think the process doesn't happen overnight, 
but as you mentioned, in December, if these conditions still stay 
poor the stock market stays down, it's a global me still looking worrisome, 
people are probably going to cut back on their Christmas list. I was 
going to say this is usually the time they start gearing up for christmas 
shopping. Do you think they're going to take a hit this year because 
of the skon assumer unconfidence? Well, I think they're going to try 
to hold up on discounting as long as they can. But I think eventually 
toward the end, the last two weeks before Christmas, we are going 
to see them having to cut prices which of course means they're going 
to cut into their profit margin. Very quickly, can you give me a long-term 
look? Is this just a short-term lack of confidence or is it something 
we could see into 1999? If you look at the state of the labor markets, 
they still look pretty strong and that's the primary determinant on 
consumer spending. So as long as job growth continues to be pretty 
healthy, then I think long-term consumers are still in pretty good 
condition. Okay. Kathleen madigan of business week, thanks for joining 
us. Thanks for the insight. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>