<DOC>
<DOCNO> MNB19981027.2100.0627 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> CAPTION </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Among those watching this mission today, the man widely considered 
the best test pilot in the history of modern aviation. He made history 
on October 14, 1947 when before anybody knew what it would do to an 
aircraft or to the human body for that matter, he became the first 
pilot to break the sound barrier. Brigadier general Chuck yeager retired 
from the U.S. air force after 34 years of service and a slew of military 
decorations, including the purposele heart. He joins in cedar Ridge, 
California. How do you feel about the space program these days? Great. 
I enjoyed the liftoff having ridden on the nose of a rocket 43 times. 
One of those rocket engines I used to fly wouldn't ignite one of the 
big ones we saw today. I thought it was beautiful. You've been saying 
in the past couple of years that the difference between what you did 
and what they do now is, if I can paraphrase, control. You were a 
pilot, raw, pure, and simple. You-the stick and now in this business 
over here on pad 39-B, is a very tightly controlled, enormous aircraft. 
Yeah. And a lot of support people involved, Brian. The technology 
that has been developed for not only the space program but in modern 
aircraft is mind boggling and makes it extremely easy to do your job. 
In the old days I had to set there and manually load things and watch 
pressures. That's done by a computer today. It makes your job easier. 
It's probably a lot more fun. Do you think there's room in the budget 
for John Glenn to go up? Let's say ease a nonessential astronaut on 
this shuttle. Let's say the amount of science he'll get done is minimum. 
Do you think it's OK? John is not the first free loader, if you pardon 
the expression, to go up. Jake garn, a senator, and also a congressman 
from Florida went up on a free flight. As fars a the justification 
of sending John up there, the way I look at it, NASA is sorely in 
need of publicity. They've been in trouble the last few years. There's 
not an awful lot of attention paid to it. They couldn't have picked 
a better guy than John to generate some interest in this. The media 
has responded greatly. America needs heroes and John is one, and he's 
come through. As far as the justification for the money spent on John, 
I don't think it's worth it as far as the data they'll get back on 
medical research from John. Why isn't Chuck yeager the one we're following 
tonight? I was raised in the military not to waste money, and that's 
the way I feel about it. It probably had been a lot better to take 
one of the young astronauts up in that seat and give him some exposure 
and give us 15 years of space duty. That's the way I feel about it. 
Well, now, wait a minute. You just said that you -- because you weren't 
raised to arrest money. Does that mean what's going on here is a waste 
of money? Well, probably, as I said, Brian, I think to justify John 
going up in the space shuttle for medical research, I don't think 
the medical research they get out of this is going to justify the 
cost. So how about just saying that maybe it's a problem of truth 
and labor he willing and maybe just like Chuck yeager and the honors 
he's received, it's OK for America to give John Glenn a victory lap? 
As I said, NASA needs the publicity and John is an excellent guy to 
get it for them. As far as justifying it for medical research, I don't 
think it amounts to that much. What's the -- your view of fear? When 
you climbed into the X-1 which was untested and approached the sound 
barrier which was unbroken and untested, what percentage of fear and 
what percentage adventure, and how much of a percentage of fear do 
you think was in John Glenn's brain today? I think John Glenn is as 
disciplined as I am. I was disciplined in world war II rass a combat 
pilot. I flew combat in B-51's. Have we -- Chuck? Evidently he can't 
hear us but we can see him enough to say thank you to Chuck yeager 
from his home in California tonight with the X-1 hanging over his 
shoulder. Retired brigadier general Chuck yeager, the man who broke 
the sound barrier in October of 1947, talking about an old acquaintance 
of his. When we come back, those who came to watch and those who watched 
around the world as this went up today. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>