<DOC>
<DOCNO> MNB19981027.2100.1909 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> CAPTION </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Today's launch in Florida of the space shuttle discovery with John 
Glenn aboard will be the last shuttle flight before construction begins 
on the international space station as troubled a project as it's been 
so far. The space station has certainly attracted a lot of controversy 
for being behind schedule and overbudget, not to mention the fact 
Russia with its current financial trouble will not be helping to pay 
the Bill here. Thus, the question for American taxpayers and critics 
of the space program, is it worth the money? As Ed Rabel reports, 
that depends on who you ask. It will be the most ambitious engineering 
feat of the space age, a lasting monument for our relentless desire 
to explore. It will also be the third brightest object in our sky, 
a new star shining day and night, brighter than any star, brighter 
than any planet, brighter than everything but the sun and Moon. Two, 
one, zero. Liftoff of the shuttle discovery. Frank culbertson, an 
astronaut who has flown two shuttle missions runs the space station 
program. The international space station is going to be an outpost 
in space, similar to the Mir tation but on a grander scale. A grander 
scale, indeed, at about 100 feet long, Mir is the largest permanent 
installation in space. But the international space station will dwarf 
it, larger than a football field and weighing more than 500 tons with 
5600 square feet of living and working space for up to nine astronauts. 
This is your house on orbit. If you think of all the things you have 
in your house like a living room, dining room, kitchen, bathroom, 
a place to sleep, all of that is contained in this Module. The rest 
of the station is for working and laboratories and research. This 
habitat Module is only one of 18 modules that will be launched into 
space by missions starting this November and ending in 2003. This 
sleeping bag looks as if it would be very uncomfortable because it's 
straight up and down as if you have to stand up and sleep standing 
up. Right. But that's not a problem at 0 G. you can sleep with your 
head up or down or across. Some people sleep in free space and float 
around. The station will be assembled by astronauts 220 miles above 
earth, making more space walks than during the entire space program 
to date. This is certainly the most difficult technical undertaking 
internationally that's ever been done. It's going to be hard to put 
these pieces together on orbit traveling five miles a second, many 
of which seeing each other on earth have to fit right the first time 
and support life. That's a challenge. Five miles a second, 18,000 
miles an hour, and the kind of space age engineering that will take 
comes at a big price. For example, this $34 million complex, including 
what may the largest pool ever constructed so astronauts can practice 
assembling the station in zero gravity. Well, the overall cost is 
difficult to judge at this point. The current estimate is somewhere 
between $17 billion and $21 billion. That's NASA's current estimate. 
Tim Roemer of Indiana has a different one. The general accounting 
office, the nonpartisan body of Congress that estimates these kinds 
of decision for Congress has now come up with a $98 billion cost estimate 
for this space station. Hold it. Where did the extra $80 billion come 
from? The G.A.O. says snass A's estimate I go norse operating costs 
for the station, shuttle flights to build it, years of expensive delays 
in getting the station built and perhaps most importantly, the cost 
of bailing out U.S. partners in the station, the biggest of which 
is Russia. Now we've come full circle from competition with the Russians 
to a welfare program for the Russians. With the implosion of the Russian 
economy, do they get the Russians out, do they get them out of the 
critical path and build it at home are, or will they continue to shove 
billions of dollars of U.S. taxpayer money over to the Russian space 
agency? I am directing NASA to develop a permanently manned space 
station and to do it westbound a decade. Roemer says the station which 
has been on the drawing board since the early 1980's is a relic of 
the old bloated NASA, not the liener NASA that gave us missions like 
Mars Pathfinder. On time and on budget, perfect science, incredible 
return for technology, science, and the taxpayer at $263 million. 
Now, the space station is starting to suck up and cannibalize money 
for many of these other worthwhile scientific programs. People need 
to make a choice whether they want a space program or not. This is 
the next thing we're doing in space and well worth the money. If we 
want to explore beyond the earth we live on as well asthma this a 
better place to live, we need to be in space. And the one thing both 
sides agree on is that the value of the space program comes down to 
more than just dollars and cents. That's one small step for man, one 
giant leap for mankind. I was about 11 years old when we landed a 
man on the Moon and beat the Russians to the Moon. And I'll never 
forget watching a black and white TV and being glued by that example 
of what this country can accomplish. I know from my own experience 
when I was a kid and saw sputnik fly over for the first time that 
affected me. I'm now an astronaut and been in space twice, and those 
kinds of things inspired me to work hard to get to where I wanted 
to go. I'll let her know I'm thinking about her. So where is Spock's 
cabin? We haven't installed that yet. That hasn't been skined, but 
some day we'll have something that big and nice. As the new captain 
of the enterprise. Response frequency, lieutenant? The practical side 
of making something you imagine real, I guess goes back to be wear 
of what you dream of, because it -- when it comes true, it might not 
be what you expect it to be. William Shatner may be something of an 
expert on that subject. As star trek's James T. Kirk, he helped inspire 
a generation of NASA dreamers and engineers, so much so that NASA's 
first space shuttle was named -- Enterprise. The enterprise. Building 
a space station is akin to science fiction come to life. And that's 
good. You know, the imagination of the country and maybe even the 
world has stimulated like going to the Moon and walking on the Moon. 
The problem will be if a space station is built and everybody exults 
over the international cooperation of building the space station and 
nothing is done with it. And critics question the space station's 
scientific objectives, such as photographing earth from space and 
studying Chris Tam growth in zero gravity, saying most could be done 
in cheaper, smaller missions. But NASA points out natch the race for 
space has paid big unexpected dividends in the past. The portable 
computer on your desk is a great example of what came out of the Apollo 
program and think where we'd be without that. I think everybody will 
be torn by the same things I am, and that is looking aup the third 
large egs brightest object in the sky and say we created that. That's 
wonderful and wond reduce for human ego, but for the human soul there 
are other, more critical things to do. But others wonder in a country 
named after a map maker where explorers are heroes, if anything is 
more critical than boldly going where no one has gone before. Space, 
the final frontier. Ed Rabel. Houston. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>