<DOC>
<DOCNO> MNB19981027.2100.3047 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> CAPTION </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
There is news in the investigation of Swiss air flight 111 and the 
crash, Canadian investigators identified heat damaged wiring recovered 
from the wreckage as part of the plane's inflight entertainment system. 
As a result, Swiss air immediately disconnected the video screens 
from the jumbos in its entire fleet. That means the remaining MD-11s 
and 747's. With us for an update, one of the reporters that covered 
the initial crash, Matthew wald. When we say inflight entertainment 
system, what are we talking about? Well, it's the high tech premium 
system. If you bought a ticket in first class or business class, you 
have a little table that swings out of the arm rest, kind of like 
the -- kind of like a tray table, and it's got a bunch of things on 
it. It's a touch screen like a bank A.T.M. screen. You can call up 
a movie. They have up to 16 movies to play from and you can play games, 
casino games. If you won, they credit your account. It's got music 
and other things on it. There is still in the coach class and these 
classes the old fashioned inflight movie, but this was the high tech 
system that Swiss air went to a year and a half ago. This system is 
not common on short domestic flights, but the airlines that do extremely 
long flights compete with each other on these top of the line, premium 
systems. So these are not manufacturered or built in. These have been 
retro fitted as the technology has come to market since the jets were 
made. Do you think that retro fitting and the wiring under the false 
flooring will be where they'll zero in on? No one is sure. One of 
the reasons the airline was so ready to turn this is off is it's not 
an essential system. You can live long and fly happy without it. The 
wiring was heat damaged. The investigators have not used the word 
fire, but it's heat damaged. But the investigators say it's not clear 
if this is cause or effect, whether the -- whether this started the 
fire or was damaged by a fire or damaged by heat. But in any case, 
it's not essential. They have located a place on the airplane where 
they're interested in. It's a barrier, a wall between the cabin and 
the cockpit. It's the space over that where they have found a lot 
of heat-damaged material, including this stuff. Slow-going investigation. 
They've only identified half the victims, we're told. Matt wald, the 
story will be in tomorrow morning's "New York Times." I wish we had 
more time tonight. Thank you for coming in tonight. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>