<DOC>
<DOCNO> MNB19981027.2100.2629 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> CAPTION </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Our next guest witnessed today's launch firsthand. He is among the 
few who know the feeling. Bill Nelson, former congressman from Florida 
was also an astronaut and on the space chuttle Columbia for the program's 
24th flight back in 1986, conducting medical experiments while orbiting 
the earth 6 days. With us tonight from west palm beach, Florida. Congressman, 
you and I first spoke today I guess 12 hours ago or earlier than that. 
Since then you saw what we saw. You saw the tears in people's eyes 
here. I was stunned at the members of the crowd who were overcome 
emotionally. And I'm going to interrupt myself, this is the launch 
today. We're just getting these pictures from NASA. John Glenn is 
in the middle. This is the back seat. No wind. They're in the subbasement 
of the shulling. John Glenn lifting his arm despite the G forces. 
Again, this is -- you can see their bodies jiggling but the spacecraft 
isn't because of the -- just the rough going. Excuse me for the interruption, 
but combined with what you saw here and what we're seeing, what did 
it bring back for you, congressman? That is a wonderful feeling to 
have all of that energy behind you and you're going straight up and 
accelerating. And John Glenn, of course, has flown the X-15, no shrinking 
violet. He knows G. forces and has probably experienced seven or eight 
times the pull of the earth's gravity. What we're seeing is, what, 
two times the G force. Are you as convinced as you were this morning 
that there should be room in the budget to send John Glenn on board 
this thing? Absolutely. You saw all of those smiles and cheers there. 
I saw a lot of ex-astronauts that had tears in their eyes. This was 
a great day for America. This was a return of the excitement of this 
country and our adventuresome rsmr spirit. We are ex-florers and adventurers 
by nature. That is a characteristic of us as an American people and 
we don't want to ever lose that. Today John Glenn reminded us of that 
spirit of America. This is is as he motional as the tape pla back 
gets. You witted the firsthand shake in 0 G for John Glenn in his 
career as an astronaut and the solid rocket boosters dropped off. 
It's about two minutes plus into the launch which would put us 150 
miles out from the pad. A great moment. Does the P.R. bounce from 
this necessarily put us into the international space station and does 
it send us to Mars? Well, I hope so. I believe in my lifetime that 
we will see an international crew go from planet earth to planet Mars. 
It's a part of our destiny. It's a part of that frontier that used 
to be westward and now it's upward. And I think today was a big boost 
for all of us that have exploration in mind. How many Americans do 
you think were thinking these are tough times for this country and 
this is not necessarily a great time for this country. Look at what 
the news media have been dwelling on, all of us. Look where this broadcast 
is originating from tonight, we're back talking about the space program? 
I don't think there were many cynics present today either at the cape 
or across the country. This was a time that we could all come together 
and say that we remember back to a time when this country was so excited 
that we were achieving such great technological progress and John 
Glenn symbolized that. And then today that he can go back at age 77. 
That's a wonderful feeling and a wonderful accomplishment. Astronaut, 
congressman, I wonder if that would be cosmonaut when combined. Thank 
you for coming on the air. Good to see you. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>