<DOC>
<DOCNO> MNB19981027.2100.1227 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> CAPTION </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
People in Russia are also closely watching John Glenn's return to 
space today, a lot like they did back in 1962 when he was the first 
American in orbit, albeit behind the Soviets at that time. This time 
the view is much different. The race is over. The U.S. and Russia 
are partners in space now, and the country's oldest astronaut, a cosmonaut 
in Russia who was also a national hero in the 1960's was cheering 
Glenn on today from his vantage point in Russia looge with the rest 
of the world. NBC news correspondent Dana Lewis has our report. Konstantin 
feoktistov had pre-flight butterflies of his own watching John Glenn 
with envy, feeling the Rumble of the launch as someone who's been 
there can. 72 years old, he's Russia's oldest living cosmonaut and 
dreams of following John Glenn back into space. I would love to be 
in his place. I remember the first feelings, the engines fired and 
the rocket moved away from the block. It was an enormous joy. Back 
in 1962 at the height of the cold war, feoktistov designed the first 
manned spacecraft which carried Soviet cosmonaut Yuri gagarin into 
orbit. The space race was the ultimate propaganda tool in the former 
Soviet Union. When leaders heard the U.S. would launch a two-man crew, 
feoktistov was ordered to ready the first three-man space are craft 
and be on it. Here on the left, 1964, a national hero. Remarkably 
today he says the space race was a waste of money, believing American 
and Russians should have started working together years ago. Decades 
were lost to the space competition. Who was first doesn't matter. 
What's important is who discovered something new. Since those days 
both space programs have seen hard times. Russia in the midst of his 
deepest economic crisis. After 11 years, it's being forced to deorbit 
its accident prone Mir space station next year. This November Russians 
launched first stage of the international space station, but they're 
$200 million short on funding and months behind schedule. They're 
very concerned about the stability of the political and economic stability 
of the country and how it affects the space station program. In Russia, 
officials still justify spending money on space, even at a time when 
there's deep concern over providing enough food this winter. All the 
every day food, food today and not to think of the future, we will 
not have the future. Russians and Americans are partners in exace 
exploration today. No wonder cosmonaut say they view John Glenn's 
mission with applause and only dream they were along for the ride. 
Dana Lewis, NBC news, Moscow. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>