<DOC>
<DOCNO> NBC19981027.1830.0855 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> CAPTION </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
NBC news "in depth." Smart money, tonight, when women face the financial 
pressures of retirement. Today at the White House, the president held 
a conference on women and their retirement plans, especially the biggest 
safety net of all, social security. Almost 27 million retired Americans 
now receive social security benefits, nearly 13 million are women. 
Whether a woman is getting ready to retire or just beginning to plan 
for it, there are plenty of hidden challenges. NBC's Anne Thompson 
tonight, "in depth." 32 million baby boomer women in their 30s, 40s 
and 50s went to work this morning, but less than 20% came home tonight 
with their retirement financially secure. In terms of women, social 
security is especially important. At today's White House teleconference, 
President Clinton pledged to protect social security, then told women 
at a dozen sites around the country he wants to make taking time off 
from a job to care for children and elderly parents count towards 
your retirement plan. Sometime the few months spent at home with a 
child mean the difference between pension benefits and no pension 
benefits. That's precisely the wrong message to send to people who 
are trying to balance work and family. 51-year-old Carole Nelson of 
San Francisco bounced between the roles of stay-at-home mom and working 
mom. Now, as she and her husband prepare to retire, she's found there's 
a hidden problem. My social security is a lot less than men who've 
been able to work all of that time. I wouldn't begrudge staying home 
with my children, but I'm paying the price now. The national center 
for women and retirement research says every year a woman stays home 
to care for a child, she must work five years to recover lost income, 
pension, promotions. She also loses social security benefits. Less 
than one-third of baby boom women will earn full social security benefits 
based on their own work statements. a working woman earns 74 cents 
for every $1 a man makes. But in retirement, the gender gap widens. 
The average annual pension for a newly retired woman, $4,800. Compare 
that with a man -- $9,600. Women also live longer than men -- 3 1/2 
more years, on average. So the president proposes giving retired couples 
a choice -- take less of the principal breadwinner's pension, most 
often the man's, while he's alive, so his widow gets more when he 
dies. That option could have helped Frances Stanley, a 63-year-old 
Chicago widow who's had to go back to work. I just found that the 
social security benefits and the little annuity was just not enough. 
So what should you do? Experts says women need to learn about pension 
plans early. Participate in 401-K and other retirement accounts. Negotiate 
the sticky issue of caring for elderly relatives with other family 
members. And most of all, save more. But working women will tell you 
they can't save more until they earn more. Anne Thompson, NBC news, 
Chicago. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>