<DOC>
<DOCNO> NBC19981027.1830.1559 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> CAPTION </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
At the Kennedy space center, it's two days and counting for liftoff 
of the shuttle "discovery" and its high-profile payload specialist 
senator, John glenn, who spent part of the day in a final fit check 
of his water-cooled, orange flight suit. All of "discovery's" crew 
took and passed their final physical exam, as well. When John Glenn 
lifts off Thursday, the rest of us wannabes will only wonder what 
it must be like to be so daring. Others who will be watching will 
know. They share the John Glenn DNA for adventure, young and old. 
More tonight from NBC's Bob Faw. In the beginning, before John Glenn 
became an American icon, there were military test pilots in this country 
who sneered at the astronauts. The capsule guys that wasn't flying. 
For general Chuck yeager, first to break the sound barrier, in 1947, 
this was flying -- man in control. By comparison, astronauts went 
along for the ride, were human cannonballs or what the pilots dubbed, 
"spam in a can." "Why look," they chortled, "Glenn wasn't the first 
to orbit, a chimpanzee was." The technology existed, and was tested 
and proven by the monkeys. It all changed after Glenn. And splashed 
down. And when his "Mercury 7" capsule came to the Minnesota state 
fair and a 6-year-old visitor from England saw it, the visitor's life 
changed. I was fixated on the fact that a man, John Glenn, had been 
in that capsule. And it was the process that totally seized me. Glenn's 
voyage into the unknown didn't just shape the goals and character 
of children, it was also an awakening for an entire generation of 
americans. For Michael foale, it meant not just becoming an astronaut, 
but also a Hero. Last year, he circled the earth for six months in 
the Mir spacecraft and calmly repaired it, preventing disaster. Inspired, 
he says, by John Glenn. We don't want heroes to be yelling and screaming 
in sheer terror throughout the whole flight. He didn't do that. He 
did it just the way we expected him to behave. Because of how he behaved, 
we didn't just cheer. Children then, children now -- You're on the 
Moon? -- set their sights on the stars. He's a hero because he did 
something very risky, very risky. The original risk taker, now 75, 
but still swamped by fan mail, concedes he has some misgivings about 
Glenn going back up. The qualitative data they're gonna get off Glenn, 
in my opinion, is gonna be zilch. Still, he's cheering Glenn on, and 
he knows why millions of others are also. They like to be like him, 
because he accomplished something. The greatest test flier of them 
all and the newest generation with the right stuff, acknowledging 
the standard bearer, then, and now. Bob Faw, NBC news, Houston. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>