<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981027.0364 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
While the Yankees began their efforts to retain Scott Brosius at a 
bargain price, Bernie Williams on Tuesday added an ingredient to his 
agent's argument that he should receive a bigger contract than Mike 
Piazza. Williams, who had already contributed a 1998 batting championship 
and Gold Glove to Scott Boras' arsenal, emerged as the topranked outfielder 
in the American League as well as the top-ranked player among the 
league's outfielders, first basemen and designated hitters. Boras, 
speaking before the annual statistical rankings were released, signaled 
his intentions for Williams by making various points, but one in particular 
stood out. ``Piazza pure and simple,'' he said of the new $91 million 
man, ``is a slugger.'' Can baseball's first $100 million contract 
be far behind? Brian Cashman, the Yankees' general manager, said the 
club had not yet prepared an offer for their center fielder, meaning 
George Steinbrenner hadn't authorized one. But it's highly unlikely 
that the Yankees will offer anything close to what the New York Mets 
gave Piazza. Cashman, however, had Williams in mind when he spoke 
on Tuesday with Tony Attanasio, the agent representing Brosius, the 
Yankees' third baseman. Cashman, noting that it would take a lot of 
money to sign Williams, did not make a formal offer regarding Brosius, 
but acknowledged discussing ``some numbers'' in an effort to ``get 
some parameters set.'' The parameters Cashman had in mind did not 
appeal to Attanasaio. ``We've made it known that Brosius wants to 
come back, and we understand he may not get what he deserves on the 
open market,'' Attanasio said by telephone from San Diego. ``Notwithstanding 
that, should he be penalized for that? The answer is no.'' The agent 
said the numbers Cashman mentioned could have wrapped up Brosius in 
a three-year deal in August, but not after he drove in 98 runs, hit 
19 home runs, batted .300 and was named the World Series most valuable 
player. He declined to say what numbers Cashman discussed, but they 
were believed to be less than $5 million a year. Brosius, meanwhile, 
filed for free agency on Tuesday. While Brosius, who played for $2.75 
million this year, was going free, his infield mate, shortstop Derek 
Jeter was joining Williams as the top-rated player at his position. 
They were the only members of the Yankees designated No. 1 in the 
rankings that have been compiled by the Elias Sports Bureau since 
they were created in the 1981 collective bargaining agreement. The 
rankings are designed to determine compensation for free agents, but 
they are the only means by which players are rated and compared. Williams 
is No. 1 for the second consecutive year. The outfield rankings, based 
on five offensive statistics, basically complement the Gold Glove 
he won for his defense. The Padres' Kevin Brown was ranked No. 1 among 
National League pitchers, the first time since Jose Rijo of Cincinnati 
was first in 1992 that the top-rated N.L. starting pitcher did not 
work for the Atlanta Braves. Roger Clemens of Toronto was the top 
American League starting pitcher. Jeter beat out Nomar Garciaparra 
of Boston and Alex Rodriguez of Seattle in the A.L. shortstop rankings. 
Jeter was not lower than eighth in any of the five offensive and two 
defensive statistical categories. Fielding percentage hurt the other 
two. While Jeter was eighth, Rodriguez was 13th and Garciaparra 15th. 
Mariano Rivera of the Yankees fell from No. 1 reliever to No. 6, replaced 
at the top by Mike Jackson of Cleveland. Rivera was hurt by number 
of appearances and innings. The N.L. rankings had plenty of repeaters: 
Barry Bonds of San Francisco, No. 1 in the outfield for the eighth 
consecutive year; Craig Biggio at second base for the fifth time in 
a row; Jeff Bagwell of Houston at first base and Barry Larkin of Cincinnati 
at shortstop, each for the fourth straight year; Piazza as the catcher 
for the third time in a row, and Trevor Hoffman of San Diego as the 
relief pitcher for the second straight year. Bagwell, however, had 
to share his No. 1 ranking for the first time. He was tied by Mark 
McGwire of St. Louis, whose total number of plate appearances the 
past two years kept him from supplanting Bagwell. Vinny Castilla of 
Colorado and Chipper Jones of Atlanta tied for the N.L.'s top spot 
at third base. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>