<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981027.0157 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Advertisements for the controversy magnet that is ``American History 
X'' seem to be selling Edward Norton's buff physique, savage scowl 
and swastika tattoo in equal measure. So they reflect the film's bold 
but reckless synthesis of visual enticement and rhetorical fever. 
Presented in the ersatz poetic idiom of videos and commercials, this 
is an inflated yet gut-slugging film that dares to address America's 
neo-Nazi culture with brutal candor. Its toughest images stick even 
when its lurid self-aggrandizing spins out of control. Having made 
his electrifying screen debut with an essentially dual role in ``Primal 
Fear,'' Norton now plays a two-faceted character with even more fury. 
He appears as the ideologically double-jointed Derek Vinyard, who 
begins the film as a hate-mongering skinhead only to undergo a total 
personality transformation. Once Derek renounces his past (``Those 
guys, the gang, that life _ I'm done with it!'') the film can consider 
the lingering residue of bigotry. Not surprisingly (the executive 
producer, Steve Tisch, was also a producer of ``Forrest Gump''), it 
repudiates the same violence it initially exploited in shocking, lovingly 
slow motion. Though its story elements are all too easily reduced 
to a simple outline, ``American History X'' has enough fiery acting 
and provocative bombast to make its impact felt. For one thing, its 
willingness to take on ugly political realities gives it a substantial 
raison d'etre. For another, it has been directed with a mixture of 
handsome photo-realism and visceral punch. The filmmaker of record 
is Tony Kaye, but he has renounced this substantially re-edited version 
of his work. It's easier to acknowledge the heady mix of flash and 
conscience that Kaye has created, in a manner reminiscent of politically 
aware hyperstylists from Michael Cimino to Spike Lee, than to know 
whether suffocatingly melodramatic music, pensive water images and 
lingering, super-tight close-ups were necessarily the director's own 
ideas. Certainly, someone has arranged the film's time frame portentously 
enough to add extra heft to its slender story. As written by David 
McKenna, ``American History X'' centers on a racist killing that Derek 
commits with horrifying gusto. It's the kind of film that milks this 
violence furiously and also tries to heat up this episode by watching 
Derek in a sexual tryst just before the violence occurs. Though Fairuza 
Balk plays his nose-ringed racist sweetie here, the rest of the film 
brims with the tacitly homoerotic energy of its skinhead bullies. 
``American History X'' saves the details of Derek's viciousness for 
a shock later on. What it means to do, at first, is alternate between 
black-and-white flashbacks of his fascist heyday and color scenes 
of Derek after he has served brief prison time. The contrasts between 
these scenes are strong enough to deflect attention from the unlikeliness 
of Derek's about-face. Though the vastly talented Norton plays him 
searingly well, Derek is as thin a straw man as the story's other 
characters, who are conceived as essentially passive products of their 
small-minded environment. Or as Beverly D'Angelo, playing Derek's 
mom, says while rubbing the shaved head of her firstborn, ``What did 
I do to you?'' ``American History X'' provides a jumbled litany of 
factors contributing to Derek's evil streak, as in a dinner-table 
conversation about affirmative action with his father, a fireman. 
(``America's about the best man for the job!'' his father heatedly 
says.) The father's on-the-job death has also sent his son into a 
fury, as has his mother's way of smoking and coughing, deteriorating 
before Derek's eyes. The film's pivotal figure is Derek's impressionable 
younger brother, Danny, who has a spongelike interest in everything 
Derek espouses. Danny, as played with wrenching vulnerability by Edward 
Furlong, is the film's most blatant reminder that actions have consequences, 
though this is something most viewers will already know. ``American 
History X'' creates several memorably savage episodes that hammer 
home its cautionary ideas. They have been staged with terrible gusto, 
as when Derek leads a raid on immigrant workers at a grocery store, 
or in a killing sure to make even the most jaded gasp. A black-and-white 
homosexual rape sequence has been so strikingly photographed by Kaye 
himself that it makes up for the facile nature of the film's prison 
interlude. Equally effective in that regard is a fine, funny performance 
by Guy Torry as the black man who is bewilderingly eager to befriend 
the hostile Derek but finally makes him see the error of his ways. 
Other performances are stagier, like Avery Brooks' turn as the principal 
who declares: ``He learned this nonsense, Murray, and he can unlearn 
it too. I WILL not give up on this child.'' Elliott Gould plays the 
Jewish suitor whose presence at dinner with Derek's mother is enough 
to send her son into a frenzy. Ethan Suplee plays an obese, lonely 
loser whose white supremacy is rendered ludicrous and pathetic. Stacy 
Keach plays the sinister neo-Nazi ringleader with a taste for malleable 
young disciples, and he speaks ominously of the way the Internet has 
become vital in spreading propaganda. For all its glaring hyperbole, 
``American History X'' knows which raw nerves to hit. PRODUCTION NOTES: 
`AMERICAN HISTORY X' Directed by Tony Kaye; written by David McKenna; 
director of photography, Kaye; edited by Jerry Greenberg and Alan 
Heim; music by Anne Dudley; production designer, Jon Gary Steele; 
produced by John Morrissey; released by New Line Cinema. Running time: 
118 minutes. Rating: American History X'' is rated R (Under 17 requires 
accompanying parent or adult guardian). It includes fierce though 
not gory violence, strong language laced with racial epithets, nudity, 
and sexual situations, including the homosexual rape. WITH: Edward 
Norton (Derek), Edward Furlong (Danny), Fairuza Balk (Stacey), Stacy 
Keach (Cameron), Avery Brooks (Sweeney), Beverly D'Angelo (Doris), 
Jennifer Lien (Davin), Elliott Gould (Murray), William Russ (Dennis), 
Ethan Suplee (Seth) and Guy Torry (Lamont). 
</TEXT>
</DOC>