<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981027.0272 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Under the gaze of U.S. spy planes overhead and international monitors 
prowling the back roads in armored cars, filing reports by satellite 
telephone, Yugoslav forces continued to move out of the battered province 
of Kosovo on Tuesday. Police and military units disappeared from many 
positions they had held for months, though it was not clear if enough 
troops had gone _ and gone far enough away _ to meet the exacting 
demands that NATO laid down to forestall threatened air strikes. Although 
NATO officials said Tuesday that Yugoslavia had not met all requirements, 
its compliance was considered sufficient to hold off any immediate 
attack. ``We're getting a constant stream of information about the 
situation on the ground,'' a U.S. diplomat said. ``It is very detailed, 
very specific. We know exactly what a lot of the units are doing, 
and they are leaving.'' But instead of returning to their barracks 
by Tuesday, as NATO demanded, some police units appeared to be dispersing 
their forces into small groups assigned to places where they would 
be much more difficult to see from the sky or the ground. At the same 
time, rebel soldiers who had been kept scattered and somewhat disorganized 
by the government forces, were boldly re-forming and fanning out in 
large numbers into villages now freed of government control by NATO 
threats. As reports were received in Western capitals, a senior U.S. 
diplomat, Christopher Hill, spent much of the day with Yugoslav President 
Slobodan Milosevic to personally handle any difficulties on the day 
of the NATO deadline. ``It seems to be the same all over,'' a diplomat 
in the western town of Pec said Tuesday morning as five hulking armored 
personnel carriers were hauled down the main street on flatbed trucks. 
``A lot of them are leaving. There was so much traffic through here 
last night that we could hardly sleep.'' But outside a remote village 
about 30 miles away, what appeared to be a group of police officers 
packing to leave was actually a redeployment of sorts, the officer 
in charge said. As some of his men loaded a truck with their backpacks 
and with furniture from the house they had commandeered for their 
headquarters, the officer said, ``We're taking the things from here 
so the men can be more comfortable in their new locations higher up 
the mountain.'' He said none of the men in his unit were leaving, 
only being scattered about the area in small groups. NATO officials 
said their surveillance aircraft over Kosovo may not be able to detect 
policemen or soldiers based in homes or small camps. ``We're worried 
that they will hide themselves, perhaps change into civilian clothes,'' 
a NATO official said. In the village of Junik, where a few police 
officers were still present, villagers said most of the others who 
had been there have moved to a house hidden in the nearby woods. Under 
an agreement between Milosevic and U.S. envoy Richard Holbrooke, Yugoslavia 
said it would comply with a United Nations resolution demanding that 
the number of police officers and soldiers in Kosovo be brought down 
to what it was in February. NATO officials say that number was 15,000, 
and that as recently as last weekend there were an additional 9,000 
on duty in Kosovo. NATO gave Yugoslavia until Tuesday to reduce the 
numbers or face air strikes. Senior NATO officers also told Yugoslav 
officials which units they wanted withdrawn from the field. Some 250,000 
ethnic Albanians fled their homes during the offensive, and most are 
still afraid to return. U.S. monitors said Tuesday that it was their 
impression, based on their observation, that many refugees were returning 
to their homes. But many were cautious. ``They have gone from here, 
but they are in the next village,'' said Bajram Morina. ``They could 
be back in five minutes, so we are still in danger.'' He stood in 
front of a burned-out house that became a two-story pile of stones 
and debris after government forces attacked his village in July. ``I 
come here in the daytime,'' he said, ``but at night I sleep with my 
family in the woods, because we are not safe yet. If you don't eat 
proper food for months, if you are afraid all the time and your family 
is always in danger, that can make a man go crazy.'' But there was 
an atmosphere of joy and optimism here in the village of Istinic as 
people watched the police leave the building that had been their base 
for several months. They left the sandbags up in the firing positions 
at the corners of the building, and the logs that protected the windows, 
but Petrit Jonuzaj said, ``They took down that antenna for the radio 
last night. Then just loaded their cooking stove, and they're gone. 
I can't say where they are going, but it is away from us.'' Police 
left in two blue armored vans, snaking through a throng of people 
filling the marketplace where the village's two streets crossed. Some 
villagers said that with the police gone, they hoped guerrillas from 
the Kosovo Liberation Army would not move into the village. ``We are 
all civilians here, with our children, and the police are still on 
the main road very near. We don't want more fighting,'' Jonuzaj said. 
``Now there is a chance for negotiations with the government. We want 
to solve problems, not create problems.'' Underlying the strategy 
to reduce the number of police and soldiers is the theory held by 
some Western diplomats that if people can return to their homes and 
if renewed fighting can be prevented it is possible for the vast differences 
between the Yugoslav government and ethnic Albanians in Kosovo to 
be settled through negotiations. A lot of ethnic Albanians think that 
is a foolish theory because what they want is nothing short of independence, 
and Yugoslav officials say they will never agree to that. Nine out 
of ten people in Kosovo are ethnic Albanian. Fighters of the Kosovo 
Liberation Army, who embrace the view that only insurrection can achieve 
independence, were filing down from their isolated hideouts and into 
many of the places government forces were leaving Tuesday. A drive 
across the province revealed that many Serbian police checkpoints 
had disappeared. Only one car was seen being stopped by police and 
that was for speeding. On the other hand, many rebel checkpoints had 
appeared. For the first time in months, in some villages rebel fighters 
in uniform casually walked the streets. Western diplomats say they 
have told rebel leaders that it would be a mistake for them to take 
advantage of the government pullout by trying to strengthen their 
military position. But, the diplomats say the military offensive that 
hurt so many civilians caused little permanent damage to the Kosovo 
Liberation Army, and if the rebels wanted to renew combat it would 
be difficult to stop them. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>