<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981027.0402 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Bruce Arena wanted to play quarterback, just like his brothers, Paul 
and Mike. The problem was, when he reached the ninth grade, he was 
not able to see over his linemen. ``We had a starting tackle, a friend 
of mine, who was 6-9, 320 pounds,'' Arena recalled Tuesday. ``I was 
maybe 5-1, 100 pounds. I started for the freshman team, but it was 
pretty obvious I wasn't going to be a football player.'' His friend 
Bill Zito told him about another sport that was played on crisp autumn 
afternoons at H. Frank Carey High School in Franklin Square, on Long 
Island. And that was how the new American national coach was introduced 
to soccer. This was not one of those ethnic deals, mom and dad and 
maybe a bunch of uncles turning an infant on to the favorite sport 
of the old country. This was a boy, already 14 years old, learning 
he could be pretty good at a sport that requires a low center of gravity 
and does not require a player to give up his creativity. By the age 
of 14, of course, Diego Armando Maradona had already been perceived 
as a prodigy. Real soccer nations produce feral children who must 
score goals or live in shacks the rest of their lives. However, the 
United States has done quite nicely in producing a national coach 
like Bruce Arena, now 47, who played soccer (and lacrosse) for his 
high school and later for Nassau Community College and Cornell University. 
In 1978, he began developing the University of Virginia into the great 
men's program of its time, winning five national titles. (He picked 
up motivational techniques by eavesdropping on halftime talks by intense 
Dean Smith of North Carolina and gregarious Jim Valvano of North Carolina 
State, through the vents of the visiting basketball locker room.) 
When major-league soccer began in 1996, Arena led DC United to the 
first two championships and a recent loss in the finals. Now, instead 
of hiring somebody from another culture, the national federation has 
hired its second straight home-grown coach, following the Californian 
Steve Sampson, whose team could not beat Iran (or Germany, or Yugoslavia, 
either) in the recent World Cup in France. Americans were so scornful 
when the Yanks finished a statistical 32nd that Sampson tendered his 
resignation before he got his boarding pass. Not long afterward, Germany, 
Spain, the Netherlands and even Brazil, the runner-up, eased out their 
coaches, while the French coach retired while he was ahead. In other 
words, by griping when our soccer lads cannot connect on a pass, or 
cover a corner kick, Americans have finally joined the world of nations. 
We have come of age. Arena predicted flat out Tuesday that the United 
States would not win the World Cup in 2002. ``The biggest challenge 
of my career will be qualifying for the final 32 in Japan and South 
Korea,'' he said. Asked if Americans could live with that realistic 
expectation, Arena noted that Spain, with its great players and expensive 
professional league, had failed to get out of the first round, so 
it was no disgrace for the United States. ``Americans can look at 
tennis and hockey,'' Arena said. ``The international levels are so 
high that America has trouble winning. Look at the Winter Olympics. 
We don't win as many medals as small Scandinavian nations, and people 
accept that. Baseball? We invented that. But we haven't arrived yet 
in soccer.'' Arena has a reputation for giving rather blunt advice 
on how MLS should be run, but as Commissioner Doug Logan noted, Arena 
does not ``overcoach,'' but allows his players to perform. This was 
one of the worst traits of the Sampson team in France: The players 
bickered and yapped off the field, but seemed trapped inside a rigid 
and dysfunctional system on the field. Clearly, the crabby old guard 
from 1998 won't be back, and Arena said he would favor the American 
players who perform the best ``week by week'' in MLS. He also debunked 
the theory that there are Latino and other foreign-born players who 
have been overlooked by the federation. This theory is much like the 
famous legend that there are alligators lurking in the New York sewer 
system. ``I think it's a myth,'' Arena said, referring to the alleged 
soccer stars waiting to be discovered in parks in Long Island or New 
Jersey or Los Angeles. ``Are there any Ronaldos walking around New 
York City?'' he asked. ``I don't think so.'' It would be nice to think 
there is a bicycle messenger pedaling around Manhattan, with an American-born 
parent, to say nothing of dancing feet educated in some Brazilian 
neighborhood. But for the moment, the United States has a mediocre 
mix of home-grown and imported players, and a coach who started off 
with the very American dream of wanting to be a quarterback. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>