<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981027.0325 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
WASHINGTON _ NATO suspended its immediate threat to attack Yugoslavia 
on Tuesday, concluding that President Slobodan Milosevic was now in 
``substantial compliance'' with demands to end his attacks on ethnic 
Albanians in Kosovo. NATO representatives in Brussels voted to postpone 
the deadline indefinitely after international observers confirmed 
that scores of Serbian-led army and paramilitary units had withdrawn 
from the province of Kosovo or at least returned to their barracks. 
Despite the major pullout, confusion persisted on TUesday over the 
exact numbers of troops still in Kosovo, and it appeared that NATO 
had eased its initial demands on the number of special paramilitary 
police officers it was prepared to allow to remain in the Yougoslav 
province. Although Tuesday's decision averts any immediate strikes 
against Yugoslavia, NATO did not lift the threat of force completely. 
Instead, the alliance's 16 member countries agreed to extend indefinitely 
a so-calledactivation order that authorizes the use of force and keeps 
more than 400 NATO warplanes on alert. That means that NATO's supreme 
commander, Gen. Wesley Clark, could still order strikes at any time 
if Milosevic resumes his crackdown, though NATO's political representatives 
would have to take a new vote. President Clinton welcomed the last-minute 
withdrawal of Yugoslav forces, whose tanks and armored vehicles began 
abandoning fortified positions in Kosovo on the eve of the NATO deadline. 
But Clinton warned that Milosevic now had to move ahead with his pledge 
to allow greater political freedoms for Kosovo's ethnic Albanian majority, 
which has long suffered under Serbian domination. ``NATO's willingness 
to act, combined with determined diplomacy, created this chance to 
end the suffering and repression in Kosovo and to put its people on 
the path to peace,'' Clinton said on Tuesday afternoon at the beginning 
of an address at the Old Executive Office Building. ``But this is 
a chance, not a guarantee.'' The retreat of Serb forces _ which on 
Tuesday encouraged some ethnic Albanians to return to homes they had 
fled during the worst fighting over the summer _ was an abrupt turn 
in NATO's showdown with Milosevic. Only a couple of days ago, senior 
NATO and American officials had warned that Milosevic was continuing 
to violate a pledge he made two weeks ago to end the fighting. NATO's 
representatives first authorized military strikes on Oct. 13, but 
then gave Milosevic four days to comply with a U.N. Security Council 
resolution that called for a peaceful resolution of the fighting. 
The conflict has left hundreds dead and has driven an estimated 250,000 
from their homes, threatening stability throughout the Balkans. The 
first deadline was extended 10 more days, until Tuesday. The withdrawals 
averted _ for now _ the specter of NATO cruise missiles and attack 
jets battering Yugoslav military targets. It was a threat that NATO 
first brandished in the spring when Milosevic's crackdown began, then 
let languish over the summer, then revived in the fall but one which, 
in the end, many in the alliance fervently hoped to avoid. Despite 
deep reservations about the use of force against a sovereign country 
for actions within its borders, NATO and administration officials 
maintained on Tuesday that it was only the threat of force that compelled 
Milosevic to comply. ``We know that President Milosevic only moves 
when he is presented with the credible threat of force,'' NATO's secretary 
general, Javier Solana, said after Tuesday's meeting in Brussels. 
The focus now turns to Milosevic's pledges to offer greater political 
freedoms in Kosovo and to accept unprecedented international verification 
of those pledges, as he vowed to do in an agreement brokered by the 
American special envoy to the region, Richard Holbrooke. To that end, 
NATO on Tuesday formally approved an alliance-led mission to conduct 
unarmed, reconnaissance flights over Kosovo. Those flights began 10 
days ago when American U-2 spyplanes starting soaring over Yugoslav 
airspace, but Tuesday's vote clears the way for other nations to join 
in, including other NATO members and Russia. NATO also ordered its 
military commanders to speed up plans for a ``rapid reaction'' force 
that would be based in neighboring Macedonia, ready, if needed, to 
evacuate the international monitors that the Organization for Security 
and Cooperation in Europe is supposed to start sending into Kosovo 
in the next few weeks as part of Milosevic's agreement with Holbrooke. 
Even with the latest withdrawals, the Serbian-dominated Yugoslav army 
and police will still be able to keep thousands of troops in Kosovo. 
NATO and U.S. officials have insisted that Milosevic reduce those 
troops to the levels present in the province before the fighting began 
in late February. Ten days ago, Clark, in a meeting with Milosevic, 
demanded that the number of special police in the province be reduced 
to 6,500, senior administration official said at the time. On Tuesday 
a senior Defense Department official said that even after the latest 
withdrawals, 10,000 special police remained. One of the Clinton administration's 
greatest fears _ which officials have largely avoided expressing publicly 
_ is that the ethnic Albanians bent on independence for the province 
will regroup and resume fighting. It was the success of their insurgency 
in the spring that prompted Yugoslavia's crackdown, which quickly 
spread from rebel strongholds to entire villages of civilians. Asked 
if he expected the loosely knit insurgents would agree to lay down 
their arms, a senior Defense Department official replied that the 
possibility was ``dicey.'' And he went on to note that the agreement 
allows Milosevic every right to order his army back on the offensive 
if the rebels strike. Already, there are reports that the rebels _ 
known as the Kosovo Liberation Army, or KLA._ have returned to areas 
being vacated over the last two days by Serbian forces. With NATO's 
deadline approaching, the United States held extensive discussions 
with the rebels, urging them to refrain from attacking retreating 
Serbs or otherwise provoking retaliation. ``We would be surprised 
if the KLA didn't seek to move into areas where the Serbs left,'' 
the State Department's spokesman, James Rubin, said. ``That's simply 
a reality of Kosovo. That's part of the continuing crisis of Kosovo, 
that there are too many guns and too many people willing to use those 
guns.'' 
</TEXT>
</DOC>