<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981027.0333 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
I am a child,'' sang Neil Young in 1968. ``I'll last awhile.'' It 
was the flash point of a rock-and-roll-fueled youth explosion, and 
fans identified more with Young's naive protagonist than with the 
father figure making rules in the ballad's last verse. ``I Am a Child'' 
magnified rock's romanticization of childhood _ and of adolescence, 
which to most rockers means childhood plus sex. The song traced a 
legacy of teen-age rebels and sweet little 16-year-olds to its origins 
in an emotional Never-Never Land. In 1998, though, rock and its sibling 
genre, hip-hop, seem headed for a different future. On the MTV Music 
Video Awards, the rapper and actor Will Smith accepted his awards 
accompanied by his 5-year-old son, Justin; Smith's current single, 
``Just the Two of Us,'' is an ebullient ode to the boy. Billie Joe, 
of the punk band Green Day, focused his awards speech on his wife, 
at home awaiting the birth of their second child. Performers included 
two cutting-edge mother figures: Courtney Love of Hole and the evening's 
big winner, Madonna, whose latest album, ``Ray of Light'' describes 
her spiritual awakening after the birth of her daughter, Lourdes. 
Rock-and-roll, the cultural home of perpetual adolescence, was clearly 
engaging the ultimate passage into maturity: parenthood. The domestic 
realm has long provided fruitful subject matter for musicians in other 
genres like country and folk, which attract listeners of all ages 
and gain power from a different set of myths, including an often sentimental 
view of family life. When classic rockers have addressed their own 
children in song, they often invoke these other styles, tapping their 
melodrama and effectively sidestepping the conflict between such conventional 
feelings and rock-and-roll rebelliousness. As rock-and-roll becomes 
a lifelong pursuit for many, however, the debauched dream of sex, 
drugs and general abandon is giving way to a new set of ambitions. 
Young rockers have seen Mick Jagger become a grandfather and Bob Dylan 
share the pop charts with his hit-making son, Jakob, and they are 
starting to question the illusion that the rock life style could or 
should stave off adult responsibility. Hip-hop artists are turning 
their attention away from gangsta fantasies toward realities that 
include child rearing. There seems to be a growing consensus that 
no one really wants to die before they grow old. Rockers are eager 
to learn how to grow up without abandoning shared values like spontaneity 
and self-determination. Being a parent is a great metaphor for that 
attempt, and it is also a condition that many feel should no longer 
be hidden. The attempt to infuse parenthood with rock-and-roll attitude 
extends from the mainstream to the underground. Once, female artists 
usually retired or at least took time off when pregnant, but the trend 
today is to pick up some groovy maternity gear and keep going, as 
Posh and Scary Spice are doing and Erykah Badu did. And once the kids 
are born, they are not always banished to nanny. Alternative-rock 
fans can sometimes spot 4-year-old Coco Gordon Moore, daughter of 
Thurston Moore and Kim Gordon of the legendary art rock band Sonic 
Youth, wearing huge protective headphones while watching a concert 
in her mother's arms. Artists like Ms. Gordon treat maternity as a 
normal part of life _ a daring concept in a field where, not long 
ago, female sexuality was designated as either fantasy material or 
a means of entrapment. To the world in general, staying childless 
is still the real act of rebellion, especially for women. But within 
a rock-and-roll culture struggling to maintain its youthful ideals 
beyond an overspent adolescence, artists venturing into public parenthood 
break a different set of constraints. ``Unsure of what the balance 
held, I touched my belly overwhelmed,'' sings Lauryn Hill on ``To 
Zion,'' a song dedicated to her newborn son, from her huge-selling 
debut album, ``The Miseducation of Lauryn Hill.'' Ms. Hill (who is 
expecting again) has been called self-righteous in her advocacy of 
old-fashioned mama power. But her songs tackle the doubts that come 
with parenthood, as well as the revelations. ``Retrospect for Life,'' 
a 1997 track Ms. Hill recorded with the Chicago rapper Common, addresses 
the same uncertainties from a male point of view. These honest portraits 
of commitments made under stress acknowledge that sometimes the choice 
to become a parent may be the wrong one, and that such decisions deserve 
consideration beyond the self-satisfied kitsch of oldies like Paul 
Anka's ``You're Havin' My Baby.'' In the past, that perspective _ 
the man worshipfully acknowledging mother and child, but from a safe 
distance _ typified rock-and-roll's attitude toward being a parent. 
Most rock stars were guys, after all, and they did not often take 
time off from their schedules of playing and carousing to learn how 
to strain peas for Junior. (One important exception is Young, who 
spent much of the early 1980s caring for his son, Ben, who has cerebral 
palsy; Young wrote the experimental album ``Trans'' in an effort to 
comprehend communicating with the boy and subsequently organized an 
annual concert to benefit disabled children.) Even if they did engage 
in such matters, though, rockers rarely wrote about them, perhaps 
because they contradicted the free and easy individualism of the rock 
myth. Usually, when an artist turns to domestic subjects, as Bruce 
Springsteen did, for example, with the album ``Lucky Town,'' it has 
signaled a step away from his rock-and-roll virility. In 1998, though, 
such separations are harder to maintain. The biggest change in pop 
during this decade has been the emergence of female artists as regular 
and equal players instead of courageous rarities. These new stars, 
like most professional women, are refusing to choose between career 
and family. The pioneers who stood in isolation before _ Chrissie 
Hynde, Sinead O'Connor, Kristin Hersh of the Throwing Muses _ are 
now considered role models, instead of freaks, among the boys. These 
women endured great difficulties because of their insistence that 
mothering need not end their careers. Ms. Hynde and Ms. O'Connor faced 
criticism and saw their record sales drop when they turned to more 
domestic subjects. Ms. Hersh, who had the first of three sons at age 
19, lost custody of her oldest, Dylan, to his father partly because 
she was in a touring band. But she refused to give up her art, and 
the sight of her playing Throwing Muses' jagged, hypnotic rock while 
huge with her second son, Ryder, was one of the most inspirational 
shocks the underground rock world got in the early 1990s. The way 
motherhood informed the artistic identity of such women is equally 
subversive. Ms. Hersh's lyrics tend to be oblique, and the erotic, 
fractured ballads that fill her 1998 solo album, ``Strange Angels,'' 
would not necessarily conjure images of fecundity unless one knows 
that she wrote them while confined to her bed with a difficult third 
pregnancy. Ms. Hersh has also frankly discussed her family life in 
the news media; she kept a diary of the tour she recently took, with 
her two younger sons in tow, for the Webzine Hipmama.com, and even 
included her children in her publicity photograph for ``Strange Angels.'' 
Like Kim Gordon and Thurston Moore, Ms. Hersh has set out to prove 
that the rock-and-roll life style is not bad for children or vice 
versa. Her proof is in the obvious health and vitality of her sons, 
and of her music. Parents like Ms. Hersh are changing the scenes in 
which contemporary music is made and heard, and, just as important, 
confounding the argument that children must be protected from rock-and-roll's 
dangerous influence. Others, like Liz Phair and Amy Rigby, are making 
their mark through their lyrics. Ms. Rigby's 1997 debut album, ``Diary 
of a Mod Housewife,'' was hailed as a groundbreaking effort because 
its rootsy pop songs matter-of-factly broached subjects like marital 
boredom and dead-end pink-collar jobs. These were quotidian concerns 
that did not fit anyone's description of bohemian. But Ms. Rigby is 
undeniably bohemian, and she was describing that world's plain truths, 
not its wishful self-image. Her just-released second album, ``Middlescence,'' 
takes up her story at a new juncture. Now a single mom, she contemplates 
the drama of buying clothes off the clearance rack or trying to salvage 
a date when the kids demand to stay up past their bedtime. The album's 
homespun sound suits its practical attitude; Ms. Rigby's songs capture 
reality instead of inflating it. Liz Phair goes in a similar direction 
on ``Whitechocolatespacegg,'' especially on the indelible ballad ``You 
Go Ahead, Honey,'' which plainly and simply elucidates the strain 
a new baby can put on a relationship. Once underground rock's most 
famous female sexual adventurer, Ms. Phair has not compromised her 
frank approach because she has settled down. The most triumphant thing 
about songs like hers and Ms. Rigby's is that they so blithely cross 
lines few artists have even approached. Just as classic rock first 
broached forbidden subjects like sexuality, these women dig into the 
particulars of domestic experience with a frankness that challenges 
propriety. Not only is the reverent image of traditional family life 
violated, but rock's rule of silence on subjects considered ``novelties,'' 
as Ms. Rigby called making a living and having a family on her liner 
notes to her first album, is broken. Neither sentimentalizing nor 
trivializing parenthood, today's artists target it with the same penetrating 
gaze that the Who applied to the generation gap in the 1960s. Few 
have done so with such force as the inimitable Courtney Love. Ms. 
Love has never been anybody's idea of the perfect mom: she had her 
daughter, Frances Bean, within a maelstrom of controversy about drug 
use and other irresponsible acts, then faced single parenthood when 
her husband, Kurt Cobain, killed himself. Instead of trying to hide 
her troubles, she turned them into ferocious music. In 1994, her band, 
Hole, released ``Live Through This,'' an album that staged a visceral 
attack on feminine stereotypes. Songs like ``Plump'' and ``I Think 
That I Would Die'' took on motherhood, their images of squirting milk 
and screaming hunger invoking the exhaustion, isolation and emotional 
bewilderment that are the dark side of maternity. Hole's current album, 
``Celebrity Skin,'' avoids these subjects. But ``Live Through This'' 
insured that no female artist would have to for fear of being called 
soft. Other daring women were not going to stand for such dismissals, 
anyway. When Sinead O'Connor returned to the spotlight with ``The 
Gospel Oak,'' she filled it with lullabies about pregnancy and mothering. 
And breaking an even bigger taboo, Tori Amos wrote about her recent 
miscarriage on her latest album, ``From the Choirboy Hotel.'' Yet 
this year's two best answers to the example of Ms. Love come from 
men. The songs ``Father of Mine,'' by the band Everclear, and ``Carriage 
for Two,'' by the English hip-hop experimenter Tricky, also rage against 
the damaged legacy of the nuclear family. Art Alexakis of Everclear 
berates a deadbeat dad for bequeathing his son a life of alienation; 
he ends with a pledge to do better for his own daughter, although 
his anger makes it clear that his promise will not be easy to fulfill. 
``Carriage for Two'' is more spare, with Tricky muttering proud and 
protective words about his daughter, as the sinister music builds 
a mood of foreboding at the prospects of raising a black child in 
a racist world. Anxiety also colors ``Dearest Christian, I'm So Very 
Sorry for Bringing You Here. Love Dad,'' the new release by the progressive 
soul duo P.M. Dawn. The album, inspired by the birth of a son to the 
group's primary songwriter, Prince Be, confronts fatherhood with equal 
parts love and apprehension. With the lush, soothing grooves of the 
music creating a nurturing environment, Prince Be embarks on an inner 
journey that puts him in contact with the ghosts of his own childhood: 
an unloving mother and a father who died too young, tormentors who 
made him an outcast, his own self-loathing. At times, Prince Be's 
ire seems more like a sign of childishness than of growth, but his 
willingness to expose these vulnerabilities does make for a kind of 
cleansing. Like ``Mer Girl,'' the climactic song on ``Ray of Light'' 
that sends Madonna to mourn at her mother's grave, ``Dearest Christian'' 
shows a new parent uncovering a birthright of sorrow to break free 
of it. He turns toward his own son in tenderness and hope, but cannot 
deny his fears. The sense of struggle that animates his testimonies. 
While past rockers rebelled against the social control exerted by 
their elders, Prince Be and his peers are making art of the effort 
to break patterns set down within private life. The artist who set 
the stakes for these kinds of explorations was John Lennon. On the 
Plastic Ono Band album ``Mother,'' Lennon brutally exposed the psychic 
scars that came from the frequent absence and early death of his mother, 
Julia, anticipating the therapeutic viewpoint that often pops up in 
current songs. Even more revolutionary was the role-switching he did 
with his wife, Yoko Ono, which made Lennon the world's most prominent 
househusband, an experience he wrote about in songs in the years before 
his death in 1980. The idea that this cultural powerhouse could retreat 
into the home struck many as bizarre; in fact, it was a brave move, 
making Lennon's radical politics a matter of his daily life as well 
as his art. It may seem odd that an artist of the baby-boom era foreshadowed 
a trend so divergent from the classic rock-and-roll approach, but 
such connections are key to rock's new family values. Lennon's son, 
Sean, one of rock's grooviest new talents, began his career in a band 
with his mother. Rock's generation gap is being superseded by an intergenerational 
dialogue about how to uphold a legacy that encompasses much more than 
adolescent angst. If ``I Am a Child'' marked the high point of rock's 
historic youth fetish, the new album ``The McGarrigle Hour,'' exemplifies 
its changing perspective. That album features a sprawling tribe of 
musicians headed by the sisters Kate and Anna McGarrigle. Other performers 
include Anna's daughter, Lily Lanken; Kate's children, Martha and 
Rufus Wainwright; her ex-husband, Loudon Wainwright III, and her friends 
Linda Ronstadt, Emmylou Harris and Chaim Tannenbaum. With its homey 
selection of folk songs and originals, ``The McGarrigle Hour'' presents 
a fantasy of a clan gathered around the piano that appeals as much 
to 20-something fans of Rufus' promising solo career as it does to 
the boomers who love his mom and dad. That they are divorced and Rufus 
is openly homosexual gives it a millennial twist that is also very 
rock-and-roll. When Kate McGarrigle and Loudon Wainwright were new 
parents, they both wrote about the experience in songs that were sometimes 
sarcastic, sometimes poignant. On his recent debut album, Rufus returned 
the favor to his mom with a lovely ballad, ``Beauty Mark,'' which 
is about the qualities she instilled in him. The younger Wainwright 
is his own man, but he also likes being part of a family. Like so 
many young artists, he does not see a contradiction in that. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>