<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981027.0153 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Go to central or northern Italy at this time of year and you're sure 
to be offered tortelli (or other pasta) filled with zucca. Zucca is 
a pumpkinlike vegetable whose flesh, like that of butternut or acorn 
squash, is dense, orange and somewhat sweet. Zucca is cooked, then 
pureed with nutmeg, eggs and Parmesan to make the filling. Crumbled 
amaretti (those wonderful individually wrapped almond-flavored cookies) 
are frequently added to the mix, a step that seems unusual in a cuisine 
more often known for its restraint. Tortelli con Zucca are normally 
bathed in butter and grated Parmesan, and are unforgettably delicious. 
The rub is that making them is a serious project. But the labor is 
almost all in the pasta part: the making of the fresh dough, the cutting, 
stuffing and sealing of the individual tortelli. Preparing the zucca 
is simplicity itself. The flavor and essential nature of pasta with 
zucca can be captured in a 30-minute preparation that is admittedly 
a compromise, but a pretty good one. In this version, you prepare 
the zucca _ butternut squash is a near-perfect substitute _ and thin 
it slightly so that the stuffing becomes a pasta sauce. The result 
is inside out, and not as attractive as tortelli, but the flavor and 
texture are right there. Pasta with butternut-squash sauce also shows 
off those ubiquitous, easy-to-store and incredibly inexpensive winter 
squashes (usually less than 50 cents a pound) to great advantage. 
Normally, they are baked or pureed as a side dish or soup. No one 
I know does either with any regularity, and there isn't much beyond 
that. This dish provides a way to work them into the fall repertory. 
In addition, it's a recipe that features nutmeg, a highly flavorful, 
generally enjoyed spice that doesn't make its way into savory foods 
often enough. The combination of squash and nutmeg has a surprising 
whiff of pumpkin pie about it that children especially seem to like. 
It's worth remembering that some butternut squashes are sweeter than 
others, and there's no way to predict this by appearance. But since 
this sauce relies on sweetness for its character, if the squash seems 
a little bland as it cooks, add about a teaspoon of sugar. It will 
brighten the sauce's flavor considerably. PASTA WITH BUTTERNUT SQUASH 
Time: 30 minutes 1 pound peeled and seeded butternut squash (start 
with a whole squash weighing about 1{ pounds) Salt to taste 2 tablespoons 
butter or olive oil Freshly ground black pepper to taste 1 pound cut 
pasta, like ziti [ teaspoon freshly grated nutmeg, or to taste 1 teaspoon 
sugar, optional { cup freshly grated Parmesan. 1. Cut squash into 
chunks, and place in food processor. Pulse machine on and off until 
squash looks grated. (Alternatively, grate or chop the squash by hand.) 
Set a large pot of salted water to boil for the pasta. 2. Place a 
large skillet over medium heat, and add the butter or oil. A minute 
later, add the squash, salt, pepper and about { cup of water. Cook 
over medium heat, stirring occasionally. Add water, about \ cup at 
a time, as the mixture dries out, being careful not to make it soupy. 
When the squash begins to disintegrate, after about 10 or 15 minutes, 
begin cooking the pasta. While it cooks, season the squash with the 
nutmeg, sugar if necessary, and additional salt and pepper if needed. 
3. When the pasta is tender, scoop out about { cup of the cooking 
liquid, then drain. Toss it in the skillet with the squash, adding 
the reserved cooking water if the mixture seems dry. Taste, and adjust 
the salt, pepper or nutmeg as you like; then, toss with the cheese 
and serve. Yield: 4 servings. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>