<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981027.0287 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Only weeks after signing a global covenant calling for freedom of 
speech and assembly, China has taken new steps to suppress political 
organizations and debate. Monday, government agents closed a recently 
formed independent think tank in Beijing that sponsored research and 
unusual, open seminars on democracy and current affairs. Government 
censors have also barred the further distribution of a path-breaking 
book of essays on political change, people with ties to the book said 
Tuesday. And, over the last three days, the police have questioned 
or detained more than 20 democracy advocates who had planned a show 
of support for a colleague who is being evicted from his home and 
whose wife was forced out of her teaching job after he applied to 
register a new political party. These measures seem part of a pattern 
in recent months. Over all, the climate for open discussion is somewhat 
looser than it was over the previous nine years, since the violent 
crackdown on demonstrators in 1989. But security agents have not hesitated 
to harass or detain people who try to form independent organizations 
or who publicly question the primacy of the Communist Party. The think 
tank that was closed Monday, the China Development Union, was started 
this year by a 42 year-old former official and businessman, Peng Ming. 
It has sponsored research and frequent public seminars, attended by 
a few dozen people, on topics ranging from democratic theory to environmental 
policy. Recently, Peng started enlisting intellectuals and others 
as members; he recently asserted that several thousand people had 
joined and that he hoped to sign up millions in a movement to push 
for new ideas and policies. Peng's ideas are somewhat eclectic and 
he has had few associations with the better known, and often more 
radical, dissidents here. But he has walked a risky legal line. In 
an effort to bypass the general rule that all groups must have government 
sponsors, he had registered the China Development Union in Hong Kong. 
But Monday, agents who said they were from the Beijing Bureau of Civil 
Affairs entered the union offices, held Peng and eight others for 
three hours of questioning, said the group was operating illegally 
and took away the office computer and other documents. According to 
Peng, they also searched the home of a U.S. citizen and businesswoman 
who is a union board member, Qiao Zhihui (known as Wisdom Qiao) and 
took away her computer and other documents. In an interview Tuesday, 
Peng said that while he believed the closure was illegal, he would 
comply with the orders to cease the union. But he vowed to continue 
the activities of a separate affiliated entity, the China Development 
New Strategy Research Institute, including its research and public 
forums. ``They didn't say that was illegal,'' Peng said. Whether the 
tactic will work is unclear since Oct. 13 the research institute's 
sponsoring government agency severed its ties. The institute also 
remains registered in Hong Kong. In another crackdown, over the last 
three days the police temporarily detained several democracy advocates 
around the country who planned to travel to Shandong Province, on 
the east coast, in support of a destitute colleague. Many more were 
questioned. The dissidents had announced plans to travel to Dongping 
city in Shandong where Xie Wanjun has been punished for trying to 
register a new opposition party, which has been declared illegal. 
Xie faces eviction from his home on Sunday and his wife has lost her 
teaching job, dissidents said. Among those detained was one of the 
best-known dissidents still in China, Xu Wenli, a veteran of the Democracy 
Wall movement of the 1970s who has been repeatedly detained for short 
periods over the last six months, and his computers and fax machines 
repeatedly confiscated. He was held Monday for 10 hours. ``We have 
repeatedly made it clear to Chinese authorities that the recent detention 
of political activists is a step in the wrong direction,'' the U.S. 
State Department said Tuesday in Washington. ``Although the Chinese 
authorities have demonstrated a greater degree of tolerance toward 
political debate over the past year, these detentions and others that 
have occurred in recent months demonstrate that sharp limits on what 
is permissible continue to exist and that organized opposition to 
the Communist Party will not be tolerated.'' Last week, China held 
its own international conference on human rights, where officials 
boasted that the Chinese view of human rights as a relative concept, 
adapted to national traditions and needs, was gaining international 
acceptance. Early this month China signed the International Covenant 
on Civil and Political Rights. But, like any country, it has the right, 
whenever it eventually ratifies the treaty, to override any clauses 
it deems to contradict Chinese law. The book government censors have 
suppressed is ``Political China: Facing the Era of Choosing a New 
Structure.'' Published in August by China Today Publishing House, 
it brought together 39 recently published essays on political change 
and democratic thought by 32 scholars, journalists and former government 
officials. While it is hardly radical _ the book avoids any discussion 
of multi-party politics or calls for electing senior officials _ it 
reflects the impatient ferment among liberal intellectuals who are 
questioning the ossified, corruption-riddled system of Communist rule. 
It was edited by two journalists with official newspapers, Dong Yuyu 
of The Guangming Daily and Shi Binghai of The China Economic Times. 
Shi was arrested Sept. 5 and is still in detention. Associates said 
they did not believe his involvement with the book was the reason, 
but rather some other activity _ possibly contacts with the former 
Communist Party chief Zhao Ziyang, who has been under house arrest 
in Beijing since he was ousted in 1989 for being too soft on the student 
demonstrators. The first edition of ``Political China'' ran to 30,000 
copies, most of which have already been sold. With more orders pouring 
in from bookstores around the country, the publisher printed an additional 
30,000 copies. But early this month it was ordered not to distribute 
them by the Administration of Press and Publications, according to 
people with ties to the book. A few weeks earlier, at a meeting of 
publishing houses, a top official of that government agency had criticized 
the book, saying some of its essays had ``serious problems,'' the 
people said. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>