<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981027.0403 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Another Columbus Day had rolled around, and with it, the annual Peter 
Vallone Columbus Day Breakfast. Vallone, the speaker of the New York 
City Council and the Democratic candidate for governor, stood on a 
dais at the Princeton Club as the party faithful rhapsodized about 
his warmth, his integrity, his leadership skills. After a particularly 
rousing speech by Councilman Stephen DiBrienza, Vallone took the microphone 
and spoke admiringly of his delivery. ``I could have been a contender 
if I had that,'' he joked. But in his 25 years in politics, Vallone's 
strength has never been the passionate speech or the dramatic stroke. 
He is best known for his equanimity, which has served him well as 
a legislative leader but not in the campaign, where slick sound bites 
seem to resonate more than ponderous policy discussion. Republican 
incumbent Gov. George Pataki is only slightly more charismatic. But 
he is popular and extremely well-financed, making Vallone's first 
statewide race a constant exercise in frustration. And throughout 
the campaign season, the governor's race has been overshadowed by 
a highly charged contest for the U.S. Senate, making it even harder 
for Vallone to catch voters' attention. The obstacles were apparent 
long before Vallone announced his candidacy last winter, and political 
consultants warned him to stay out of the race. But the normally pragmatic 
speaker remained resolute. After all, term limits will force him to 
leave the council by 2001, so this was his last chance to run for 
governor with the fund-raising powers and connections he has as speaker. 
And so Vallone, who has never run for office outside his home district 
of Astoria, Queens, and rarely vacations outside the metropolitan 
region, has shopped himself around the state, trying to convince voters 
that his vision extends beyond New York City and that he can work 
Albany better than Pataki. Vallone has painted himself as a politician 
who can fix problems that he says Pataki has cavalierly ignored: the 
state's campaign finance system, the high price of college tuition 
and the inefficiencies of the managed care system, for example. When 
it became clear that his proposals were not leaving voters breathless, 
Vallone took the unusual step of defending President Clinton in a 
television ad. But his boldest and most uncharacteristic strategy 
came in the form of an attack on Mayor Rudolph Giuliani. Throughout 
his campaign, Vallone has assailed the Republican mayor's plan to 
build a new baseball stadium for the Yankees in Manhattan. He called 
for a referendum that would let voters decide whether to spend public 
funds on such a project. Vallone's referendum proposal attracted a 
lot of attention, even though a court ruling knocked it off the ballot 
last week. But less than a week before Election Day, the candidate 
himself is still struggling to make an impression. He is pleasant 
as can be when pressing the flesh, but rarely seems to connect with 
people on a deeper level. During a tour of a poor neighborhood in 
Buffalo, Vallone smiled benevolently as the owner of a dry-cleaning 
shop complained about the pressures on small businesses. But he did 
not offer any insights, and his thoughts were elsewhere as he left. 
``Did you ever see so many suits inside one place?'' he asked his 
aides. A picture that Vallone drew when he was 11 suggests that he 
saw Astoria not just as home, but as the family fief. It shows the 
neighborhood dotted with businesses run by his relatives: Uncle James' 
barbershop, Aunt Helen's beauty parlor and the Astoria Civic Association, 
founded by his father. ``All the bussnes' in the place seem to be 
part of this family _ Ahem,'' the young Vallone, with a child's uncertain 
spelling, wrote at the top. ``I was very proud,'' the council speaker 
said the other day in his district office on Ditmars Boulevard, where 
the drawing hangs amid photos of Vallone with Mother Teresa, Jacqueline 
Kennedy Onassis (``You look like a movie star!'' she wrote on the 
picture) and even Mr. Pataki. Peter Fortunate Vallone was born in 
Astoria on December 13, 1934, the son of a lawyer and a teacher whose 
families immigrated from Sicily at the turn of the century. Charles 
Vallone, who eventually became a Queens judge, taught his sons to 
treat everyone as their equal. Vallone loves to recount the time his 
father marched in a ``brotherhood'' parade through Astoria, his arms 
around a rabbi and a Protestant minister. Catholic elders disapproved 
of such displays, and a priest in the family's parish was so angry 
that he blocked Peter's admission to the local Roman Catholic school. 
Nonetheless, church became part of Vallone's daily life when he was 
13 and his mother, Leah, developed ovarian cancer. A nun took young 
Peter under her wing and persuaded him to attend Mass every morning, 
saying it would help his mother recover. She did, and her son faithfully 
attends morning services to this day. ``The nun said if you go to 
church and pray, make that sacrifice, everything will be all right,'' 
said Vallone, who keeps a list of people to pray for in his shirt 
pocket and tells colleagues who disagree with him that they are in 
his prayers. ``I never forgot.'' Vallone attended Fordham University, 
his father's alma mater, where he studied history and especially remembers 
a poetry class where he learned to write in iambic pentameter. After 
graduating in 1956 he wanted to join the Air Force, but was rejected 
because he had hay fever. So he continued in his father's footsteps, 
enrolling in Fordham Law School and becoming active in the Astoria 
Civic Association and his neighborhood political club, the Taminent 
Democratic Club. Vallone was 23 when he married Tena Buttigheri of 
Jersey City, N.J., whom he met at a camp near his family's vacation 
bungalow in the Catskills. They bought a little brick house around 
the corner from where Vallone grew up, and had three sons: Peter, 
now 37; Perry, 35, and Paul, 31. Vallone opened a small law office 
a few blocks from home, specializing in trusts and estates. He became 
a celebrity in the neighborhood, succeeding his father as the person 
to whom Astoria residents came for help. It was hardly a role he minded. 
``I loved the way my father lived,'' Vallone said. ``He was the busiest 
man I ever met, out every night doing civic work. But he was always 
home with us for dinner.'' Like his father, Vallone would come home 
every night in time to hear the sons say their prayers _ then go out 
again for meetings. ``He didn't involve us in his political life,'' 
Perry Vallone said. ``He wasn't a disciplinarian but he taught us 
values, mostly by example.'' Vallone first ran for office in 1970, 
seeking a congressional seat but narrowly losing the primary to Herman 
Badillo of the Bronx. He wanted to go to Washington as an elected 
official because he was angry about the government's failure to withdraw 
troops from Vietnam, he said. But while he longed for the opportunity 
to vote on the issue, he shied away from anti-war protests. ``I was 
too much of a patriot to openly demonstrate against government,'' 
Vallone said. Three years later, at 38, Vallone won a seat on the 
City Council and went to work representing Astoria. He was a relatively 
quiet member, taking diligent notes at meetings and never challenging 
the leadership. From 1975 to 1985, he worked on revising the city's 
3,150-page administrative code, tedious work that won him little recognition. 
But Vallone gained a reputation as loyal and hardworking, and in 1986 
he was chosen to be the council's majority leader, an arrangement 
worked out by Bronx Democratic leader Stanley Friedman and Queens 
Democratic boss Donald Manes. A municipal corruption scandal soon 
afterward left Friedman in jail and Manes a suicide, freeing Vallone 
of political bosses. He immediately set out to make the council, long 
derided as a rubber stamp _ if even that _ a more powerful force. 
But his efforts were mostly in vain until 1989, when the U.S. Supreme 
Court declared the city's powerful Board of Estimate unconstitutional. 
Vallone played a prominent role in a subsequent revision of the city 
charter that gave the council more budgetary and land-use powers. 
He also increased the council's staff, started a political action 
committee to raise money for incumbents and encouraged members to 
speak their minds. Vallone is more socially conservative than many 
on the council. He favors capital punishment and personally opposes 
abortion, though he supports abortion rights as a legislator. But 
as speaker, he has let a few controversial issues come up for a vote. 
In 1994 he allowed a vote on a bill to make it illegal to block access 
to abortion clinics. And in 1986, shortly after becoming the council 
leader, he permitted a vote on a gay rights bill that his predecessor 
had blocked for years. Vallone voted against the bill, which banned 
discrimination based on sexual orientation, but it still passed. Vallone 
has since become a supporter of gay issues, sponsoring legislation 
last spring to make domestic partners the legal equals of married 
couples in city contracts, housing and death benefits. ``We should 
never substitute our conscience for anyone else's,'' he said in a 
recent interview. ``We should never think we know it all.'' But for 
all his talk of consensus-building, colleagues say, Vallone is at 
heart a clubhouse-style politician who favors stealthy negotiation 
over confrontation. He has stripped rebellious council members of 
committee chairmanships, and he saves the most lucrative council stipends 
for his loyal allies. On the other hand, critics say, Vallone has 
rarely shown his tough side to the executive branch. Even when he 
was trying to procure more power for the council in the late 1980s, 
he almost never battled publicly with Mayors Ed Koch or David Dinkins, 
both Democrats. And Vallone coexisted quite peaceably with Giuliani 
until this year. ``Peter never wants to have a fight about anything, 
but you can't win recognition that way,'' one council member said. 
``He has never made his job a platform for Democratic principles.'' 
Vallone bristled at that characterization, saying he has been friendly 
to mayors only because ``they usually agree to what I ask for.'' Vallone 
has raised only $6 million and saved little of it for the final week 
of the campaign, hardly enough to bombard the airwaves with commercials. 
Polls show him slipping further and further behind. What compelled 
Vallone to take on such a seemingly hopeless race? Some colleagues 
say the decision was made by his closest aides, who they say are more 
ambitious than the speaker and wield considerable influence over him. 
But Vallone dismissed that notion, saying he wanted to go to Albany 
``to change the way things work.'' After 25 years of being a relatively 
powerless legislator, he said, he is eager to be a chief executive. 
He has proposed cutting public college tuition in half for students 
who excelled in high school, replacing health maintenance organizations 
with a state-run health care system and requiring government agencies 
to give hiring preference to New York firms. Other elected officials 
say Vallone is better suited for the job of New York City mayor than 
that of New York state governor, and they question why the speaker 
would not prefer to run the city he loves and knows well. But while 
Vallone says he has not ruled out a mayoral run, he worries that the 
job would be too demanding for someone who likes to be home for dinner 
and spend at least one day a week with his grandchildren. ``I can't 
be married to the city,'' he said in an interview. ``The mayor is 
in the public eye 24 hours a day. It's different if you're governor. 
Do you have any idea where Governor Pataki is right now?'' 
</TEXT>
</DOC>