<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981027.0370 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
The New York Times said in an editorial on Wednesday, Oct. 28: The 
Central Intelligence Agency's role in instituting and monitoring the 
new Middle East peace agreement has touched off a useful debate about 
whether the agency's activities in the region will corrupt its analytical 
work. But consideration of this matter should not labor under the 
naive belief that the agency is somehow entering unexplored territory. 
The CIA has long mixed action and analysis, often with disastrous 
results. That need not be the case this time, but the Clinton administration 
and Congress must be mindful of the agency's history as they review 
the plans for the Middle East. The problem in the past was not only 
that the CIA supported nefarious though friendly foreign governments 
and trained their security services, but that in doing so it compromised 
its ability to generate independent assessments about those countries. 
Perhaps the best example was Iran, where the agency's support of the 
shah blinded it to the rebellion brewing in the streets before the 
1979 Islamic fundamentalist revolution. Because CIA political and 
security operations are usually conducted at the request of the White 
House, the temptation can be great to tailor intelligence assessments 
to fit policy goals. George Tenet, the director of central intelligence, 
must fiercely protect the independence of his analysts. The CIA's 
role in the Middle East will be primarily to help Israeli and Palestinian 
forces combat terrorism and to monitor their compliance with the security 
plan, the last details of which are still being worked out. The agency 
is already versed in this area, and its augmented activities can be 
a productive model for similar assignments elsewhere. But the agency 
will have to guard against taking sides, or becoming involved in punitive 
actions that make the United States a protagonist rather than a mediator 
in the conflict. Providing ample security for agency officials and 
technicians is also imperative now that their work is no longer secret. 
The Pentagon and the State Department have repeatedly failed to protect 
American troops and diplomats stationed in the Middle East. President 
Clinton has made an extraordinary and appropriate commitment of American 
resources to help bring peace to the Middle East. If the CIA is careful 
about avoiding past mistakes, it can make an important contribution. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>