<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981027.0420 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Pro basketball players seem puzzled over the public's failure to embrace 
their ``struggle'' against National Basketball Association owners. 
They seem to ask, ``Where's the outpouring of sympathy for fellow 
workers?'' They might try to give the public a different look. A few 
weeks ago, LaPhonso Ellis spoke about the economic confrontation, 
one in which the two sides argue over how escalating league profits 
will be apportioned in coming seasons. Ellis spoke with ease and grace 
about the hazards of being locked out, but what you noticed was that 
he seemed to be speaking from poolside at some resort. Last week, 
the players gathered in Las Vegas, Nev., of all places, to plan a 
strategy session. Amid slot machines they voted not to accept a hard 
salary cap. Earlier this week, an article in The New York Times quoted 
Kenny Anderson, the Boston Celtics point guard and former New York 
City high school legend, about the impact this lockout was having 
on his cash flow. He spoke of possibly having to sell one of his eight 
luxury cars; he spoke of how paying child support for two children 
he fathered with two different women ``really burns a hole in your 
pocket.'' Sympathy? The two sides met in New York on Monday, and the 
union couldn't seem to decide whether there was progress or regress. 
Danny Schayes, a member of the union's executive committee, saw some 
progress. Jim McIlvaine of Seattle growled: ``Danny Schayes didn't 
stay for the entire meeting.'' Billy Hunter, executive director of 
the union, said: ``I guess Danny has a different interpretation. Maybe 
I was looking for a lot more than Danny did.'' Some players have expressed 
concern that the league's high concentration of African-American athletes 
will cause a more severe reaction to the lockout than either baseball 
or hockey experienced. A sports talk show in Philadelphia recently 
gave voice to a similar idea. A poignant moment in the show occurred 
when the station's general manager called in and said the racial angle, 
with (italics)this(end italilcs) particular group of African-Americans, 
was not relevant, because, he felt, the issue was purely economic. 
The general manger was African-American. My reaction to the concern 
about racial backlash was: They must be joking. All of a sudden they've 
discovered a collective awareness of being black? They sold that to 
NBA Properties a long time ago. The current players aren't sympathetic 
figures simply because they never wanted to be and never worked to 
be. The owners aren't sympathetic figures, either, because they were 
silly enough to create the monster _ and keep feeding it _ in the 
first place. In 1987, striking football players picketed, tossed eggs 
at strike-breakers and wore their hearts on their sleeves. Basketball 
players, it seems, sip mint juleps under honeysuckle trees and sing 
``Nobody Knows the Trouble I've Seen.'' They are stylish in their 
incongruity. I hate phrases like ``the American People,'' and I don't 
know who the average United States citizen is, but my sense is that 
the mass of workers are feeling more alienated from professional athletes 
with each successive season. Most see sports labor as a contradiction 
in terms. Clearly this lockout is not a life-or-death, knockdown, 
drag-out war. We're not talking about closing down factories, laying 
off workers, shipping jobs to overseas plants. This is a skirmish 
between the rich fighting the wealthy for a greater portion of huge 
profits. As for some kind of sustained backlash directed at the league: 
It'll never happen. Watch what happens when the doors reopen: people 
will come briskly walking in because basketball, like it or not, is 
in our blood. People rejoiced that baseball came back this year; for 
a while the nation was thrown into a fit of longing for the ``good 
ol' days,'' when the grass was real. There have been all sorts of 
rumblings that people don't care about the NBA anymore. These are 
the delirious ramblings of patients recovering from a severe bout 
of baseball fever. The patient will get over it. Knick City Dancers, 
Laker Girls, Keith Van Horn and _ who knows? _ Michael Jordan, will 
draw them back. Baseball is a classic drama; basketball is steamy, 
fast-paced soap opera. Money? The beautiful people sitting courtside 
know about money. They can relate at some level to Kenny Anderson's 
situation. After all, everything is relative. At any rate, if some 
players end up going to the poorhouse, there's comfort in knowing 
they'll have plenty of cars to take them. Don't you love this game? 
</TEXT>
</DOC>