<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981027.0347 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Motel 6, a stubbornly utilitarian chain for most of its 36 years, 
has been making some fancy moves lately. Already the biggest chain 
of company-owned and -operated budget motels in the United States, 
Motel 6 is now aggressively selling franchises. And it is spending 
$600 million to overhaul all 85,000 rooms at its 781 existing motels. 
Moreover, Motel 6 is considering entering the extended-stay market, 
a fast-growing niche that offers low-priced rooms with separate sleeping, 
working and cooking areas for penny-pinching corporate nomads, consultants 
and others who need rooms for a week to several months. The changes 
have come as a surprise to some in the hotel industry, given Motel 
6's reputation for steadfastly resisting change or innovation for 
most of its 36 years. After all, the company has stuck with the same 
folksy advertising line _ ``We'll leave the light on for you'' _ since 
1986. But is Motel 6 choosing the wrong moment to strike out in new 
directions? It's possible, according to some analysts. ``It will be 
a difficult time for Motel 6, especially if there's a slowdown in 
the economy in 1999,'' said John Rohs, the hotel analyst for Schroder 
&AMP; Co. Fortunately for Motel 6, the expansion comes after a turnaround 
in its fortunes. The chain, based in Dallas, was on the ropes soon 
after being acquired by Accor SA of France in 1990 from Kohlberg Kravis 
Roberts &AMP; Co., the leveraged-buyout firm, for $2.3 billion. In 
1993, Motel 6 lost $40 million, hurt by accusations that its guests 
were easy prey for criminals and by a downturn in the hotel industry. 
But after breaking even in 1995, the company turned a modest profit 
in 1996 and earned $75 million before taxes last year. It expects 
to earn $100 million this year. ``The turnaround of Motel 6 has been 
more difficult than we expected,'' said Georges Le Mener, the chain's 
French-born chief executive, who before the purchase of Motel 6 headed 
much smaller North American and Pacific hotel operations for Accor 
from an office in New York. ``But we're here for the long term.'' 
The United States is clearly an important market for Accor, the world's 
fourth-biggest hotel company and the owner of European-based hotel 
chains, including Sofitel and Novotel, that are more upscale than 
Motel 6. So important was the U.S. market that from 1991 through 1993, 
at a time when Motel 6 had 525 motels and was losing money, Accor 
spent $700 million for 200 more properties. Last year, Motel 6 accounted 
for only 13 percent of Accor's $5.5 billion in revenue but 30 percent 
of its earnings before interest and taxes. Le Mener says that Motel 
6's management philosophy is blending European concern for people 
and quality with American skill at marketing, operations and finance. 
The most significant change for Motel 6 has been franchising, which 
it began in earnest about a year ago. Its strategy is to use franchising 
to expand quickly, primarily throughout the eastern United States, 
which has only about one-third of Motel 6 properties. For allowing 
the Motel 6 name and red-white-and-blue logo on franchised properties, 
the company receives 4 percent of revenue for Motel 6 operations and 
another 3 percent for marketing and reservations. While that is a 
fraction of the return possible from company-owned properties, Motel 
6 executives say franchising is a quick and low-cost way to maximize 
name recognition and invade new markets. That strategy, widely adopted 
in the 1960s and 1970s by more upscale chains, fueled the expansion 
of Holiday Inn, Sheraton, Hilton, Hyatt, Ramada Inn and other hotel 
companies, big and small. Today, 64 percent of the United States' 
3.7 million hotel rooms are affiliated with hotel chains, according 
to Smith Travel Research, two-thirds of them through franchise arrangements. 
Franchising also complements the company's strategy by putting smaller 
hotels in smaller communities, cities and towns that Motel 6 formerly 
ceded to other chains. Unlike company-owned properties, which average 
115 rooms, franchised Motel 6s will average 60 to 80 rooms. At the 
same time, the chain is nearly finished with a $600 million overhaul 
of all 85,000 rooms in its system. And in what passes for a radical 
departure from its Spartan one-type-fits-all style, Motel 6 now offers 
a new prototype at 27 properties that features central heating and 
air conditioning, bathtubs as well as showers, and an emphasis on 
landscaping. Of course, no one is likely to mistake a Motel 6 for 
the Ritz. Even the new style echoes the look and feel of the original 
hotels. The chain is firmly anchored in the budget market, with an 
average room rate of $37 a night, still a few dollars below what competitors 
charge for a comparable room. But with a telephone and desktop color 
television set in each room, a fax machine available 24 hours a day, 
and other amenities, Motel 6 has come a long way since it started 
in 1962, charging just $6 a room. When Tom Bodett, the humorist, promises 
``We'll leave the light on for you,'' the light is one it is actually 
possible to read by. And change may have been long overdue at Motel 
6. ``For the first 20 years, Motel 6 didn't change anything, because 
as the Interstate highway system expanded, it expanded along with 
it,'' Le Mener, Motel 6's chief, said. ``But even when your price 
is very low, there comes a point where if you are not perceived as 
giving value, nobody will buy.'' But one possible change that has 
raised questions is the proposed move into the extended-stay business. 
Le Mener said no decision was expected before spring but noted that 
traditional budget motels were losing customers to extended-stay properties 
_ an acknowledgment that seems to suggest that the company is leaning 
toward getting into the business. Some analysts think it is already 
too late to become an important player in that market, where the economy 
segment ($200 to $350 a week) is dominated by Extended Stay America, 
a chain created by Wayne Huizenga, the founder of Blockbuster Entertainment 
and Waste Management Inc. Still, there may be room for new competitors: 
Bear, Stearns recently forecast a shortage of extended-stay properties 
in about a year in ``hundreds of lodging markets.'' Rohs, the Schroder 
analyst, noted that the growing acceptance of the extended-stay concept 
could make it easier for Motel 6 to enter the market _ unless the 
new business came at the expense of its traditional motels. Le Mener 
expresses caution. ``With our $1.1 billion, we could already have 
gotten into extended stay, but we're moving slowly,'' he said, adding 
that Motel 6 was well positioned to buy an existing brand at a favorable 
price during the lodging industry's expected downturn. The $1.1 billion 
is the amount raised from the sale of 288 properties last year to 
such companies as Philip Morris and U.S. Realty. Motel 6 retains management 
control of the properties for 20 years, with renewable options. Motel 
6 raised an additional $325 million in 1996 as part of a consortium 
with financial companies, including Chase Manhattan Bank and Merrill 
Lynch. The consortium created a holding company specifically for buying 
65 California motels, which Motel 6 promptly agreed to lease for about 
$270 million and convert to its brand. The remaining funds will be 
spent buying additional properties. ``That allowed us to grow our 
balance sheet and revenues without adding to our real-estate inventory 
and liabilities,'' said Armand Sebban, Motel 6's chief financial officer. 
While many changes are aimed at attracting new guests, Motel 6's strategy 
is also directed at retaining the loyalty of its 33 million annual 
customers, few of whom are on expense accounts. Many of them are retirees, 
members of the military, families with young children, or students. 
A growing number are foreign visitors. ``Their motels are always clean 
and comfortable, the price is very good and the people are pleasant,'' 
said Gail Eidukonis, a retired bookkeeper from Wallingford, Conn., 
who with her husband, Edward, is a Motel 6 enthusiast. During a recent 
seven-week trip to California, the Eidukonises stayed exclusively 
at Motel 6s, except for three nights when they found no vacancies 
in them. ``When we were in Oklahoma City there was a tornado scare 
about 4 in the morning,'' Mrs. Eidukonis said, ``so the manager invited 
us to wait it out in an inside room behind the office, and had coffee 
for us.'' Until a few years ago, some Motel 6 guests might have chosen 
to brave the tornado's wrath rather than venture from their room before 
sunup. Concerns about security were heightened in 1992 after a $10 
million settlement of a negligence suit brought by a woman who was 
repeatedly raped by two ex-convicts who forced their way into her 
room at a Motel 6 in Fort Worth. The rape occurred before Accor acquired 
the chain, but the new management suffered the fallout. After the 
settlement, a front-page article in The Wall Street Journal highlighted 
the issue of lax security at budget motels. ``We didn't know about 
the lawsuit, and we clearly underestimated the problem,'' Le Mener 
said. ``In Europe, the level of crime is way, way below what we found 
here.'' Motel 6 sold about 100 properties that it deemed unsafe, and 
beefed up security elsewhere. It installed electronic door locks and 
deadbolts as well as high-intensity outdoor lights and closed-circuit 
television cameras, and it put security guards at almost half its 
properties. Its newest properties also have interior corridors, which 
especially appeal to the growing number of women travelers. Motel 
6 has also emphasized cleanliness, the condition of its properties, 
attention to complaints and employee attitudes toward guests. Training 
and improved benefits, as well as cash incentives and weeklong cruises 
to the Caribbean for top producers, have encouraged employees to make 
improvements, Motel 6 executives say. Yet for all the activity, Motel 
6 remains unchanged in many ways. It still has only a single brand. 
Its motels do not have meeting rooms, suites or floors for business 
travelers. They do not give frequent-flier miles or free room nights 
even to their most loyal guests. The only discount is 10 percent off 
for members of the American Association of Retired Persons. And the 
chain's 12-year-old ad campaign with Bodett is also virtually unchanged, 
except for having expanded to television in 1996. Which is still the 
way Motel 6 likes to operate. ``The tag line about leaving the light 
on, which Tom ad-libbed, conveys a sense of warmth and caring,'' said 
Carol Kirby, the head of marketing for Motel 6. ``My claim to fame,'' 
she added, ``is that I had the sense not to change it.'' 
</TEXT>
</DOC>