<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981027.0400 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Seen from the campus here, the Caribbean Sea appears so serene and 
breathtakingly beautiful that it may be hard to remember that just 
15 years ago this month the United States fought a sort of war to 
save St. George's University. Some 6,000 troops were sent by President 
Ronald Reagan to rescue medical students he feared would be taken 
hostage by a hostile government allied with Cuba. But even in the 
midst of that conflict, a few soldiers found the setting so congenial 
that they later returned as students. For an institution barely two 
decades old, St. George's University has had a remarkable history. 
Begun in 1977 and run privately by Americans as an offshore program 
for aspiring doctors unable to gain admission to American medical 
schools, it has survived both political turmoil here and skepticism 
about its quality abroad. Today, with an enrollment of nearly 2,000, 
up from 760 during the invasion, St. George's is poised for a burst 
of growth. The university is building a 45,000-square-foot library, 
classrooms, laboratories and student housing, the fruits of a $25 
million building program. But the most profound changes have to do 
with academics. Trying to become a truly Caribbean university, St. 
George's has begun both a School of Arts and Sciences for undergraduates 
and a School of Graduate Studies, allowing students to specialize 
in public health, tropical medicine, anthropology and other subjects 
of regional interest. ``Because of our attractive location and our 
diverse student body, we have a unique opportunity,'' said Dr. Peter 
Bourne, the university's newly appointed vice chancellor and formerly 
an adviser to President Jimmy Carter on health and science. ``Within 
5 or 10 years, we can become the eminent academic institution in the 
Caribbean.'' The core of the university, though, remains its medical 
school, which has trained nearly 2,500 doctors. C.V. Rao, the dean 
of students, who began there as an anatomy professor, recalled, ``We 
started with 200 students and 5 faculty members, teaching in a wooden 
hall so small that they had to repeat their lectures, and today we 
have a faculty of nearly 600.'' Then, as now, enrollment was drawn 
primarily from students whose grades fell short of what American medical 
schools were demanding. Though many a B-movie has poked fun at offshore 
universities as havens for slackers, the truth is that students at 
St. George's are comparable to those at many American medical schools: 
the average college grade-point average of enrolling students is 3.4 
on a 4.0 scale, compared with 3.56 for those at medical schools in 
the United States, according to the Association of American Medical 
Colleges; the average Medical College Admissions Test score of applicants 
to St. George's is 26 out of 30, compared with 26.5 nationally. St. 
George's also has a healthy pool of seven to nine applicants for every 
slot. ``We're the people the U.S. schools didn't want because we didn't 
quite fit the profile,'' said Christopher McWhorter, a 23-year-old 
second-year student who graduated from the University of Georgia. 
``For the past few years, the bar keeps getting raised higher and 
higher, so I just decided to go abroad and come down here.'' During 
St. George's early years, virtually all the students came from the 
United States or Canada. More recently, the university has stepped 
up recruiting in Africa and Asia, especially in countries that retain 
a British educational structure from colonial days and use English 
as a language of instruction. Since 1993 the percentage of non-American 
students has increased to more than 1 in 5, from less than 1 in 10; 
the college is aiming for a 50-50 split. Fifty-nine countries are 
represented this year. Studying in an international environment, particularly 
in a third-world country, has some disadvantages, McWhorter said, 
but overall the experience has been better than he had expected. ``It's 
fun to see the mix,'' he said. ``Just think, last night I was playing 
cards with students from Iran, which is something that could never 
have happened if I had stayed back in Georgia.'' To accommodate students 
from different educational backgrounds, St. George's has arrived at 
``a hybrid medical curriculum'' combining the North American and British 
systems, to use the phrase of Dr. Allen Pensick, dean of basic sciences. 
``We mix problem-solving sessions along with didactic teaching,'' 
he said. ``For an international student population, we think that 
approach is best.'' For foreign students, enrolling at St. George's 
assures clinical tryouts at affiliated hospitals in the United States 
and Britain, often a prelude to obtaining a residency. ``Coming from 
India,'' said Ajay Malhotra, a native of Delhi who attended the State 
University of New York at Stony Brook, ``it is easy for me to adapt 
to a place like this, and they have very good board pass rates here.'' 
Ninety-three percent of St. George's graduates passed the United States 
Medical Licensing Examination on the first try, in June 1997, a figure 
comparable to that for graduates of American medical schools and far 
above the 58 percent rate for graduates of other offshore medical 
schools. According to St. George's records, 99 percent of its American 
graduates have been accepted for residencies at 364 hospitals in 41 
states, with 21 percent going on to become chief residents, a designation 
bestowed only on the best. ``Our pass rate is better than some of 
the Philadelphia schools I couldn't get into, which I guess just goes 
to prove that grades and MCAT scores have nothing to do with your 
clinical abilities,'' said Shira Gertz, 23, a Bard College graduate 
who majored in biology and music and plans to become a neonatalogist. 
Like many of the students it attracts, St. George's University has 
struggled. Two years after the medical school was founded, Maurice 
Bishop and his New Jewel Movement assumed power on the island in a 
coup, established a Marxist government and allied with Cuba. The leaders 
invited the Cubans to build an international airport barely a mile 
from St. George's main campus. In October 1983, a more radical faction 
of the party overthrew and killed Bishop, which led to fighting and 
fears that the nearly 1,000 Americans on the island, most of whom 
had some connection to St. George's, might be taken hostage. After 
efforts to evacuate the Americans failed, President Reagan ordered 
``Operation Fury,'' which took the Cuban forces prisoner, flew the 
students to the United States and installed a friendly government. 
``Within 15 days, we were in Piscataway, N.J., conducting classes 
at Rutgers Medical School with a new set of cadavers,'' Rao recalled. 
The campus here reopened on Jan. 10, 1984, in a significantly changed 
environment. ``The U.S. government brought in a lot of aid, and by 
1990, people began to look at this as a more stable place,'' Rao said. 
Prime Minister Keith Mitchell, who has been in office since 1995, 
said the university ``has played an enormous role'' in the development 
of Grenada, not only providing jobs and tax revenues to the island 
of 100,000 citizens but also a chance at higher education. The Caribbean's 
leading institution of higher education is the University of the West 
Indies, which this year is celebrating its 50th anniversary and has 
campuses in Jamaica, Barbados and Trinidad. But with a population 
that exceeds 6 million people, the English-speaking Caribbean produces 
123,000 high school graduates each year, far beyond the capacity of 
the University of the West Indies. In the past, many of the region's 
most promising students have gone on to colleges in the United States, 
Britain or Canada, swelling the brain drain for which the Caribbean 
is famous. But because of recent immigration restrictions _ and limitations 
on federal grants to university and medical programs _ ``it is increasingly 
difficult for students from third-world countries to get into U.S. 
institutions,'' said Bourne, chairman of St. George's department of 
psychiatry before being appointed vice chancellor. Hence the School 
of Arts and Sciences here, which, like the medical school, has begun 
humbly, with 196 students, many of them Caribbean residents, who are 
entitled to a reduced tuition rate of $4,000 a year, compared with 
$10,400 for non-residents. School officials, though, are planning 
to accommodate 1,000 students in the near future, eventually as many 
as 5,000. St. George's, which receives no money from the Grenadian 
government, relies on tuition to operate. The expansion comes in response 
to ``a great need to move into areas where we can be of greater service 
to the Caribbean,'' said George McGuire, associate dean of the School 
of Arts and Sciences and a former Minister of Education here. Programs 
of special interest to the Caribbean, like marine biology and tourism, 
are under development. And in what Mitchell called ``one of the more 
noble initiatives of the university,'' there is even a new Cricket 
Academy, intended to train promising young West Indian players for 
international competitions. ``We want to be head and shoulders above 
everything else in the Caribbean, to cease to be a foreign body in 
the area and face up to the fact we are a Grenadian institution,'' 
Bourne said. ``We are about halfway there, and I suspect that when 
we get there, there will still be a lot of room for further expansion.'' 
</TEXT>
</DOC>