<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981027.0354 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
A federal judge has refused the recording industry's request to halt 
production of a hand-held device that can record and play back digital 
music found, often illegally, on the Internet. Within hours of the 
court's announcement late Monday, Diamond Multimedia Systems, the 
San Jose company that makes the device, known as the Rio, began producing 
it. The Recording Industry Association of America, the powerful trade 
group that had sued to prevent Diamond from shipping the Rio, vowed 
Tuesday to appeal. The Rio, which sells for $199, can store up to 
60 minutes of music, functioning as a sort of a personal stereo, much 
like portable CD and tape players. But given the near-CD fidelity 
of the digital recordings, the record industry sees the Rio as far 
more dangerous than cassette tapes. The industry fears that by enabling 
users to grab unlicensed digital music off the Internet with the click 
of a mouse, the device will encourage widespread music piracy. Earlier 
this month, the trade group asked U.S. District Judge Audrey Collins 
in Los Angeles for a preliminary injunction preventing Diamond from 
shipping the Rio. Her denial of the injunction effectively enables 
Diamond to manufacture and ship the Rio for the holiday season. The 
case underscores the formidable challenge facing the music industry 
as it tries to protect the rights of musicians and distributors at 
a time when illegal music can be distributed freely, anonymously and 
widely over the Internet. The RIAA, which represents 90 percent of 
the creators, manufacturers and distributors of commercial recordings, 
said it had found dozens of sites that in all offered tens of thousands 
of unlicensed recordings free. Forrester Research Inc., a market research 
firm in Cambridge, Mass., estimates that 10 million people already 
have software that enables them to get and listen to MP3 files, the 
audio format the Rio supports. Even Microsoft Corp., media player 
for Windows is capable of playing MP3 files. The Rio weighs less than 
2.4 ounces. After being attached to a computer with a cable, it finds 
music on the Internet and stores it. Eric Schmitt, a research associate 
at Forrester, said it was the first of several similar devices expected 
to hit the market in coming months. Diamond Multimedia says it does 
not condone piracy and that it is not fair to blame the company if 
some people use its product illegally. ``If the recording industry 
wants to go after piracy, it should go upstream to the pirates themselves,'' 
said Ken Wirt, Diamond's vice president for corporate marketing. The 
request for a preliminary injunction hinged primarily on whether the 
Rio met the definition of a digital audio recording device under the 
Audio Home Recording Act of 1992. That law requires makers of digital 
audio recording devices to pay artist organizations royalties of 2 
percent of the wholesale price of the device. Although Judge Collins 
said the court was ultimately very likely to find that the Rio met 
the definition, she refused a key request of the trade group _ that 
Diamond be forced to install a technology that would prevent the device 
from copying unlicensed music files. Cary Sherman, general counsel 
for the RIAA, said that since it was logistically impossible to go 
after all the people who offer pirated music on the Internet, the 
association thought it made more sense to regulate the technology 
used to ``receive'' the music. Manufacturers of such devices ``have 
a moral obligation to protect creative works,'' he said. Andrew Bridges, 
a partner with Palo Alto-based Wilson Sonsini Goodrich &AMP; Rosati, 
, which is representing Diamond, argues that the association is not 
entitled to derail new technology while it determines how to protect 
its members. ``Are they saying no one can develop a new technology 
without their permission?'' Bridges asked. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>