<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981027.0391 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Poor Broadway. Of three recent arrivals, the one production to become 
a critical hit is not only in for a limited run, but also isn't really 
a Broadway show at all. It is a full-length ballet, ``Swan Lake,'' 
Matthew Bourne's exuberantly free and satiric reinterpretation of 
the standard version of the ballet as choreographed by Marius Petipa 
and Lev Ivanov in 1895. Though the Tchaikovsky score remains more 
or less intact, Bourne, an English modern-dance choreographer and 
director, has come up with his own cheeky, sometimes remarkably poignant 
version of the tale. If the reviews pay off, ``Swan Lake'' could well 
duplicate the production's success in the West End two years ago. 
Yet if it does, ``Swan Lake'' will be saying a lot less about classic 
ballet as a future Broadway trend than about the hunger of Broadway 
audiences for theater that offers the possibility of astonishment. 
The two other recent Broadway arrivals are going to have to fight 
to hang on. ``Footloose'' is a big generic teen-age musical designed 
to attract those audiences that have been at loose ends since ``Grease'' 
closed. ``Getting and Spending'' is the kind of straight play that 
aims very carefully to please, and misses. It is a soberly silly comedy 
about a sweet young woman charged with insider trading on Wall Street 
and the brilliant lawyer who defends her on the eve of taking his 
vows in a religious order. Do they fall in love? Is she really as 
greedy as she never quite seems? Does he get her sprung? Will he turn 
away from God? Where have you been all your life? That the new Broadway 
season is beginning so uncertainly was underscored by my New York 
Times colleague, Jesse McKinley, in the On Stage and Off column of 
Oct. 23. According to the report, the only certifiable hits of the 
season to date are three unusual straight plays, each running in a 
comparatively tiny Off Broadway house: Margaret Edson's ``Wit'' at 
the 99-seat MCC Theater, the revival of Tracy Letts' ``Killer Joe'' 
at the 199-seat SoHo Playhouse and the revival of Charles Ludlam's 
``Mystery of Irma Vep'' at the 250-seat Westside Theater/Downstairs. 
The enthusiastic public response to these productions has resulted 
in advance ticket sales that are phenomenal by Off Broadway standards 
($125,000 in one three-day period for ``Killer Joe,'' and more than 
$350,000 for ``Irma Vep''), while the producers of ``Wit'' are frantically 
looking for a larger theater, possibly one on Broadway. Yet considering 
the state of our theater today, and the state of mind of theater audiences, 
would Broadway provide a happy home for ``Wit'' or for either of the 
other two hits? I'm doubtful, and not necessarily because of the huge 
amounts of money needed for such transfers. When people go to ``Wit'' 
at the MCC Theater on West 28th Street, they have to make a real physical 
effort. The theater is not easy to find. The stairs to the second 
floor space are steep. By the time they sit down, they have made an 
emotional commitment to what they are about to see. They also have 
some idea of what is in store: an extraordinary actress, Kathleen 
Chalfant, in a small, rich, devastating play about a woman in the 
process of losing her life. The tickets are inexpensive, but audiences 
don't go to one theater instead of another to save money. It's cheaper 
and easier to stay home. Audiences go Off Broadway because they are 
informed. They haven't been steered by friendly ticket brokers; they 
have made conscious decisions on their own. It is not only the state 
of mind of the audience that informs the performance, but also the 
physical nature of the theater itself. Move that exact same production 
to a theater six, seven or eight times as large uptown, on Broadway, 
and priorities as well as expectations shift. Many people will be 
in attendance not because they have any interest in the play itself 
but because it is this week's must-see hit, or because they couldn't 
get tickets to something else. Some people seeing ``Wit'' unprepared, 
having paid $55 to $60 a seat, might hate it. They might also hate 
the entire idea of serious theater. The SoHo Playhouse, which in an 
earlier age was the Vandam Theater, is as ramshackle as any Off Broadway 
space I know, which makes it the ideal location to see a white-trash 
comedy like ``Killer Joe.'' The place has a kind of clammy authenticity 
to it that matches the slovenliness of the characters on the stage. 
In much the same way, the alarmingly low ceiling at the Westside Theater/Downstairs 
on West 43rd Street reflects the pinched budgets and limited resources 
of old-time B-movies that are so lovingly and hilariously evoked by 
Everett Quinton and Stephen DeRosa in ``The Mystery of Irma Vep.'' 
As matters now stand, these hits are subsidized most directly not 
by any government arts programs, private foundations or commercial 
producers, but by the actors, directors, writers and crafts people 
who make them possible. They work for peanuts in the expectation that 
they will transfer to larger spaces producing more revenue. A few 
productions can move without damaging the original product. Others, 
like ``Wit,'' ``Killer Joe'' and ``The Mystery of Irma Vep'' have 
to pay attention. They might easily get lost, not only in the economics 
of Broadway but also in its larger, airier, more impersonal spaces. 
It's an impossible situation, but Off Broadway and the nonprofit companies 
continue to go their own way, sometimes triumphantly. --- One of the 
pleasures of ``Swan Lake'' is the opportunity to see what is essentially 
a classic, full-length ballet in a theater the size of the Neil Simon. 
The Neil Simon is certainly not a small Broadway house, but it is 
an intimate space when compared with the Metropolitan Opera, the New 
York State Theater or some of the newer barnlike Broadway theaters 
where one usually sees such attractions. Not only are the sightlines 
good, but also the sound has the purity of something untampered with. 
The orchestra, conducted by David Frame, fills the theater without 
the crude, electronically amplified emphases by which our song-and-dance 
shows communicate emotions and tell us when it's time to applaud. 
Technology never gets in the way of Bourne's update of the old tale, 
now seemingly set in what often suggests London of the mid-1950s. 
The generic unhappy prince of old, originally called Siegfried, now 
simply the Prince, is recognizable as a sympathetic spinoff of Prince 
Charles. As a boy, he clutches a toy swan when he sleeps. As an eligible 
young bachelor, he is charmed by the wrong women, drinks too much, 
frequents low dives and dreams of escape from a life of empty ritual. 
His chilly mother is a sexually rapacious queen who, apparently, buys 
not British but French; her costumes suggest the kind of clothes Givenchy 
made for Audrey Hepburn. More important, the enchanted swan princess 
has become a swan prince, identified in the program simply as the 
Swan. He is attended by a flock of aggressively territorial, often 
threatening male swans (the corps de ballet), who leap, thrust, turn 
and leap again, always in edgy concord with their leader. Shoe-less 
and bare-chested, the swans wear only knickers made of feathers, which, 
in the case of their leader, just as easily suggest the fleece of 
a goat. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>