<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981027.0321 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
President Clinton and Senate Majority Leader Trent Lott traded accusations 
of demagoguery and bad faith Tuesday in a partisan pre-election skirmish 
over Social Security. Clinton, at a White House forum on elderly women 
and Social Security, said that Republicans in Congress wanted to use 
the federal budget surplus to finance tax cuts, rather than to insure 
the solvency of the Social Security system. The president said that 
he blocked that effort by threatening to veto the Republicans' tax 
bill and that he would continue to oppose any effort to spend the 
surplus on anything other than Social Security. The president said 
Lott had continued to insist that budget surpluses be returned to 
taxpayers in the form of tax cuts. He recalled that Lott had recently 
said that Clinton could not be trusted to address the problems of 
Social Security and that Republicans would wait until a new president 
was elected before beginning serious work on the government retirement 
program. Lott said recently _ and repeated Tuesday _ that scandal 
had eroded the president's credibility and left many wondering whether 
he could be trusted to deal with important policy matters like Social 
Security. ``Well, I hope that's just election-season rhetoric,'' the 
president said in an East Room discussion of retirement security for 
elderly women. He then sarcastically noted that Republicans were willing 
to work with business lobbyists to kill an administration health care 
proposal, tobacco legislation and a campaign finance overhaul measure. 
``I think the Senate majority leader will be able to find time to 
work with me to save Social Security, and I certainly hope so,'' the 
president said with a sardonic smile. Barely an hour after the president 
finished speaking, Lott issued a statement accusing Clinton of using 
Social Security to frighten and pander to elderly voters. ``No politician 
should prey on the fears of senior Americans and shamelessly demagogue 
Social Security one week before an election,'' Lott said. ``I am committed 
to genuine Social Security reform, and after the election I will work 
with anyone who shares that commitment.'' Lott then repeated a remark 
from 10 days earlier that infuriated the White House and led to Tuesday's 
rejoinder from Clinton. ``The president's credibility crisis leaves 
many wondering whether he can be trusted with such an important policy 
issue,'' Lott said in his statement. White House officials were delighted 
with Lott's response, because polls show that the president's position 
on Social Security is much more popular than Lott's. Paul Begala, 
a senior political adviser to the president, said Clinton had not 
raised Social Security as a partisan issue, but had sought bipartisan 
agreement on saving the budget surplus to strengthen the Social Security 
trust fund. Tuesday's dust-up ``is regrettable,'' Begala said with 
a barely-suppressed smile. ``If the majority leader is interested 
in a debate on who is more credible, who is to be trusted to save 
Social Security, we will not shrink from that debate.'' At the White 
House event, Clinton announced support for two relatively minor measures 
similar to proposals that Congress has twice failed to act upon. Clinton 
noted that single elderly women have among the highest rates of poverty 
of any group of Americans and said that, for many of them, Social 
Security ``is literally all that stands between them and the ravages 
of poverty.'' He said that preserving Social Security and expanding 
other retirement income programs were critical to helping close the 
income gap between men and women. Clinton revived two proposals that 
would expand retirement benefits for relatively small numbers of women. 
The first would allow workers who take time off from work to care 
for a baby or a sick family member to credit that time toward vesting 
in a company pension plan. Workers who take advantage of the Family 
and Medical Leave Act are overwhelmingly women, and many return to 
work only part time, making it more difficult to vest in pension plans, 
the White House noted in a fact sheet. The second proposal would require 
companies to alter the payout provisions of pension plans for a surviving 
spouse. Many companies now allow couples to save up to 50 percent 
of their retirement benefits until after one spouse dies. Tuesday's 
proposal would require companies to offer an option of setting aside 
as much as 75 percent of the retirement benefit for the surviving 
spouse. Neither proposal would cost private employers much money, 
said Dallas Salisbury, an analyst at the Employee Benefit Research 
Institute. The family leave provision would affect relatively few 
workers who fall just a few weeks short of the five years generally 
required to vest in a pension plan, he said. And many companies already 
offer the 75 percent pension payout option, which does not affect 
employer contributions but only the rate at which they are paid out, 
Salisbury said. He also noted that similar proposals had been proposed 
in legislation in the past two Congresses but not acted upon. ``They 
were popular, but there are other things that were more popular,'' 
Salisbury said. ``These are small proposals that affect a quite small 
number of people.'' 
</TEXT>
</DOC>