<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981027.0281 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
As the interim director of the Mississippi Gaming Commission, Bruce 
Nourse authorized the opening of the state's first casino in 1992. 
But a year later, as casino neon began to flicker with opportunity 
all along the Gulf coast and north into the Delta region, Nourse traded 
roles. Instead of continuing to police the casino operators, he joined 
them, doubling his salary and becoming a senior vice president for 
Casino Magic, a casino hotel owner. Within a matter of months, the 
government body formed to keep Mississippi's casino industry honest 
was virtually wiped out. Nourse's successor, Lorenzo Creighton, resigned 
to become general manager of a riverboat casino in St. Louis. Nine 
of the commission's 10 law-enforcement agents also left. ``There were 
a lot of people who quit'' to seek jobs in the industry, recalled 
Chuck Patton, the gaming commission's current chairman. ``It was a 
difficult time.'' As fast as the gambling business has spread across 
the country, a fast-spinning revolving door has also developed, creating 
a world in which a state senator with no casino experience has in 
an instant become president of a major casino, a law enforcement official 
from a state attorney general's office has gone on to become chief 
executive officer of the nation's most profitable casino, and where 
top gaming officials from one state after another have resigned to 
pursue lucrative casino careers. From Raymond ``Skip'' Avansino Jr., 
the Nevada Gaming Commission member who went on to become president 
and chief operating officer of Hilton hotels and casinos, to James 
E. Thompson, the Illinois governor who first signed riverboat gambling 
into law in his state and then, after leaving office, became one of 
the industry's key lobbyist, the officials who wrote the rules and 
picked the casino operators are reaping rewards from the industry. 
Other regulated industries, like airlines or pharmaceuticals, have 
for years lured government officials into their camps. But legalized 
gambling has created a robust new market for politically connected 
executives, lobbyists and consultants not only because it is growing 
so fast, but precisely because it is one of the nation's most highly 
regulated industries at the state level. ``If you own the politicians, 
regulators, judges or whoever you need to do what you need to do, 
you totally control your environment,'' said Don Williams, a political 
strategist in Las Vegas and a former senior executive and part owner 
of casinos. ``It's always best to have these people on your side, 
so why not hire these people?'' Convincing government officials to 
join forces with the gambling industry is usually easy, Williams said, 
adding: ``They hang around wealth, they investigate wealth, they see 
money being made in areas that they never dreamed of before. And they're 
learning how people made this money.'' To an outsider looking in, 
he said, joining the industry is like becoming ``a part of the king's 
court.'' THE BIG FEAR: It's a Matter Of Objectivity The high crossover 
rate, coming as many states are writing laws that will govern the 
industry for years to come, has raised concerns about the impartiality 
of the people who oversee gambling. ``It certainly raises doubts about 
the objectivity and the credibility of some of those individuals,'' 
said Kay Coles James, chairwoman of the National Gambling Impact Study 
Commission, the presidential committee that is studying the effect 
of legalized gambling on the United States. The commission, which 
is scheduled to report its findings to Congress next summer, has not 
yet considered taking action to discourage the industry's revolving 
door, Ms. James said. But in forming her staff she extracted verbal 
commitments from those she hired not to leave and take jobs in the 
gambling industry while the commission continued its work. Even though 
states like Nevada and New Jersey have ``cooling-off'' periods that 
prohibit some government employees from immediately going to work 
for casinos within their own jurisdictions, other casino states, including 
Mississippi, have no such waiting periods. And in those states that 
do have cooling-off periods, officials regularly get around the prohibitions 
by working for subsidiaries in other states. Critics of revolving-door 
practices contend that the cooling-off periods, which range from one 
to four years, are not long enough and do not apply to enough people. 
Some have suggested that regulatory positions should be filled by 
people who are either near retirement or financially secure enough 
to avoid being induced by high-paying jobs. ``The big fear is that 
they'll be overly friendly with the companies they're going to go 
work for in the future,'' said Nelson Rose, a gambling law professor 
at Whittier Law School in Costa Mesa, Calif. ``They may think deep 
down subconsciously that if they make decisions against the industry 
they won't get hired if they choose to leave government.'' The industry's 
revolving door has become so promising that Rose said he advises his 
students that the best way to get ahead in the gambling business is 
to first become a regulator because they ``learn the regulatory system'' 
and ``of course, you make contacts.'' While some officials have switched 
to the casino business within months of making decisions that benefited 
their future employers, no one has been able to prove a direct exchange 
of a job for favorable treatment from regulators. However, critics 
of the revolving door contend that there are many cases illustrating 
that state regulators are too close to the industry and are particularly 
lax about exacting punishment on casinos that break the rules. For 
example, although Bally Gaming several years ago entered into a partnership 
in Louisiana with a company that was later found to have ties to organized 
crime, officials in New Jersey and Nevada _ where Bally is also licensed 
_ allowed the company to keep its license in those places. And last 
August, Hilton Hotels Corp. entered into an agreement with federal 
prosecutors to avoid an indictment on charges that Hilton executives 
paid money to a public official in Kansas City, Mo., as a reward for 
his support for the Flamingo Hilton casino project in that city. Hilton 
denies any wrongdoing. However, in its signed pact with prosecutors, 
the hotel and casino company agreed to ``acknowledge that the Unites 
States has evidence'' supporting the alleged scheme to pay the Kansas 
City Port Authority chairman for using his influence to assist the 
company's casino project. So far, regulators in other jurisdictions 
where Hilton operates casinos have not taken any action in response, 
and Missouri regulators renewed Hilton's license a month after the 
agreement. ``Even though they call themselves heavily regulated, it's 
a good-old-boys network that is taking care of gambling companies 
throughout the United States,'' said Tom Grey, executive director 
of the National Coalition Against Gambling Expansion, the nation's 
most active anti-gambling organization. THE INCENTIVES: Instant Pay 
Rise In Casino Work Those who have traded in their bureaucratic backgrounds 
and joined forces with the casino business can be found all around 
the country. Mick Lura, for example, the former top administrator 
for Iowa's Racing and Gaming Commission, left his job in 1993 to become 
an executive at president casinos, which operates riverboats in three 
states, including Iowa. He later became general manager of the Meskwaki 
tribal casino in Iowa. In Mississippi, the nation's third largest 
gambling jurisdiction, after Nevada and New Jersey, there was no cooling-off 
period that prohibited Nourse from going to work for a casino in the 
state. But he did seek an opinion from a state ethics commission, 
which cleared the way for him to join Casino Magic. State officials 
later considered putting a cooling-off period into effect, but instead 
have continued to consider such moves on a case-by-case basis, which 
has allowed employees of the gaming commission to continue to get 
instant salary increases by taking jobs with the casinos. ``I moved 
into the industry and effectively doubled my salary,'' said Nourse, 
who earned about $90,000 a year with the gaming commission. Defending 
his decision to become a casino executive, Nourse noted the ``huge 
demand by the industry'' for regulators. ``I speak the language,'' 
he said. Philip Hannifin, a career bureaucrat who was a longtime member 
of the Nevada Gaming Control Board before going on to help operate 
some of the industry's largest casino companies, conceded that the 
gambling business has been very good to him. ``My family and I have 
been well-treated from a monetary standpoint,'' said Hannifin, now 
an executive vice president at Fitzgeralds, a casino company based 
in Nevada. ``I have no complaints.'' Some former government officials 
have truly hit the jackpot in the casino industry. Avansino, for example, 
was a Nevada tax lawyer and gaming commission member who was named 
president and chief operating officer of Hilton Hotels in 1993. For 
nearly three years Avansino led the company through a worldwide expansion 
of its gambling operations. His salary and bonuses over those years 
totaled $2.6 million, plus generous stock options, according to the 
company's financial statements. After resigning abruptly in 1996, 
Avansino is now chairman of a nonprofit foundation in Nevada, teaches 
gaming law at the University of San Francisco School of Law, and shuttles 
on a private plane between homes in Reno and in Santa Barbara, Calif. 
The prospect of such financial rewards entices others. In September 
the chairman of the New Jersey Casino Control Commission, Bradford 
Smith, stepped down from his $95,000-year-post, expressing a desire 
to ``maximize my earning capacity,'' and candidly said he would like 
to land a job in the gambling business. ``I'm fascinated by this industry,'' 
he said in an interview after his final meeting as head of the commission, 
which governs the state's casinos. He also noted that he was prepared 
to move outside New Jersey to avoid the state's cooling-off period 
and immediately go to work for the gambling industry. Smith's predecessor, 
Stephen Perskie, has fared well since he resigned in 1994. Perskie 
was the New Jersey General Assembly member who wrote the 1977 statue 
that legalized casino gambling in Atlantic City. After serving as 
chief of staff to former Gov. Jim Florio (Florio joined the board 
of Bally Gaming, a major manufacturer of casino equipment, after he 
was defeated by Gov. Christie Whitman in 1993), Perskie was appointed 
to the casino control commission in 1990, where he served as the state's 
top regulator for four years. He resigned to join the riverboat casino 
company, Players International, as vice president and general counsel, 
and was able to circumvent the cooling-off period because, although 
Players operated casinos in other parts of the country, they had none 
in New Jersey. Still, while at Players, Perskie's office remained 
in Atlantic City. A few years later, he left the company to go into 
private practice, and is now considered one of New Jersey's top gaming 
lawyers. In fact, the casino business that Perskie was instrumental 
in legalizing in New Jersey has been very good to the entire Perskie 
family. Three Atlantic City law firms that represent casinos bear 
the Perskie family name. ``The appearance of the revolving door is 
a matter of legitimate concern,'' Perskie conceded in a recent interview. 
But he insisted that in the 20 years that Atlantic City has had legalized 
gambling, ``there has been no threat to the public confidence or the 
integrity of the regulatory process.'' THE PIONEERS: Early Proponents 
Often Prosper Still, in many cases the same people who have been instrumental 
in setting up the casino industry in their states have gotten the 
biggest opportunities. In New Jersey, where gaming officials often 
boast of having the toughest, most restrictive cooling-off laws, Martin 
Greenberg, a former state senator who helped draft the casino control 
law that governs the state's casinos, resigned from his legislative 
post in 1979 and within days became president of the Golden Nugget 
despite having no experience in casino operations. (As a result, the 
cooling-off laws in New Jersey were expanded in 1981 to include state 
legislators, but most other states still do not prohibit such moves.) 
And G. Michael Brown, who as director of the state attorney general's 
division of gaming enforcement, conducted background investigations 
of many of Atlantic City's first casino operators, left his job in 
1982 to go into legal practice representing foreign casino companies. 
He later became became chief executive officer of the Connecticut-based 
Foxwoods Casino, the nation's most profitable casino. Richard Cody, 
who as a New Jersey assemblyman in 1977 was chairman of the legislative 
committee that wrote the state's casino control act, said he has received 
numerous invitations to join the industry but refused. Cody, now a 
state senator, said he believes that government officials who are 
interested in working for the gambling industry tend to ``become the 
lap dog instead of the watch dog.'' But for their part, many former 
regulators contend that the influx of former government officials 
into the industry has only helped to clean up a once-notorious business. 
``It's good because it brings people with honesty, ethics and integrity 
into the industry,'' said Shannon Bybee, a former member of the Nevada 
Gaming Control Board who went on to become president of the Golden 
Nugget in Atlantic City and chairman and chief executive officer of 
the Claridge casino. But Bybee, now a gaming professor at the University 
of Nevada at Las Vegas, conceded that the revolving door ``can be 
bad if it's abused and people use their positions to get around doing 
things, or do things because of friendships.'' THE BLURRED LINES: 
When Regulators Relax the Rules Others, including former regulators, 
say the revolving door has created an incestuous culture in which 
the lines separating gambling and the people responsible for overseeing 
it are often blurred, or even nonexistent. Dave Waters, a former casino 
control commission member in New Jersey, said he found that his colleagues 
were sometimes swayed by their personal job interests. ``Some of these 
folks, as their terms come to an end, start finding ways to agree 
with the industry,'' he said. ``They start trying to pave a way to 
endear themselves with the industry.'' Waters, who retired in 1991 
after five years on the commission, said he never sought a casino 
job. But he added, ``If I had wanted to, all I had to do was cozy 
up to them.'' Not surprisingly, gambling's courtship of regulators 
began in Las Vegas, where former officials have long cashed in on 
ties to gambling. Today, in many of the 26 casino gambling jurisdictions 
around the country, some of the most powerful gaming lawyers and executives 
are people who started as regulators in Nevada, where cooling-off 
laws did not exist until 1987 and are still less restrictive than 
in other states. Frank Schreck, for example, left the Nevada Gaming 
Commission in 1975 and immediately began building his law practice 
by providing counsel to gaming clients. ``At that time, the only real 
way to learn gaming law was to learn it on the governmental side,'' 
Schreck said. Today he is one of the most prominent and influential 
gaming lawyers in the country, known especially for his high rate 
of success when representing clients appearing before Nevada's gaming 
regulators. In part, the casino industry's consumption of government 
officials is attributed to its rapid growth and resulting job opportunities. 
Since 1990, casino revenue has more than doubled, to $20.5 billion 
annually, and the industry now accounts for an estimated $7.3 billion 
in wages, according to the American Gaming Association, the industry 
trade group. And as the casino industry has grown, so has the need 
for consultants, lobbyists and executives with regulatory experience 
who can obtain and maintain the government licenses that allow casinos 
to operate and proliferate. THE LUSH LIFE: From Prosecutor To Casino 
Boss Of all the many former government and law-enforcement officials 
who have chosen to stake their futures on the casino industry, probably 
none has evolved so completely as that of James Ritchie. Twenty-six 
years ago, Ritchie was a federal prosecutor earning less than $35,000 
a year. He worked on the West Coast and, according to former colleagues, 
his investigations included the gambling business in Nevada, where 
organized crime was still deeply entrenched. Then, in 1973, Ritchie 
left the Justice Department to become executive director of the Congressional 
Commission on the Review of the National Policy Toward Gambling, which 
was organized to help establish guidelines on legalized gambling. 
But when the commission issued its report in 1976, Ritchie's former 
colleagues at the department lashed out at him for being too partial 
to the casino bosses. ``We had several strong differences of opinion,'' 
recalled William Lynch, who, as head of the organized crime and racketeering 
section, had been Ritchie's boss. ``The commission was very influenced 
by, or in agreement with, the gambling industry,'' Lynch added. ``Basically, 
the whole thrust of the commission as it developed became pretty clear. 
They were in the `let's repeal all laws against gambling' attitude.'' 
For the next decade or more, as state laws were changed and casinos 
began to open around the country, Ritchie worked as the industry's 
top lobbyist in Washington. In those years, said associates who spoke 
on the condition of anonymity, Ritchie owned his own boat and had 
a lavishly appointed Capitol Hill office decorated with expensive 
artifacts that underscored the lush life the gambling business had 
afforded him. Reached on his cellular phone recently, Ritchie, 62, 
refused to discuss why he switched jobs or how his life has changed 
since he traded in his federal credentials for a career in the casino 
industry. After lobbying for the industry, Ritchie moved to Las Vegas, 
where in 1990 he became executive vice president of development at 
Mirage Casinos, helping to analyze new casino development opportunities. 
After four years in that job he left the company, taking more than 
$6 million in stock options on his way out, according to Mirage records. 
Two months ago, Ritchie's evolution was nearly complete. At that time 
he went before Nevada regulators seeking a license to own 12.3 percent 
of the CasaBlanca Resort, a privately held casino and 700-room hotel 
with a luxury spa and championship golf course, 80 miles north of 
Las Vegas in Mesquite, Nev. The former prosecutor of organized crime, 
which once controlled the casino business, was about to become a casino 
operator himself. Despite the clean background Ritchie had when he 
joined the casino industry, his years in gambling have led to relationships 
and business associations that have brought him scrutiny. At the hearings 
in August, Nevada regulators questioned Ritchie about some of his 
past business relationships, specifically about what one gaming commission 
member called ``questionable associations'' with two men. One of the 
men, whom Ritchie had lent $400,000 in 1994 for a casino investment, 
was said by regulators to have a history of problems and allegations 
of impropriety in the gambling industry. Ritchie, according to his 
testimony, said he was unaware of the full nature of the man's past 
problems when he gave him the loan. Another man who had been a partner 
of Ritchie's earlier this year in a plan to buy the Desert Inn casino 
in Las Vegas was described by regulators as a ``flim-flam man'' and 
``the world's biggest flake.'' Ritchie testified that he now recognized 
that he was ``used'' by the partner. ``I'm no longer in government,'' 
told the regulators. ``I no longer have access to law-enforcement 
records. I'm sitting in my kitchen with a fax machine and a telephone 
and enough of a bankroll to try to become involved in some of these 
projects.'' Despite their misgivings, both the state gaming board 
and the state gaming commission voted unanimously to give Ritchie 
a two-year license as co-owner of the CasaBlanca casino and hotel. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>