<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981027.0227 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
The other day, an artist who will remain nameless for obvious reasons 
told me she was worried about her forthcoming show, not because the 
work was causing her more than the usual anxiety but because her gallery 
happens not to be in Chelsea. Unfortunately, I knew what she meant. 
At last count, around 60 galleries had colonized the area roughly 
between 17th Street and 27th Street on the far West Side of Manhattan. 
Dealers there are ecstatic, and why not? Foot traffic is booming. 
For these 15 minutes, at least, it's the new epicenter. I spent a 
couple of days recently making the rounds of the neighborhood. I liked 
Chelsea very much when it first started to develop as the un-SoHo, 
but now, though I still want to like it, I'm not so sure. Why? It's 
not the art. The art is simply what it is, location notwithstanding, 
and this time around, for instance, I got a kick out of Nayland Blake's 
gingerbread house at Matthew Marks and James Welling's photographs 
at Leslie Tonkonow. There were also Sue Williams' new paintings at 
303 Gallery to see, and Louise Fishman's at Cheim &AMP; Reid. (Do 
you remember, by the way, a decade ago, long before the Chelsea boomlet, 
when that space was Larry Gagosian's gallery? Too far ahead of the 
curve, it didn't last long.) I stopped at a few galleries I hadn't 
visited before, which always reduces my guilt level, although making 
the rounds is like changing light bulbs in the Empire State Building: 
by the time you finish one cycle you're behind in the next. Guilt 
is built in. It was just three years ago that only a handful of galleries 
existed among Chelsea's taxi garages. When you went to see them, or 
to see the Dia Center for the Arts, which was already there and a 
kind of magnet to the area, you were probably making a minor pilgrimage 
because Chelsea is out of the way for most people. This was part of 
its attraction: people went there specifically to look at art, as 
was no longer the case in SoHo, and moreover they were going to a 
place that seemed to evoke something of SoHo's former character because 
it was largely industrial. (It triggered the art world's Pavlovian 
response to la vie de boheme.) Actually the resemblance to SoHo was 
superficial. I happened to grow up next to SoHo and vaguely remember 
as a child thinking _ the way we all think when we have a stake in 
the past, which blinds us to the future _ that the old neighborhood 
had been taken over by outsiders after the first galleries opened. 
In fact, SoHo's virtue was that its growth was organic and bottom 
up. It was an architecture of airy cast-iron lofts. Artists moved 
in because the spaces were cheap and practical. Then galleries followed. 
The archetypal gallery was Leo Castelli's, at 420 West Broadway, which 
resembled an artist's loft. In SoHo, dealers were mostly in plain 
sight, and the ambient aim, even if it increasingly wasn't achieved, 
was to be informal and accessible. In Chelsea the evolution has roughly 
been reversed. It is an architecture of storage facilities and garages, 
less easily adaptable to art. There are artist studios in the area, 
but it is not, nor was it ever, where many artists lived. The new 
galleries arrived pretty much ex nihilo, the first ones mostly belonging 
to high-enders like Matthew Marks, Barbara Gladstone, Paula Cooper 
and Metro Pictures. Marks' gallery on 22nd Street, in a converted 
single-story garage with skylights, turned out to be a spare and handsome 
place with a big window on the street that makes the art inside visible 
from outside, a friendly arrangement roughly mimicked by the new Postmasters, 
with a glass storefront on 18th Street. But most Chelsea galleries 
are chilly and turn inward. The spaces feel antiseptic, awkward. They 
tend to speak of money. Dealers too often opt to be out of sight, 
with offices on a separate floor. Sometimes the architecture is grand 
_ Paula Cooper's gallery is stunning to look at _ but so grand that 
the architecture can overwhelm the art. Andrea Rosen's gallery on 
24th Street exemplifies the problem. It's like a mausoleum, tall and 
windowless, with a hallway to an office in the back, the office blocked 
from view by a giant file cabinet so that, like a child, anyone with 
a question about what's on view must stand on tiptoes to talk to the 
20-somethings who work there. A few scrappy galleries have found quarters 
more or less in the interstices of the neighborhood. Team, for instance, 
is in a basement on 26th Street, and Kenny Schacter/Rove uses an unfinished 
warehouse, noble but grim. As for the big new mall buildings (529 
West 20th Street, for example), let's just say that once the elevators 
arrive and you make your way inside some of the galleries, the views 
of the Hudson aren't bad. An excellent dealer like Bill Maynes told 
me he has 10 times as much space in the building for twice the price 
of what his gallery in SoHo cost, but the old gallery, where he specialized 
in small works, was distinctive and matched the art he showed. Everything 
is a trade-off. New York is not Los Angeles, yet Chelsea's rapid rise 
is a phenomenon perhaps more typical in Los Angeles than in New York, 
which may explain its rootless ethos. In L.A., a car culture, galleries 
will cluster in one place, then pick up and move somewhere else a 
few years later. Moving around fits the character of the place, where 
a multigallery development like, say, Bergamot Station, is a matter 
of real estate prices combined with collective bargaining, a temporary 
arrangement subject to the whims of fashion. And it is the arc of 
fashion that a thing becomes chic, then passe, then maybe it achieves 
retrochic. With Manhattan neighborhoods these days, the evolution 
seems rapid. SoHo is passe. Chelsea, having become chic, has already 
been diluted by a number of SoHo's schlock galleries. It is now closer 
in character to 57th Street than to SoHo as a center for the business 
of art; though, contrary to the old assumptions about uptown galleries 
versus downtown galleries, many of the galleries on 57th Street actually 
feel less pretentious. Who knows? SoHo may soon seem retrochic. If 
you wonder how long it will be before the arrival in Chelsea of SoHo's 
clothing shops, which finally overwhelmed the neighborhood and turned 
it into a retail mall, count to one: I was told last week that the 
Con Edison trucks on 22nd Street, outside 303 Gallery, were there 
for the new Comme des Garcons shop. Then I stopped in to see Leslie 
Tonkonow at 601 West 26th Street, and she told me that she had heard 
that the owners of her building were asking new renters three times 
what they were charging when she arrived two years ago. An old industrial 
facility long known as the Starrett-Lehigh building, 601 West 26th 
has housed a typical fringe New York mix: box manufacturers, printers, 
hospital storage rooms and a cheesecake company, along with a few 
artists' studios. Now it's placing advertisements in The New York 
Times calling itself the Starrett-Lehigh Center for Creative Arts, 
Media and Technology. Well, there goes the neighborhood. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>