<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981027.0276 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Even for a tough political competitor like Jean Chretien, question 
period in the House of Commons can be a grind. Every day, for an hour, 
Prime Minister Chretien has to answer questions, in English and French, 
from his parliamentary foes. The opposition constantly tries to bait 
him, and sometimes succeeds, as in a recent session when Chretien 
stood to defend himself against accusations that he and his staff 
had ordered the police to use pepper spray on demonstrators before 
a visit by a foreign dignitary last year. He retorted that it was 
better to get hit with pepper spray than a baseball bat. Later the 
prime minister shrugged and said he was only being honest. It didn't 
matter. ``Pepper Spray Beats Baseball Bats'' was the main story on 
newscasts and newspapers across Canada. Whether it is candor, or insensitivity, 
Chretien's five years in office have been marked by a directness uncommon 
among world leaders. At a time of obtuse diplomacy and executive legalisms, 
he can be outspoken and blunt to a degree that frightens and frustrates 
his handlers. He likes to be called ``the little guy from Shawinigan,'' 
the mill town in Quebec where he was born 64 years ago, but recent 
incidents have critics accusing him of being a street tough and a 
tyrant. His missteps are already legend in Canada. He once boasted 
before what he thought was a closed microphone that Canada's Cuba 
policy scores points at home because it makes the United States squirm. 
When Canadians speak of the ``Shawinigan handshake,'' they are referring 
to the time the prime minister literally wrung the neck of a protester 
who got too close to him at a Flag Day rally in Ottawa. And when he 
was first asked about the pepper spray incident, Chretien told reporters, 
``Pepper, for me I put it on my plate.'' ``This whole affair is affording 
Canadians a rare glimpse into the inner soul of this prime minister,'' 
said Rick Anderson, an opposition strategist. ``People are getting 
to see him as a bully.'' Reaction to Chretien's wisecracks and roughhousing 
has always been split. Everything about him is open to criticism except 
the paralysis that causes the left part of his face to contract so 
that he looks as if he is talking out of the side of his mouth. An 
opponent once tried poking fun during a campaign and paid dearly for 
it in lost votes. French speakers delight in saying that this prime 
minister has trouble expressing himself in both of Canada's official 
languages. They make fun of his bumbling, and at the same time they 
accuse him of hiding behind the everyman persona to deflect criticism. 
Louis Duclos, head of Quebec's delegation in Toronto, points out that 
Chretien is a lawyer and has for most of his adult life been a member 
of the government elite, something far from common on the streets 
of Shawinigan. But the average Canadian identifies with Chretien's 
humble beginnings and his unassuming ways. ``I don't think Canadians 
are expecting perfection,'' said Edward Zussman, a political analyst 
who once worked for Chretien. In spite of past miscues, the prime 
minister's personal approval ratings have always remained well above 
50 percent. It is no secret that Chretien's current popularity rides 
on the performance of Canada's economy. Unemployment, though at 8 
percent about double that in the United States, has been steadily 
dropping, inflation has practically vanished and there is a budget 
surplus for the first time in a quarter-century. ``It's very rare 
that when the press writes `that's a damn good government,''' Chretien 
said in an interview in his office in the center block of Canada's 
prim parliamentary complex in Ottawa. ``I've never seen that title 
in the world.'' He has shown an uncanny talent for shaking off controversy. 
Even badly fumbled explanations for major policy reversals _ he campaigned 
against a free trade agreement, then warmly embraced it _ frustrate 
voters but do not entirely alienate them. And his support sometimes 
comes from unlikely corners. The pepper-spraying incident took place 
last November, but it surfaced in newspapers and newscasts only after 
the Starr report on President Clinton was issued in early September. 
That left many Canadians, including some Ottawa reporters, asking 
old questions about the character of Canada. ``Perhaps the doings 
in Washington set it off, but the Canadian political and media elites 
appear to be suffering a dose of scandal envy,'' wrote Jeffrey Simpson, 
a columnist with The Globe and Mail of Toronto. What Chretien is accused 
of is directly, or indirectly, interfering with security arrangements 
at the Asia Pacific Economic Cooperation conference in Vancouver and 
making it clear that he did not want the visiting President Suharto 
of Indonesia to be embarrassed by protesters. Even though conclusive 
proof has not been found, Chretien's jokes and heavy-handed responses 
have raised questions about his judgment. ``They're going after Chretien 
for insensitivity, but that is not an indictable offense,'' said Robert 
Bothwell, a professor of history at the University of Toronto. The 
big concern now is that the prime minister's controversial remarks 
and actions could influence the outcome of the coming election in 
Quebec, where separatist and federalist parties are fighting for control 
of the provincial government. Some analysts are already speculating 
that Chretien will resign if the separatist party is re-elected. The 
separatists have vowed to hold a third referendum on Quebec independence, 
and even within Chretien's own party, the Liberals, not everyone thinks 
he can lead another campaign to hold Canada together. He was widely 
seen as having mishandled the 1995 referendum, which federalists won 
by less than 1 percent. ``Chretien,'' wrote Rosemary Speirs, a Toronto 
Star columnist, ``would have to face the fact that many federalists 
believe he'd be a liability, not an asset, in the ultimate fight to 
keep the country together.'' The old warrior smiles crookedly at suggestions 
that he is not up to another fight, and challenges anyone who doubts 
his stamina to race him up the stairs at Parliament. He takes pride 
in a recent photograph that shows him bounding over a wall while Clinton, 
with whom he has a cordial relationship, struggles to catch up. ``I 
have to tell you that some days I feel that perhaps I should go,'' 
said Chretien, who has spent more than 35 years in Canadian politics. 
``Then the day after, I am saying, `Gee, I'm staying.' And I love 
it.'' One thing is clear. After fighting Quebec separatists for 35 
years, he has no intention of overseeing the dismemberment of his 
country, should that day ever arrive. ``I'm telling you, if they were 
to vote two-thirds or 75 percent for separation, I would probably 
resign the day after and go home and let them bring in somebody else,'' 
Chretien said. He acknowledged that a recent judgment of the Supreme 
Court of Canada made it clear that under such circumstances the federal 
government would be obliged to negotiate the separation of Quebec. 
``But the problem is that the Supreme Court said too that the borders 
of Quebec are not secure,'' he said. ``Now you fall into the problem 
of partition of Quebec, because if you can break Canada why the people 
who are not happy to stay in Quebec cannot break Quebec?'' Cree Indians 
who inhabit the wild northern part of Quebec, along with scattered 
Eskimo groups, have threatened to break away from the province if 
it leaves Canada. Chretien's unbending opposition to separation makes 
him more popular throughout Canada but in Quebec he is seen as a traitor, 
and he doesn't apologize. ``The separatists don't like Chretien at 
all, and I'm very proud of that,'' the prime minister said. ``I've 
always been very clearly a Canadian whose province is Quebec, whose 
language is French, whose religion is Catholic, who's coming from 
the St. Maurice Valley. I've always been very consistent with my policy, 
my view of myself and of my country and those who want to split Canada 
always see me in their path.'' But the pressure from Quebec will always 
be there, he said, because the province can use it to force Ottawa 
to grant programs and constitutional changes that strengthen the province 
at the expense of the federal government. ``But discussing the constitution 
in Canada, it's part of the national _ what's the right word here 
_ sport. We have hockey and the constitution. When hockey is not doing 
too well, we start to talk about the constitution.'' There are signs 
that the recent controversies have taken a toll on him. In a move 
that seemed to betray unusual anger, Chretien's press office filed 
a complaint against the Canadian Broadcasting Corp. for slanted coverage 
of the pepper spray incident. Last week, Chretien's wife, Aline, attended 
the question period. At one point he looked up at her and smiled, 
then took the opposition's best shots. When the hourlong period ended, 
he scooped up his briefing books and was one of the first members 
to leave the House. He returned energetically to his third-floor office, 
where one window almost perfectly frames the U.S. embassy across Wellington 
Street. With the Stars and Stripes snapping over his shoulder, he 
said that simply surviving was his ultimate political goal. ``At the 
end of the day you say `I've survived one more day,''' he said. ``In 
order to survive you have to learn to walk with your back to the wall, 
with your elbows held very high, and a smile on your face.'' 
</TEXT>
</DOC>