<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981027.0198 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
What does ``modern'' mean? Is it purely historical, as in ancient, 
medieval and modern (the latter frequently seen as beginning with 
the Renaissance)? Is it uppercase, an umbrella term covering all art 
from van Gogh to, say, Frank Stella and Robert Ryman (after which 
postmodern takes over)? Or is it a lowercase valedictory applied temporarily 
to things that are deemed new and irrefutably contemporary _ that 
is, a designation that is outgrown, rather like being a freshman in 
high school? Furthermore, is it possible for a museum of modern art 
to accumulate a collection and still remain involved with modern art 
as it evolves? These questions emanate from a freshly sprung little 
time capsule set by Abby Aldrich Rockefeller, one of the founders 
of the Museum of Modern Art, at the time of her death in 1948. They 
seem surprisingly pertinent. After all, this is a time of multiple 
meanings and linguistic fluidity, when the role of museums, especially 
where contemporary art is concerned, is frequently redefined by curators 
and artists alike. It is also becoming increasingly apparent that 
nearly every culture has a version of modern art, that it is not a 
strictly Eurocentric phenomenon. Some of its forms, like film, may 
begin in the West, but many of its vocabularies have global sources 
_ cubism's debt to African sculpture, for example. So in some ways 
these questions are as alive as ever. In this instance, they have 
the added attraction of providing a glimpse of a Museum of Modern 
Art that might have been. Mrs. Rockefeller, an active trustee until 
her death, clearly felt that modernity was a condition with an expiration 
date. And so last month the Modern gave up four works of art that 
she had bequeathed to it. In accordance with her will, two drawings 
by Vincent van Gogh were handed over to the Metropolitan Museum of 
Art and two drawings by Georges Seurat were transferred to the Art 
Institute of Chicago. She stipulated these transfers, which Glenn 
Lowry, the museum's director, called painful, in the firm belief that 
by 50 years after her death the drawings would cease to be modern 
works of art and would therefore be better suited for museums where 
history, not modernity, was the primary mission. This was the majority 
view at the Modern in the early years, when the museum was young and 
the modern-art concept was too. In a famous statement, Alfred Barr 
Jr., the museum's founding director, described its collection as a 
torpedo moving through time, its nose in the ever-advancing present, 
its tail pulling 50 to 100 years of earlier art behind it. In fact, 
in 1947, after years of negotiation and discussion, the Modern and 
the Whitney Museum of American Art entered an agreement with the Metropolitan 
Museum of Art that was intended to keep the younger institutions unencumbered 
and open to new developments. As time passed, the Modern and the Whitney 
would cede or sell their older modern works to the Met, making room 
for the newly modern. The three co-signers had decided that when these 
works were roughly a century old, they would stop being modern and, 
with any luck, become classic. Although the Met bought two works by 
Picasso from the Modern, including the sentimental ``Woman in White,'' 
the agreement soon fell apart. The Modern must have figured out that 
indeed there were such things as ``modern classics,'' that it owned 
a great number of them and that they were part of its identity, its 
view of history and its ability to attract future gifts. But some 
telling documents from the moment remain in the museum's archives, 
according to a 1995 article by Kirk Varnedoe, chief curator of painting 
and sculpture, published in the fifth volume of the Modern's ``Studies 
in Modern Art'' series. Among them is a list drafted by James Thrall 
Soby, one of the museum's prominent early curators, specifying the 
future dates of transfer for some of the Modern's most beloved masterpieces: 
Cezanne's emblematic ``Bather,'' usually the first work encountered 
in the Modern's permanent collection galleries, was to have gone to 
the Met in 1972, van Gogh's ``Starry Night'' in 1962 and Rousseau's 
``Sleeping Gypsy'' in 1967. (It is amazing to think of the Modern 
as, in Robert Smithson's words, an entropic organism, continually 
in flux, decaying and renewing, and defined primarily by its exhibition 
program. This brings it close to the contemporary idea of the Kunsthalle, 
or an iconoclastic alternative space like the New Museum of Contemporary 
Art, which in the 1970s also adopted the concept of an ``impermanent 
collection.'') By the early 1970s, Barr's torpedo seemed to have ground 
to a halt. In a 1974 interview in Artforum, William Rubin, Varnedoe's 
predecessor, considered the advent of earthworks and conceptual art 
and wondered out loud if the contemporary art being made even had 
a place in a museum of modern art. ``The museum concept is not infinitely 
expandable,'' Rubin said. In a sense, ``modern'' was coming more and 
more to suggest a ``classic'' period of 20th-century art, while fresh, 
new and original fell increasingly within the jurisdiction of the 
word ``contemporary.'' This was suggested by the distinction in auction 
houses between sales of modern art and contemporary art, and by the 
tendency throughout the postwar period for new museums devoted to 
postwar art to call themselves museums of contemporary art. How a 
Collection Can Define an Art And would our idea of ``classic'' modern 
art have been so clearly defined if the Modern had not maintained 
its extraordinary collection, with its highly selective view of Western 
art since 1880? If its treasures had been gradually ceded to the Met, 
they would still be on view in New York. Yet their impact might have 
been quite different seen against the backdrop of an encyclopedic 
array of the world's cultures. Would Picasso's ``Demoiselles d'Avignon'' 
be quite the mountaintop it appears to be in a museum that also contains 
masterpieces of African art and paintings by Velazquez, El Greco and 
Rembrandt? Certainly Barr's torpedo would have lost some of its sleek 
outline and forward momentum in a context where the simultaneity of 
visual endeavor _ of many cultures speaking at once in very different 
languages _ is one of the main messages. But in effect, since the 
late 1940s, modern art has been less a moving torpedo than an exploding 
one, a mass of powerful ideas moving outward in all directions across 
the globe and having different repercussions at each point of contact. 
In addition, even as modern seems to have become more fixed as a moment 
in art history, the term is also unfixed, in both cultural and personal 
terms. Used in the lowercase, ``modern'' can connote what might be 
called historical, as opposed to contemporary newness. By this logic, 
nearly everything genuinely new has had its moment in the modern sun. 
In terms of art, for example, single-point perspective was a sign 
of modernity in mid-14th-century Italy; images of unpopulated landscapes 
and everyday life were modern in 17th-century Holland, and the abandonment 
of single-point perspective and the emphasis on paint and color signaled 
modernity in late 19th-century Paris. There are always some objects 
that seem eternally modern, that are premodern signs of modernity: 
Cycladic idols and African sculpture, certain Japanese screens, Amish 
quilts and Navajo weaving. Experience Changes Personal Definitions 
Beyond this there is a more personal, poetic idea of the modern that 
is constantly affected by one's interests and experiences. Sometimes 
it moves around according to what exhibition is on view. Over the 
last two decades, exhibitions at the Met have enabled us to appreciate 
the modernity not only of Degas but also of Fragonard and Goya. And 
finally, there is the modern that is to be found within, an especially 
important process for artists. For Philip Guston, Piero della Francesca 
was the beginning of the modern; for Myron Stout, it was classical 
Greek sculpture. Donald Judd probably would have cited the paintings 
of Malevich and Navajo weavings, and Alex Katz has frequently pointed 
to ancient Egyptian art. Ultimately it is necessary to hold in mind 
several definitions of ``modern'' at once, uppercase and lowercase, 
personal and historical, and to see that it is both increasingly fixed 
in some ways and in others more in flux than ever. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>