<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981027.0426 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Gov. George Pataki continues to hold a 2-to-1 lead over his Democratic 
challenger, Peter Vallone, but voters are paying scant attention to 
the race as Election Day draws near, according to a statewide New 
York Times/CBS News poll. The Republican governor is favored by 56 
percent of likely voters, while Vallone, the speaker of the New York 
City Council, is supported by 21 percent, according to the poll. Pataki's 
standing among voters has barely changed since early this month, when 
a similar poll found him favored by 54 percent of the voters and Vallone 
by 24 percent. Thomas Golisano, the Independence Party candidate, 
was favored by 9 percent of respondents in the new poll, and Lt. Gov. 
Betsy McCaughey Ross, the Liberal Party candidate, was supported by 
4 percent. The new poll is based on telephone interviews conducted 
from Oct. 21 through Oct. 25 with 1,235 registered voters, of whom 
the pollsters considered 639 likely to vote. The poll has a margin 
of sampling error of plus or minus four percentage points. The poll 
shows a wide lead for Carl McCall, the state comptroller, giving him 
a 42 percentage-point lead over his Republican challenger, Bruce Blakeman. 
The margin between McCall and Blakeman has increased since the earlier 
poll, which was conducted the first week in October. Sixty percent 
favored the incumbent this time, 18 percent favored the challenger 
and 19 percent remained undecided. The new poll also found that Dennis 
Vacco, the state attorney general, was now leading his Democratic 
challenger, Eliot Spitzer, by a margin exceeding the poll's margin 
or error. Vacco is now favored by 48 percent of the voters, Spitzer 
is supported by 36 percent, and 14 percent are undecided, according 
to the poll. Those figures changed from a Times/CBS News poll conducted 
in the first week in October, which found Vacco favored by 43 percent 
of voters and Spitzer by 41 percent, a gap that for polling purposes 
is the equivalent of a tie. While most respondents said they knew 
whom they would support for governor, the poll found a widespread 
lack of interest in the race. Only 21 percent of respondents said 
they were paying a lot of attention, roughly the same number as in 
the poll earlier this month. About 50 percent of respondents said 
they were only giving some attention to the race, and 24 percent said 
they were not paying much attention. Sixty percent described the race 
between Pataki and Vallone as dull, and only 35 percent called it 
interesting. In contrast, 53 percent of respondents described the 
closely contested Senate race between Sen. Alfonse D'Amato and Rep. 
Charles Schumer as interesting. The poll suggests that Vallone is 
still not making a strong impression on voters. A third of the respondents 
said they thought he was spending more time attacking Pataki, while 
a third said he was spending more time explaining what he would do 
if elected. The remaining 30 percent of the respondents were unable 
to say one way or the other. Two-thirds of the respondents had not 
seen or heard about Vallone's television commercial defending President 
Clinton, which the Vallone campaign hoped would draw attention to 
the candidate. And with Election Day approaching, 71 percent of voters 
were unable to say whether their overall opinion of him was favorable 
or unfavorable. The candidates for comptroller and attorney general 
are also still struggling for name recognition, the poll found. Seventy-three 
percent of the respondents said they did not know enough about Vacco 
to say whether their opinion of him was favorable or unfavorable, 
and 79 percent said they could not form such an opinion of Spitzer. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>