<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981027.0383 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
The meetings have not been billed emergency sessions, but with the 
National Basketball Association scheduled to announce the cancellation 
of more games today, negotiations between owners and players may go 
a long toward settling the nearly fourth-month-old labor impasse and 
salvaging the season. Commissioner David Stern and representatives 
from all 29 teams will meet with Michael Jordan, Patrick Ewing and 
as many as 200 of their peers Wednesday at a midtown Manhattan hotel. 
The meeting represents the best hope for the two sides to try to work 
out a revenue-sharing plan. With three bargaining sessions in the 
past four days, there are clear signs that both sides are beginning 
to compromise. As the financial losses mount _ player losses in salary 
may reach $200 million if cancellations are announced Wednesday _ 
much of the rhetoric and posturing has begun to subside. The perception 
among many players is that the owners were merely waiting for the 
players to lose paychecks before genuinely exploring a deal. With 
an estimated 200 players standing firm for the moment, the question 
now is whether the two sides can agree on numbers in time to avert 
losing the season. The owners have pulled back on their insistence 
on a hard salary cap, while the players have offered alternatives 
to help the owners bring salaries in line with the league's revenue 
growth. Stern and his deputy commissioner, Russ Granik, have indicated 
that an agreement needs to be in hand by early December to prevent 
losing the entire season. The league lost its first two weeks on Oct. 
13, the first time games were canceled in the NBA's 52-year history. 
Barring a quick settlement, the rest of the November schedule _ and 
probably some December games _ will most likely be canceled Wednesday. 
The union's executive director, Billy Hunter, and Ewing, its president, 
along with other players met with NBA legal representatives Tuesday 
at a Manhattan law firm for four hours. The two sides discussed non-economic 
issues relating to player conduct, including discipline and adding 
marijuana and performance-enhancing drugs to the list of banned substances. 
Meanwhile, the owners' labor relations committee held its own meetings 
and was apprised of developments from Monday night's marathon bargaining 
session in New York. Like two armies massing and moving toward the 
front, the two parties fortified their positions Tuesday. ``The good 
news is we're talking and we seem to be talking about the same thing,'' 
said Danny Schayes, a member of the union's executive committee. ``The 
most important economic things are the things we're farthest away 
on. But there is some hope.'' Schayes was one of 13 players who took 
part in Monday night's talks, a session that several participants 
said was the most productive since the lockout began July 1. The key 
development seemed to be an agreement on an economic framework that 
could be used to divide revenue and could lead to the signing of a 
new collective bargaining agreement, a precursor for starting the 
season. If approved, it would entail a hybrid from proposals on both 
sides. For the first two years of the deal, a luxury tax would be 
employed to bring salaries in line with revenue growth. The next two 
years would involve the league's plan for an escrow fund. If total 
revenue devoted to salaries had not dropped to 52 percent, enough 
of that escrow money would be returned to the owners to hit the league's 
targeted percentages _ 52 percent in the 2000-01 season, 50 percent 
in 2001-02 and 48 percent in 2002-03. While the players have said 
the escrow fund amounts to a hard salary cap _ which they said they 
will not accept _ the compromises being discussed Monday night would 
not involve all escrow returned to the owners. Instead, the sides 
discussed possibly instituting the cap-tightening mechanisms the union 
has offered in its previous proposals. There are reservations on both 
sides over whether the system would work, but the fact that the owners 
and players seem to be closing in on a concept represented initial 
hope that the season could begin before next year. After the league's 
board of governors convenes at 8:30 a.m. Tuesday, nearly half the 
league's 400-plus players are expected to file into a midtown hotel 
for their own meetings. Both sides plan to face off sometime in the 
afternoon. Aside from the executive committee, most players will observe 
the talks rather than participating directly in the bargaining. Tuesday's 
meeting on player-conduct issues was the first time both sides talked 
at length about issues other than economics since late last spring. 
The players, as concerned as the league about the image problems of 
some of their peers, have made several concessions on behavioral matters. 
Few specifics were agreed on, however. ``We talked about a lot of 
issues, but I can't say we made a lot of progress,'' said Jeffrey 
Mishkin, the league's chief legal counsel. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>