<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981027.0147 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Like so many other culinary pursuits, making a hamburger that approaches 
the Platonic ideal means starting from scratch: the juiciest, most 
flavorful burgers begin with meat that you grind yourself. Admittedly, 
this is a fair amount of work for what is, after all, casual food. 
On the other hand, it is relatively easy to do, and there are real 
advantages: the meat will be fresher, since you can select the cut 
and grind the meat just before cooking (juices congeal, and flavor 
fades as the meat sits). And you can learn exactly which texture pleases 
you most through experimentation. The primary factors here are the 
cut of beef and the grinding tool. The most important considerations 
about the cut are fat content and flavor. You don't want a burger 
that drips fat when you squeeze it, but neither do you want a dust-dry 
patty. So, the trick is to choose a cut with just enough fat to cook 
up into a burger that is moist but not greasy. As for flavor, the 
requirement is obvious; this totemic beef dish cries out for rich, 
deep beefy flavor. The cut that best meets both of these criteria 
is the chuck, which is basically the forequarter of the cow. Meat 
from the chuck has about 20 percent fat, which is just the right amount 
to create a perfectly juicy burger. Since it is relatively tough, 
chuck is also more flavorful than more tender sections of the cow, 
like the sirloin or tenderloin. And since grinding severs the connective 
tissues that cause chuck to be tough, that characteristic is a nonissue. 
The best tool for grinding meat is the old-fashioned one: a silver-painted 
steel grinder like the one my grandmother used to bring out and clamp 
onto her wooden kitchen table when it was burger time. Forcing the 
meat through one of these grinders gives it a pleasantly smooth texture 
and integrates the fat and the lean particularly well. But if you 
like a chunkier texture, you may prefer using a food processor, which 
also does the job with considerably less effort. The disadvantage 
of the food processor is that it can quickly turn your meat to mush. 
To avoid this, it is best to have the beef semifrozen and to pay close 
attention when grinding. To grind enough meat for four burgers, cut 
about one and a half pounds of chuck into one-inch chunks, using a 
very sharp knife. Place the chunks in a single layer on a tray or 
baking sheet, and put it in the freezer for at least 30 minutes but 
no more than an hour. Then, working with a third of the meat at a 
time, place the chunks in a food processor fitted with a steel blade, 
and pulse about a dozen times. At this point, the meat should be just 
slightly more coarsely ground than store-bought hamburger. It should 
still have distinct chunks, but they should be small enough so that 
they clump together. (You can stop pulsing as soon as the meat begins 
to clump. After that, more whirs will make it a finer texture; it's 
a matter of preference.) This process also works perfectly well for 
making burgers from other meats. For turkey burgers, use boneless, 
skinless thighs, which are higher in fat than the breast and more 
flavorful. The best cut for ground lamb or pork is the shoulder. This 
is most readily available as lamb shoulder chops and as the pork cut 
called Boston butt. To form a patty that keeps its shape but is not 
a hard, compacted mass, I like the method devised by Pam Anderson, 
the author of ``The Perfect Recipe'' (Houghton Mifflin, 1998). Take 
a handful of the meat, form it into a ball by tossing it back and 
forth between cupped hands, and then, while holding the patty in one 
hand, push it gently into a patty shape with the tips of your fingers. 
When it comes to cooking a burger, grilling over a hot fire is the 
ideal way to get a crisp exterior and moist, juicy interior. But the 
next best option is a cast-iron pan. Let the pan sit over medium-high 
heat for two to three minutes to get good and hot, and then put the 
burgers in to cook with no additional fat. An inch-thick patty takes 
about four minutes a side for medium to medium rare. For a cheeseburger, 
put a standard hard cheese like cheddar on top about two minutes before 
the burger is done; softer cheese like mozzarella can be added after 
the burger has been removed from the pan. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>