<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981027.0433 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Turning to his protege for help at a critical juncture in his re-election 
campaign, Sen. Alfonse D'Amato barnstormed across New York state with 
Gov. George Pataki on Tuesday, seeking to take advantage of the governor's 
high ratings in the polls and of his large campaign war chest. As 
D'Amato toured five cities from Long Island to Lake Erie, his Democratic 
challenger, Rep. Charles Schumer, campaigned in Westchester County 
and Manhattan with Hillary Rodham Clinton, who assailed the three-term 
Republican senator as an arch-conservative who had voted to cut federal 
spending on programs for the poor and the elderly. The candidates' 
use of high-profile surrogates to help kick off their final week of 
campaigning reflected their concerns that turnout Nov. 3 might be 
anemic among some of their core constituencies _ for Schumer, among 
women, and for D'Amato, among upstate and suburban Republicans. For 
D'Amato, Tuesday's tour represented something of a role reversal from 
1994, when he helped guide Pataki, then an unknown state senator, 
to an upset victory over Gov. Mario Cuomo. Tuesday, it was the governor 
who played the master of ceremonies and lead cheerleader for the senator, 
in splashy events upstate in Albany, Rochester, Niagara Falls and 
Buffalo and in the Nassau County town of Hicksville. At every stop, 
Pataki hailed D'Amato as ``an excellent partner in Washington'' who 
had helped direct federal money to New York for hospitals, mass transit, 
disaster relief and several local projects. D'Amato continued his 
assault on Schumer for missing votes in Congress this year, even as 
he was coming under fire for missing votes himself in 1980 when, as 
presiding supervisor of Hempstead Township on Long Island, he first 
ran for Senate. ``I think more important than making speeches and 
campaigning and racing around to say, `Look at me,' is to go to work,'' 
D'Amato told a crowd of workers outside the Super Steel factory in 
Schenectady. ``Just like you.'' At a fund-raiser at Tavern on the 
Green in Manhattan, Mrs. Clinton and Schumer accused D'Amato of being 
a comrade-in-arms with conservative Republicans led by House Speaker 
Newt Gingrich, voting to cut Social Security and Medicare, as well 
as to outlaw abortion. ``He was willing to undermine the Older Americans 
Act, Meals on Wheels, to literally take food out of the mouths of 
people living slightly above poverty thanks to Social Security, to 
finance a tax cut for the wealthiest of Americans,'' Mrs. Clinton 
said of D'Amato. ``If you don't vote,'' she added, ``you are in a 
sense abdicating that choice to others who have a very different agenda.'' 
At the fund-raiser, which was held by gay Democrats and raised $200,000, 
Mrs. Clinton and Schumer criticized conservative Republicans for blocking 
passage of legislation that would increase penalties for hate crimes. 
Both invoked two recent killings, those of a gay college student in 
Wyoming and a Buffalo doctor who performed abortions, as evidence 
of the need for such legislation. ``Certainly Matthew Shepard's murder 
and Dr. Barnett Slepian's murder, just in the last few days, has shocked 
the nation and made clear once again that there is no room for intolerance 
in our country,'' Mrs. Clinton said. ``There is no place for hate 
crimes, those who advocate them, those who tolerate them and those 
who commit them.'' Schumer attacked D'Amato for opposing abortion 
and for voting against legislation to protect abortion clinics from 
violent protesters. The congressman said that D'Amato's staunch anti-abortion 
position placed him well outside the mainstream of New York voters. 
``How can you represent New York and vote against the most basic protections 
for those who work in clinics?'' Schumer said. ``The answer is simple: 
You can't.'' In a visit to a New Rochelle senior center earlier, Schumer 
and Mrs. Clinton sought to exploit Gingrich's low approval ratings 
in New York by hammering at D'Amato for voting for provisions of Gingrich's 
Contract With America that reduced federal spending on Social Security 
and Medicare. ``Here I was leading the fight'' against the contract, 
Schumer said. ``Where was Al D'Amato? Well, when Al D'Amato had to 
choose between Newt Gingrich and seniors, he chose Newt Gingrich. 
Al D'Amato voted to cut Medicare 12 times.'' D'Amato and Pataki's 
events Tuesday kicked off four days of joint campaigning that will 
have them crisscrossing the state in a swirl of rallies and news conferences. 
The tour provides D'Amato with help from Pataki's large campaign coffers, 
because the governor, who is also running for re-election but is widely 
thought to have a comfortable lead, can foot much of the bill for 
things like hotel rooms, loudspeakers, jets and cars. It was evident 
that the tour was mainly for D'Amato's benefit. Pataki spent half 
of each of his speeches praising D'Amato. The news releases handed 
out at each event focused solely on what D'Amato had done for each 
region he visited. And the senator himself, while offering praise 
for Pataki's stewardship of the state, spoke almost exclusively about 
himself. At each stop, D'Amato talked of fighting in Washington to 
increase financing for mass transit and to pass legislation protecting 
credit unions. He also said that he saved the state and its hospitals 
$2 billion with legislation that exempted New York from certain Medicaid 
rules, even though it was never clear that the federal government 
was going to enforce those rules. At his events in Schenectady and 
Rochester, D'Amato spoke before crowds of blue-collar workers _ people 
his advisers clearly thought would be angered about Schumer's missed 
votes. In Buffalo and Rochester, he also mentioned individuals in 
the crowd whom he had helped, including a mother whose children had 
been taken by her former husband and a family who had had trouble 
qualifying for federal aid for their disabled child. ``This is one 
of the potholes I have the privilege to repair,'' D'Amato said, introducing 
the Buffalo mother he had helped reunite with her children. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>