<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981027.0366 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
The New York Times said in an editorial on Wednesday, Oct. 28: It 
took nearly 75 years for the United States to enact laws protecting 
elections from the corrupting influence of campaign contributions. 
But it has taken only four years to eviscerate those reforms. The 
wanton fund-raising this year by both parties, especially the Republicans, 
has returned the nation to the system prevailing at the turn of the 
last century, when businesses and special interests bankrolled presidential 
and congressional campaigns. This cannot be what Americans want. The 
instrument for undoing many decades of reform is the use of unregulated 
``soft money'' from corporations, unions and rich donors for so-called 
``issue ads'' on television and radio. Attorney General Janet Reno 
has ordered an inquiry into whether President Clinton's direct involvement 
in such maneuvers was aimed at illegally circumventing the regular 
spending limits on his 1996 campaign. But this year, while Republicans 
are pushing for a special prosecutor, they do not want to live by 
the limits any more than Clinton did. As a result, according to a 
report by Jill Abramson of The New York Times, House Republican leaders 
will be funneling $20 million in soft money into 60 congressional 
districts in 30 states, Senate Republican leaders are channeling at 
least $6 million, and Senate and House Democrats are sending at least 
$6 million. Since 1907, it has been against the law for corporations 
to contribute directly to campaigns. Since 1947 it has been against 
the law for unions to do so. Since 1974 there have been strict limits 
on contributions by individuals and political action committees. But 
these curbs have all been rendered meaningless by the soft-money evasion. 
In a perverse application of this subterfuge, Sen. Mitch McConnell 
of Kentucky, the Republican fund-raiser in chief, is using his power 
over soft money to punish candidates who dared speak up for campaign 
finance reform. In Wisconsin, Senator Russell Feingold, a co-sponsor 
of reform legislation, faces a tough re-election challenge because 
of a flood of attack ads on abortion, taxes and other issues, paid 
for by the Senate Republican fund-raising arm. So great is McConnell's 
determination to perpetuate a corrupt system, he is actually withholding 
campaign money from the Republican Senate candidate in Washington, 
Rep. Linda Smith, who is running a closely fought race against the 
incumbent, Patty Murray. Ms. Smith has stood for campaign reform throughout 
her career. That McConnell would withhold money from her suggests 
that he is more interested in killing reform than in electing Republicans. 
The soft money raised by McConnell has come heavily from interests 
affected by legislation before Congress, such as the tobacco, banking, 
energy and mining industries. Both parties assert that because the 
``issue ads'' never directly tell viewers to vote for or against anyone, 
they need not be governed by longtime election laws. But that contention 
is absurd, since these ads use the same images and words of the regular 
campaign ads, and they are targeted to specific races that the parties 
think they can win. The Federal Election Commission and the Justice 
Department need to declare that the soft-money gambit is an illegal 
circumvention of the election laws. The next Congress has no higher 
priority than closing the loophole and enacting genuine reform in 
the tradition of what Americans have demanded since the dawn of the 
modern political era. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>