<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981027.0286 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Gerhard Schroeder, a Social Democrat, became Germany's seventh postwar 
chancellor Tuesday, the first member of his party to lead the country 
since unification in 1990. In an emotional session, Parliament voted 
351-287 to elect Schroeder, a pragmatist who has risen to power without 
revealing his political convictions with any great precision. There 
were 27 abstentions, one invalid vote, and three absent deputies in 
the 669-seat lower house. Outgoing Chancellor Helmut Kohl, 68, who 
has governed for 16 years, immediately rose from his chair and shook 
Schroeder's hand. Several members of the environmentalist Green Party, 
which is joining the government for the first time, embraced the new 
chancellor, who is generally big on bear hugs and low on formality. 
The official transition from the father of German unification to the 
first representative of a postwar generation to hold power came exactly 
one month after Schroeder swept to victory in an election that showed 
a strong desire for change in Europe's most powerful state. But the 
exact direction in which Schroeder, 54, will lead his untried coalition 
with the Greens remains uncertain, clouded by apparent differences 
over economic policy between the chancellor and his forceful finance 
minister, Oskar Lafontaine, who also holds the pivotal post of Social 
Democratic Party chairman. For this reason, the meaning of ``social 
democracy'' in a Germany racked by 10 percent unemployment remains 
deeply uncertain even as Schroeder assumes the august mantle of the 
two postwar Social Democratic chancellors _ Willy Brandt and Helmut 
Schmidt. Brandt stands for Ostpolitik _ the fruitful opening to the 
communist east _ in the German memory, and Schmidt for a resolute 
style of government that consolidated Germany's position as a Western 
industrial power. But as the Berlin newspaper Tagesspiegel asked Tuesday, 
``What will Gerhard Schroeder stand for one day?'' Schroeder and Lafontaine, 
seated next to each other, embraced warmly _ almost demonstratively 
_ after the vote, in which Schroeder gained 6 more ballots than the 
combined 345 seats that the Social Democrats and Greens hold. But 
all is not sunshine between the two men. ``There is a very real tension 
there,'' said Lutz Erbring, a political scientist. ``They both know 
that the tension has to be kept under wraps to avoid a disaster, and 
they may succeed in doing that, but it exists.'' Lafontaine's push 
to close tax loopholes for big corporations, his suggestions that 
the fight against unemployment may be as important as that against 
inflation, his invective against the ``casino'' of international finance, 
and his determination to close the gap between rich and poor have 
already angered the very businessmen whom Schroeder sought to cultivate 
with his slogan of the New Middle. The new chancellor, who sat on 
the board of Volkswagen in his former post as premier of the state 
of Lower Saxony and sought during the election campaign to portray 
himself as friendly to business, has played down insistent talk of 
differences, but the German press has delighted in calling Lafontaine 
``the red shadow'' of Schroeder. ``After all the talk of pragmatism, 
we are astonished and disillusioned by the government program, which 
will not help competitiveness or job creation,'' said Guenter Albrecht, 
the chief economist for the Association of German Industry. ``Industry 
is very angry, after believing that its tax burden would be substantially 
cut.'' Although the new government has proposed some corporate tax 
cuts by the year 2002, most of the planned reduction will come at 
the end of that period while the immediate closing of loopholes will 
increase the tax burden on major companies in the short term. The 
fact is, however, that, in Germany as in many western countries, the 
rich have generally been getting richer in recent years and the poor 
poorer, and Lafontaine knows that he is tapping into a potentially 
vast pool of support with his talk of growing social injustice. In 
the end, both Schroeder and Lafontaine will depend on cooperation 
from industry in perhaps their most critical struggle _ an attempt 
to create jobs for the more than 4 million unemployed in Germany. 
They have proposed an Alliance for Jobs under which employers and 
trade unions would agree on new means to fight unemployment, including 
innovative forms of part-time work. But some industry leaders have 
expressed skepticism over these plans in the light of Schroeder's 
program. The new chancellor has, however, already shown that he can 
sway his partners to discard ideological principle for practical measures. 
His foreign minister, Joschka Fischer, a Green, approved the potential 
use of NATO force in Kosovo earlier this month, despite grave misgivings 
in his party over the legality of the measure and despite the fact 
that a strong pacifist current still exists among his colleagues. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>