<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981027.0194 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Great cooks usually start at the bottom, and they start very young, 
learning classic kitchen techniques honed over centuries. Not Raymond 
Blanc. At 48, he is one of Britain's most honored chefs. Sybarites 
from far and wide beat a path to the door of Le Manoir aux Quat' Saisons, 
his luscious, recently expanded and renovated hotel and restaurant 
near Oxford. But he started late, at 21, as a commis debrasseur _ 
an apprentice busboy, a waiter-in-waiting, clearing tables _ not as 
a trainee cook. A slight, tightly-wound man whose very being seems 
to jangle as he talks, Blanc fell in love with good food at his mother's 
table in a village near Besancon, in the Jura Mountains of eastern 
France. He fell in love with great food when his parents took him 
to the Palais de la Biere, then Besancon's best restaurant, and introduced 
him to flamed sea bass and truffled capon. ``I knew from that moment 
that I wanted to be a chef,'' he said recently. ``I had no experience, 
obviously. I had worked as a nurse, in a leukemia ward, where young 
people came to die, and I had worked for my father, who was a watchmaker. 
But I went to see the chef anyway and told him: `You must take me. 
One day I'll be a great chef.' He turned and walked from the room.'' 
The next day, the young Blanc went back. The chef told him he was 
too old to learn to cook, but offered the busboy job instead. ``I 
took it, of course,'' Blanc continued, ``and I worked at it. It was 
a tough old school. They called us by numbers, not by name. But I 
still longed to cook, so I began experimenting with sauces, and when 
I got one I liked, I had the nerve to show it to the chef. He threw 
a pot at me. ``It broke my jaw.'' Eventually, Blanc landed here. A 
pioneer in a country where accomplished chefs were once as rare as 
tulips in winter, he built a national reputation and trained many 
of the youngsters who have revolutionized British cooking in recent 
years. But gradually, the Manoir lost its edge. Attention shifted 
to London, and to chefs like Marco Pierre White and Gordon Ramsey. 
Blanc felt obliged to reinvent the menu, and reinforce the bottom 
line. In that respect, he is emblematic of creative chefs in the furiously 
competitive modern culinary world, for whom resilience is often a 
condition of survival. You would never guess all that if you came 
to Great Milton cold, without knowing Raymond Blanc's story. Everything 
is in its rightful place, and everything seems effortless, the way 
it must have seemed in stately Edwardian houses, if you were Upstairs. 
In summer, and in as much of spring and autumn as England's fickle 
weather permits, the evening starts with a drink in the garden, at 
little tables set on a broad, Wimbledon-perfect lawn, in the shade 
of a 100-year-old Atlantic cedar and a broad catalpa tree with beanlike 
pods dangling from it. On one side is the gabled manor house, built 
in the 15th century in Cotswold stone the color of ancient Sauternes. 
On the other is Blanc's new, 1.5-acre potager, with 75 varieties of 
vegetables, from the everyday (carrots and spinach) to the more obscure 
(purslane and salsify and white chard). Next to that is the herb garden, 
with a filmy canopy of butterflies. It is almost too terribly Merchant 
Ivory when the bells of the 13th-century church next door start ringing, 
calling the faithful to vespers, just as the waiter brings the Champagne. 
Almost, but not quite. Inside, in the 55-seat dining room and the 
attached 52-seat conservatory, Blanc has declared war on starchiness 
in general and chintz in particular. Fake ancestors no longer stare 
from the walls. This is no less than a reinvention of the English 
country-house restaurant. It is a place at home in the shrinking, 
informal world of today: pale walls, a few modern pictures, green 
plants everywhere and loose white covers on the chairs. Celebrating 
the disappearance of the old nostalgic look, Sir Terence Conran, the 
designer and restaurateur, wrote recently that the Manoir has become 
``a hymn of contemporary style.'' The informality of the decor communicates 
itself to the clients. Unawed by a formally dressed wait staff of 
48, including 7 sommeliers, people chatter happily in an assortment 
of languages and men quickly shed their jackets. ``Isn't it nice?'' 
my wife, Betsey, asked after we had settled in. ``The place hums. 
There's none of that dismal whispering and twittering you get in a 
lot of country houses, and no raucous, cocky New York talk, either.'' 
Blanc has rethought the food as well, with what the restaurant critic 
Matthew Fort recently described in The Guardian as ``quite stunning 
and happy results.'' Like many chefs, Blanc, who began as an apostle 
of classically rich cuisine, has caught the Asian culinary bug. He 
served us an amazing appetizer of roasted baby mackerel, marinated 
eel and remarkably tender octopus, embellished with pickled ginger, 
daikon radish, azuki beans and glass noodles. It was an instant trip 
to Tokyo, full of the haunting, elusive flavors that distinguish kaiseki 
cooking, by way of London's working-class East End, where jellied 
eels have been a staple for generations. A second starter was Italo-Chinese, 
I guess you could say, in its inspiration. A crab mousse that tasted 
really crabby, not like the crab-flavored cream you sometimes encounter, 
had been stuffed into a zucchini flower; that was steamed briefly 
and served with a ginger sauce. It evaporated on the tongue, reminding 
me of an intensely flavored tomato sherbet that Blanc once concocted 
to serve with a lobster salad. When the chef offered to recreate a 
dish he invented some years ago for a luncheon of the Club des Cent, 
a French gastronomic society, I agreed in a nanosecond, because it 
involves the kind of blessed excess that has been endangered by the 
pointillists of nouvelle cuisine and the cholesterol cops. Betsey, 
who has cornered the market on restraint in our family, ordered a 
fricassee of chicken (in this case a bird from the Landes in southwest 
France), with a sauce made of morels and yellow Jura wine. It is a 
classic of the Franche-Comte, Blanc's home region, and he did it proud. 
Other main courses sounded equally tempting _ a braised turbot fillet 
served with cockles and fresh pasta, for example, and a guinea fowl 
cooked on a spit, served with a verbena-flavored jus. The French, 
English and Irish cheeses were exemplary. To finish, I selflessly 
downed a few bites of pistachio souffle, flawlessly executed and aptly 
matched with cocoa sorbet. It was a grown-up version of my favorite 
ice cream cone, pistachio and bitter chocolate. When I asked later 
about the eclecticism of his cooking, Blanc told me that he found 
himself incorporating Chinese, Japanese and Italian influences into 
his menus, and cooking peasant dishes as well as haute cuisine. ``I 
don't really have any one style,'' he said. ``Because I've lived most 
of my professional life outside France, I don't feel obliged to stick 
to French ideas. Because I'm completely self-taught, I don't find 
myself in an Escoffier straitjacket. But I try to use a new spice 
or new leaf to enrich tradition, not overthrow it.'' Alain Desenclos, 
the longtime maitre d'hotel, a droll, cosmopolitan Parisian who worked 
at the Elysee Palace for Charles de Gaulle, built the Manoir's wine 
list, a weighty document that lists the treasures of Burgundy and 
Bordeaux among its 1,000 entries. The blockbusters are not there merely 
for show. One night last summer, Desenclos said, before the stock 
market swooned, four brokers casually spent $3,500 on old Haut Brion 
and Lafite. But give Desenclos a chance and he will educate you and 
save you money at the same time. For us he chose a lean chardonnay 
made by Fritz Wieninger near Vienna that went swimmingly with the 
Asian flavors of our first course, and a burly Sardinian red made 
from grenache grapes, which are used for blending in the Rhone valley. 
For a chunk of Roquefort cheese, he came up with a delectable sweet 
wine, again from Austria, where wine has made enormous strides in 
the last decade _ Willi Opitz's 1995 pinot gris trockenbeerenauslese. 
You have every incentive to save a dollar or two on wine, to compensate 
for food prices verging on the ruinous. The set menu costs $115, without 
wine and service charge. A la carte, first courses range from $35 
to $50, main courses from $50 to $65. The set lunch is a relative 
bargain at $55. There are big bills to pay. The staff of 145 people 
doesn't come cheap, of course. The gardens don't weed themselves. 
The raw materials, like prime beef from the pampered Scottish herds 
of the Duke of Buccleuch, cost a pretty penny. And to calm the villagers, 
who complain about cooking odors, Blanc has installed a $500,000 room-size 
ventilation system, which, he said, ``pulls the smells out of the 
kitchen, breaks the molecules down and throws them 200 yards in the 
air, where they disperse.'' It looks like the power plant for a destroyer. 
You will meet a new, calmer Raymond Blanc if you visit the Manoir. 
Things had to change. Since 1987, he has undergone two divorces and 
two strokes, one large and one small; he seems fully recovered from 
both. ``I've been through the flames,'' he said. Blanc made his way 
to England in the early 1970s. He worked as a waiter at the Rose Revived 
pub, in Standlake, not far from Oxford, where he befriended the chef, 
a virtuoso with the can opener who was only too happy to let his new 
buddy cook all he liked. Eventually, Blanc took a job in Wiesbaden, 
hoping to learn German, and one day, just like the movies, a call 
came from the Rose Revived: the cook was sick, the No. 2 was sick; 
could Blanc step in? He could, he did, and it was not long before 
he and his new English wife, Jenny, had their own place in a mall 
in the Oxford suburbs, situated with unintentional irony next to the 
local office of Oxfam, a charity that ministers to the hungry hordes 
of the third world. People clamored for tables. The Manoir opened 
in 1984, with Eddie Kulikundis, a theatrical impressario, and Susan 
Hampshire, his wife, a London actress, among the investors. It was 
dazzling from the start, winning a Michelin star in its first year 
and a second in its second. At the same time, the Good Food Guide, 
Britain's most respected arbiter of restaurant quality, described 
Blanc as a chef of ``creativity, passion, subtlety, indeed genius.'' 
Five years ago, he bought out his partners with the help of Richard 
Branson, the Virgin tycoon, who holds a half interest in the Manoir. 
He created a new landscape, including a Japanese garden and water 
gardens. He doubled the size of the old kitchen and added new ones 
_ one for a cooking school, one for room service and a private dining 
room. A spa, to be operated with Givenchy, the French couture house, 
is on the way. Most important, Blanc built 8 more bedrooms, bringing 
the total to 27, including 3 opulent suites. It is bedrooms, not meals, 
that turn the biggest profit for the country restaurateur. With the 
new space, revenue from the bedrooms will rise from 40 percent to 
60 percent of the total. The bedrooms start at about $350; the suites 
at $720. One new room is in an old dovecote. Others are in a new wing 
built of old stone by the contractor who works on Oxford colleges, 
or in a reconstructed 17th-century stable block, which forms a square 
around a courtyard with an old chestnut at its center. Most have a 
boldly contemporary air, but one is Chinese in inspiration, with a 
bedroom paneled in dark wood, a veritable den of iniquity, and a private 
Asian garden. ``The idea is to create a Disneyland for adults,'' Blanc 
said, admiring a doorknob and stepping over a pile of lumber as workers 
were concluding their labors. ``Time stops for a while. Reality stops. 
You ignore the vulgar things in life.'' As for him, after three years 
out of the kitchen overseeing the expansion, he is back at the range 
as much as eight hours a day, happy as a bird. He doesn't say so _ 
that just isn't done _ but he is clearly shooting for a third star 
in the Michelin guide. Already, he has restored to the food the pristine 
clarity of flavor that made his name. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>