<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981027.0173 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
In Texas, the long winding road that leads to the ultimate hamburger 
ends in Amarillo, at a place called Arnold Burgers. There, in the 
state where beef is king and the hamburger its most perfect culinary 
expression, Arnold's delivers the goods in spectacular fashion. The 
restaurant's standard-issue hamburger, the Arnold Double Burger, requires 
two slices of cheese to cover a five-and-a-half-inch patty. Multiplied 
by two, that adds up to a pound an a half of meat per burger. ``We 
have a triple-meat, too,'' Gayla Arnold, the owner, said. That's a 
full faceful of beef. But for the total hamburger experience, the 
ground-beef equivalent of surround-sound, Arnold's makes a burger 
that feeds 12 to 18. More than this, a hamburger cannot do. What the 
croissant is to France, what goulash is to Hungary, what pickled herring 
is to Sweden, the hamburger is to Texas. It's a symbol, a necessity 
and a triumph, a part of the cultural patrimony so tightly woven into 
the fabric of Texas life that Texans themselves do not even remark 
on it until they are presented with the gray-tinged, underfurnished, 
suspiciously geometric hamburger that the rest of America lives with. 
``The biggest shock of my life was in New York, where they served 
me a hamburger with no lettuce and tomato,'' said Ann Criswell, the 
longtime food editor of The Houston Chronicle and a third-generation 
Texan. ``I thought that was so'' _ she searched for the right word 
and settled on ``primitive.'' Texans love beef, and when they order 
a hamburger, they expect to see a lot of it on their plate _ freshly 
ground, cooked right and tasting like meat, not soybeans. Cooked right 
_ and this is the key to the Texas burger _ means seared on a grill 
until it gets crisp on the outside while remaining juicy inside, even 
if the patty is extra thin, a popular Texas style. Thick or thin, 
the burger must be served on a bun that's toasted until the perimeter 
gets a nice crunch to it, and then piled high with lettuce, sliced 
tomatoes, pickles and raw onions. Mustard and mayonnaise go on the 
bun, but never ketchup. Texas, of course, claims that it invented 
the hamburger, sometime back in the 1880s. A historical marker in 
the town of Athens, about 60 miles southeast of Dallas, marks the 
spot where Fletcher Davis, the owner of a local cafe, first served 
fried patties between two slices of bread, garnished with a slice 
of Bermuda onion, pickles, mustard and mayonnaise. Local lore has 
it that Old Dave, as Davis was known, backed by a consortium of local 
businessmen, took his sandwich to the 1904 world's fair in St. Louis, 
where he set up a concession on the midway, called Old Dave's Hamburger 
Stand, and presented America with one of its most enduring culinary 
classics. It should not to be confused with the Hamburg steak served 
in fancy restaurants in the mid-19th century, which was a kind of 
Swedish meatball doused in sauce. The legend may be fact. A photograph 
of the stand exists, and a reporter from The New York Tribune wrote 
enthusiastically about the new sandwich, although he neglected to 
mention Old Dave. Making matters worse, he misinterpreted Old Dave's 
explanation of the fried potatoes that came with the burger. Davis 
said that he had learned to cook the fries from a friend in Paris, 
meaning Paris, Texas The reporter filed a story saying that the hamburgers 
were being served with ``French fried potatoes.'' Originator or not, 
Texas took the ball and ran with it. ``My theory is that before oil, 
cattle was the economic machine of Texas,'' said Robb Walsh, a Texan 
who writes a food column for Natural History magazine. ``The culture 
came out of the cattle, but the cattle were tough. Hamburger and chicken-fried 
steak became the way to eat Texas beef.'' Tender steaks came from 
Midwestern cattle, fattened on feed lots. The restless grazing cattle 
that roamed the range demanded radical grinding or pounding to make 
their meat edible. The hamburger put down deep roots all across the 
state, so deep that even the forces of modernization can't quite pull 
them up. Texans probably eat as many fast-food hamburgers as anyone 
else, just as Parisians (the French ones) put up with substandard 
baguettes, but there is a strong residual prejudice in favor of joints 
over chains. ``You're in trouble if the place looks too clean and 
nice, and there's a mom with her kids,'' said Michael R. Levy, the 
publisher of Texas Monthly magazine. This is not purely a matter of 
nostalgia. Texans know that a ramshackle shed off the side of some 
Godforsaken stretch of country road could very well be turning out 
a succulent beef burger tweaked with some roasted chili peppers, or 
smeared with a fiery salsa, or _ well, who knows? In Texas, the house 
of the hamburger has many mansions. At Kitok's, a 16-table establishment 
in Waco, customers come from as far as Dallas or Austin for the double-meat 
Liplocker with cheese, a no-nonsense production that features two 
thinnish, but not ultra-thin, hand-shaped patties seared to a nice 
crunch and dressed with just enough tomato, pickle, onion and lettuce 
to let the full meat flavor come through. Most customers order their 
Liplockers with Oriental fries, an imposing haystack of matchstick-thin 
vegetables dipped in tempura batter and deep-fried. The fries are 
an invention of the owner, a Korean woman named Kitok Moore. Tookie's 
Restaurant in Seabrook, near Houston, serves several idiosyncratic 
hamburgers, all of them memorable. Stomp's Ice House Special comes 
with a topping of picante sauce, chopped jalapeno peppers, chopped 
grilled onions, lettuce, tomato and mayonnaise. It is a glorious mess 
of a burger, but it is rivaled by the Squealer, which incorporates 
hickory-smoked bacon in the ground beef, and the 99, made with ground 
beef that has been sitting for a couple of days in a spicy wine marinade. 
Up the road, at the Goode Company Hamburgers and Taqueria in Houston, 
the truly superior burgers get a distinctive tang from cooking over 
mesquite and charcoal instead of the usual gas. In San Antonio, local 
pride coalesces around the beanburger, a standard Texas burger that 
has been jazzed up with refried pinto beans, melted cheese and crushed 
Fritos. It's a 1950s innovation that has generated its own variations, 
like beanburgers with refried black beans, or beanburgers with guacamole 
topping. Stoneleigh P, in Dallas, has taken the Texas hamburger about 
as up-market as it can go without looking like a dude. The house's 
signature burger, the Stoneleigh P, is a six-ounce patty served on 
a dome-shaped pumpernickel roll with lettuce, tomato, red onion, garlic 
mayonnaise and creole mustard. The patty comes from the B3R Ranch 
in the Texas Panhandle. The restaurant also sells a Rancho Deluxe, 
a full eight ounces of meat presented on an Italian rustica bun and 
coated with chipotle mayonnaise. Most places like to surround their 
burgers with an air of mystery, and some chefs seem honestly bemused 
at their own creations. ``I used to think it was the cook,'' said 
Paul Grubbs, the bartender at Adair's Saloon in Dallas. ``But the 
cook left, and the burgers still taste the same. I think it's just 
because we've got a good old grill _ that, and we cook them slow. 
It takes 20 minutes to cook a hamburger here.'' The Adair's burger 
is a serious candidate for the best burger in Texas. It is thick, 
pink in the center, juicy and flavorful. Aggressively seasoned with 
salt and pepper, it is served with a plump, shiny jalapeno pepper 
on top. The cult of the grill reaches an extreme at Al's Hamburgers 
in Arlington, near Fort Worth. Back in 1957, Al Matthews opened his 
first restaurant, a drive-in, where the thin-patty burgers were cooked 
on a 1947 vintage cast-iron grill. When the lease ran out on Al's 
in the early 1980s and a shopping-mall developer took over the sacred 
space that Al's had become (4,000 people attended Al's farewell party), 
Matthews took his grill with him, stored it and brought it out again 
when he opened a new place in 1987. It performed valiantly until it 
developed a serious crack a few years ago and had to be retired, whereupon 
Matthews hunted up some old replacements. ``Al will not cook on a 
new grill,'' his wife, Thelma, said. ``He wants it seasoned.'' A seasoned 
grill, most chefs agree, accumulates subtle flavors that the burgers 
pick up while they sizzle. Matthews, therefore, rubs his grill down 
gently, with steel wool and a little oil. ``I don't ever scrape it,'' 
he said. ``You see some people using a brick to clean one, but I don't 
do that.'' Mrs. Matthews, however, says the grill is overrated as 
a factor. Fresh ingredients count for a lot more. ``We use fresh ground 
chuck that is delivered every day, and we cook it well done and fast, 
searing it the way you would a sirloin.'' Al's used to serve burgers 
with a meat-to-fat ratio of 80-20 but, in a concession to health consciousness, 
it reluctantly switched to chuck that is 89 to 92 percent lean. The 
Matthewses do not use newfangled bun-toasting machines, preferring 
to put the buns on the grill and then transferring the bun tops to 
the patties in the final stages of cooking, so that they pick up the 
fragrant steam from the burgers. ``What you might think is grease 
from the burger is actually condensation,'' Mrs. Matthews said. Matthews, 
eyeing a customer's single-meat cheeseburger, shook his head and said: 
``You ordered the wrong one. The double cheeseburger is juicier and 
better flavored, although I can't tell you why.'' He speculated that 
it may have something to do with the juices dripping from the top 
patty and being absorbed by the second one. Gayla Arnold, of Arnold's, 
says she knows exactly why her hamburgers are good, but she can't 
quite bring herself to surrender the details. ``The meat has a certain 
grind on it that a local market does for us, and a local bakery does 
our big buns,'' she said. ``I don't like to say too much because a 
lot of local restaurants would like to copy our burgers.'' In any 
case, analysis can take you only so far in getting to the heart of 
the Texas hamburger. ``This is complex, like asking what makes Clinton 
tick,'' Levy, of Texas Monthly, said. ``It's about the variations 
in the bread, the accumulation of grease on the grill, the level of 
grime in the restaurant. It should be cooked in grease to the extent 
that when you get within 25 yards of the hamburger stand itself, your 
heart is getting angry.'' That kind of burger, artisanal and irregular, 
still thrives in Texas, and it can be found in all sorts of unexpected 
places, from gas stations to bowling alleys, like the Palace Lanes 
in southwest Houston or Showplace Lanes in north Austin, where the 
featured burger is a Double Striker. Kincaid's, in Fort Worth, which 
routinely turns up at the top of the state's best-burger lists, started 
out in 1946 as a grocery store. As a way to use up his leftover beef, 
Charles Kincaid, the owner, began grilling hamburgers. Before long, 
hamburger operations had prevailed. Patrons now step up and place 
their orders at what used to be the meat counter. The store's shelves 
were shortened and converted into stand-up eating counters. The same 
transformation may be taking place at Forget Me Nots, an antique store 
in Timpson, not far from the Louisiana border in east-central Texas. 
At the back of the store, Brenda MacKey, the owner, has wedged four 
tables and a counter into what used to be a back porch and now bears 
the name Back Porch Deli. There's nothing deli about it; it's pure 
Texas. When customers step up to the counter and order a cheeseburger, 
Ms. MacKey asks, ``You want that all the way?'' Something in her tone 
suggests that all the way is the only possible way to go, and that's 
how it turns out. Ten minutes later, after the outdoor grill has given 
forth a cloud of smoke and a ball of fire, the $3.89, all-the-way 
burger hits the plate, and it's a beauty: eight ounces of fresh beef 
sitting on an extra-wide toasted bun and fully loaded with lettuce, 
tomato, dill-pickle slices, raw onion rings, mustard and mayonnaise. 
Anywhere else in America, Ms. MacKey's all-the-way production would 
cause a sensation. In Texas, it's exactly what people expect. TEXAS 
BURGERS WITH CHIPOTLE MAYONNAISE Adapted from Stoneleigh P, Dallas 
Time: 30 minutes 2{ pounds ground Black Angus or other high-quality 
sirloin 6 large crusty buns, preferably Italian rustica buns, split 
horizontally 12 romaine lettuce leaves 6 slices ripe beefsteak tomato 
6 slices purple onion Chipotle Mayonnaise (see recipe). 1. Preheat 
grill, or place large well-seasoned skillet over medium-high heat. 
Preheat broiler. Divide ground beef into 6 equal portions, and shape 
into slightly flattened ovals. Sear burgers over high heat to brown, 
and crisp the exteriors while leaving interiors moist, about 2{ minutes 
a side for medium. 2. Put split buns on baking sheet. Place under 
broiler just long enough for surfaces to begin to color and have a 
slight crunch, about 15 seconds. Remove immediately, and place a split 
bun on each of six plates. 3. Top a side of each bun with a grilled 
burger. On each plate place 2 lettuce leaves, 1 slice tomato and 1 
slice onion. Top each burger with 1 spoonful Chipotle Mayonnaise, 
and pass additional mayonnaise separately. Yield: 6 servings. CHIPOTLE 
MAYONNAISE Time: 20 minutes For pico de gallo sauce: 1 large ripe 
tomato 1 teaspoon chopped jalapeno pepper 2 teaspoons chopped cilantro 
1 tablespoon finely chopped onion 1 chipotle pepper in adobo sauce 
For creole mayonnaise: 1 large egg Salt \ teaspoon cayenne pepper 
1 tablespoon lemon juice 1 garlic clove, minced 1 teaspoon Zatarain's 
or other creole mustard \ cup extra virgin olive oil 1 cup canola 
oil. 1. Prepare pico de gallo sauce: In container of blender, combine 
tomato, jalapeno, cilantro, onion and chipotle pepper. Process until 
finely chopped. Transfer to bowl, and set aside. 2. Prepare creole 
mayonnaise: Rinse and dry container of blender. Combine egg, pinch 
of salt, cayenne, lemon juice, garlic and mustard. Process briefly 
to mix well. With the blender at medium-low speed, remove small cap 
in lid, and very slowly add olive oil in a thin stream. Add canola 
oil in same way. When all oil is added and mixture has thickened, 
transfer mayonnaise to medium bowl. 3. To creole mayonnaise, add pico 
de gallo sauce to taste. The Chipotle Mayonnaise should have the piquant, 
smoky flavor of chipotle pepper; it may not be necessary to use all 
the sauce. Mix well, and adjust salt to taste. Refrigerate until serving. 
Yield: 3 cups. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>