<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981027.0295 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
The halls of Mexico's Congress are adorned these days with ``wanted'' 
posters that show a man whom many opposition lawmakers consider to 
be an unrepentant white-collar outlaw. He is Guillermo Ortiz Martinez, 
the former finance minister who heads the central bank and is one 
of the Mexican officials who command the most respect on Wall Street 
and among economic policy-makers in Washington. After seven months 
of tempestuous debate that has dominated Mexican politics, the parties 
in Congress have not agreed on much about financing a $62 billion 
bailout of the country's banks. But one point of accord among squabbling 
opposition groups is that they want Ortiz to be impeached. Late Monday, 
in separate initiatives, both the left-of-center Party of the Democratic 
Revolution and the conservative National Action Party presented formal 
petitions in Congress to begin impeachment proceedings. The opposition 
holds a majority in the lower house, the Chamber of Deputies, where 
the process started. The proposals for a political trial of Ortiz 
are largely symbolic, because they are virtually certain to be blocked 
in the Senate, where the governing party, the Institutional Revolutionary 
Party, remains in control. But the challenge to Ortiz shows how bitterly 
the dispute has polarized the discussion over the financial system, 
as the slide in world markets brings uncertainty and a slowdown to 
an essentially robust economy that Ortiz did much to build. Ortiz 
is the opposition's target because after becoming finance minister 
following a catastrophic devaluation of the peso, he stitched together 
the emergency program in 1995 that subsidized overwhelmed debtors 
and bought bad loans from failing banks. In exchange for the relief 
the banks' shareholders were required to make new injections of capital. 
The bailout has been widely credited with saving the wobbling banks 
from collapse. In March the government sought permission from Congress 
to refinance the bailout by including it in Mexico's overall public 
debt. The opposition balked, accusing the government of seeking to 
rescue high-living bankers at the expense of overburdened taxpayers. 
In general, opposition legislators are not accusing Ortiz of corruption. 
Rather they argue that he violated the Constitution by contracting 
billions of dollars of government debt to shore up the banks without 
having consulted the Congress. ``This is not a personal attack on 
Ortiz,'' said Santiago Creel Miranda, a National Action Party lawmaker 
who is chairman of the Chamber of Deputies subcommittee that would 
start an impeachment. ``But he was the one in charge at the time. 
Up to now accountability has always been a theory in Mexico. For the 
first time we want someone to be held responsible for a violation 
of the Constitution.'' The government has responded that the bailout 
was fully legal, based on a statute that allows certain kinds of government 
debt without legislative consent. ``I respect Congress' prerogative 
to take this action, but I am convinced that I acted fully within 
the law,'' Ortiz said in an interview. As a measure of Wall Street 
confidence in Ortiz, who also managed the successful $12.5 billion 
emergency loans that the Clinton administration made to Mexico, the 
Mexican stock market plummeted 2 percent in a few hours this summer 
when a rumor circulated that he was resigning from the central bank. 
U.S. Deputy Treasury Secretary Lawrence Summers said he had enjoyed 
a ``good working relationship'' with Ortiz. ``His ability to make 
very difficult judgments in very short time frames played an important 
role in Mexico's recovery,'' Summers said. Mexican law permits the 
impeachment drive even though Ortiz is no longer finance minister. 
Although President Ernesto Zedillo was the highest official to approve 
the bailout, the constitution bars his impeachment. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>