<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981027.0435 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
For months, Eliot Spitzer's political rivals in the race for state 
attorney general have attacked him by raising one essential question: 
Who has paid for his campaigns? After repeatedly contending that he 
alone paid his campaign bills this year and in 1994, Spitzer, the 
Democratic candidate, acknowledged in interviews with The New York 
Times this week that his father, a wealthy real-estate developer, 
has played an extensive role in helping to finance his campaigns. 
Throughout his campaigns, Spitzer created the impression that he wanted 
the job so badly that he was willing to spend millions in his own 
money to win it. It is not clear whether his father's involvement 
violated any campaign laws or will simply turn out to be a political 
embarrassment. Spitzer said, ``I would say that what I have done absolutely 
complies with the law, and that is the critical issue here.'' Asked 
why he had been less than forthright about his campaign finances, 
he said he wanted to spare his family more unwanted publicity. His 
comments came after The Times raised questions about his ability to 
pay for his campaign expenses, particularly the interest on $4.3 million 
in bank loans that he secured in 1994 to finance his first run for 
public office, in the Democratic primary for attorney general. When 
pressed on how he had been paying off the 1994 loans, Spitzer said 
for the first time that his father, Bernard, had lent him the money 
in late 1994 after the election to repay the bank. He provided copies 
of promissory notes and checks to demonstrate that he has been repaying 
his father, though at a much slower pace and lower rate than he would 
have had to repay the bank. He also made available copies of his income-tax 
returns for the last five years. After Spitzer discussed the financing 
of his campaigns in interviews over the last several days, his spokesman, 
Steven Goldstein, released a statement to news organizations Tuesday 
night acknowledging that Spitzer received loans from his father. Loans 
in 1994 and again this year have been essential to Spitzer's campaigns. 
A lawyer and former prosecutor with no previous experience in politics, 
Spitzer had no natural political base or core of financial supporters. 
He had to spend millions on advertising to make himself known to voters, 
and he financed both campaigns fundamentally from two sets of loans: 
$4.3 million in 1994 and $4.8 million this year, both from J.P. Morgan 
&AMP; Co., the New York banking company. But his political rivals, 
first in the Democratic primary race that he won last month and now 
in the general-election campaign against the Republican incumbent, 
Dennis Vacco, have questioned how Spitzer could afford the more than 
$9 million in loans. Opponents contended that his father had given 
him money in excess of the amounts permitted by campaign-finance laws. 
Spitzer said repeatedly that he alone was paying the debt and that 
he had used as collateral eight Manhattan apartments that he owns, 
which he said were worth between $7 million and $10 million. ``The 
income-tax returns which I have revealed all the way back for five 
years show more than enough income to pay the interest and necessary 
principal payments on these loans,'' he said in an Oct. 8 interview 
on New York 1 News. ``That is the end of the issue. It has been looked 
at. There is absolutely no issue here.'' In fact, Spitzer's tax returns 
from every year except 1997 showed that he could not afford to pay 
even the annual interest on the bank loans. Nor were there any ``necessary 
principal payments'' required either by the bank or his father over 
the last four years. The interest on the $4.3 million bank loan would 
have come to $344,000 a year, which is more than Spitzer's after-tax 
income in 1994, 1995 or 1996. It is unclear precisely how much he 
has been paying his father annually in interest on the loan that repaid 
the bank loans. He initially said last Thursday that he was paying 
``a couple hundred thousand'' a year to his father. But Spitzer then 
provided copies of 10 checks he had written over the last four years 
to his father, which indicated that he had paid an average of about 
$100,000 a year since 1994. Asked on Monday if that was the actual 
amount he had been paying in interest, Spitzer said, ``I don't deny 
the possibility.'' He said that in his rush to assemble documentation 
on his loan from his father, he was uncertain whether he had made 
copies of all the checks he had written and unsure of what the annual 
payments amounted to. ``I write checks when I get a note telling me 
that it is time to pay,'' he said. He said his payments to his father 
were lower than what he would have owed the bank because his father 
had deferred the principal payments and most of the interest. Spitzer 
contended that the loan from his father was proper and followed state 
campaign-finance laws and federal tax laws. State law permits Spitzer 
to spend as much of his own money as he wants but limits his father 
to campaign donations of about $260,000 a year. The Internal Revenue 
Service, he said, permits his father to defer the repayment of principal 
and some interest on the loans, provided that the interest rate is 
competitive. Otherwise, the loans could be construed as a gift for 
tax purposes. Some of the loans from his father call for 7.16 percent 
interest; others are for 7.69 percent. The bank loans averaged about 
8 percent. The favorable loan terms from Spitzer's father would probably 
not be construed as a campaign contribution, said Thomas Wilkey, executive 
director of the state Board of Elections, because the bank loans and 
the loan from his father were personal loans, which Spitzer then gave 
to his campaign. Wilkey said election officials could not rule on 
the loans' legality, because they have not investigated them, and 
would not say if the board would conduct an investigation. The state 
law, among the least restrictive in the country, lays out rules for 
loans given directly to campaigns but does not address personal loans 
to candidates, state election officials said. While insisting that 
he had been careful to follow the law, Spitzer also acknowledged that 
he had used an aggressive strategy of borrowing to raise millions 
of dollars for his campaigns. He has only just begun to repay the 
$4.8 million in bank loans this year, which would cost more than $380,000 
a year in interest. ``Have I been aggressive in the way I've done 
this?'' he said in an interview on Monday. ``You bet. But I'm up against 
a Republican Party that has been more than aggressive.'' Spitzer decried 
the current system of financing campaigns. ``Is the system one that 
absolutely has to be overhauled?'' he asked. ``Yes, and I've said 
so from Day One. But am I playing by the rules set up by the IRS and 
the state campaign-finance law? Absolutely. I do not feel that by 
taking advantage of the way the law is written, I am doing anything 
that is in any way improper.'' But Spitzer went to significant lengths 
over the last month to avoid having to reveal the financial help from 
his father. Specifically, he has repeatedly misstated the status of 
the 1994 bank loans when attacked by Vacco on his campaign finances. 
Beginning on Sept. 28, Vacco has accused Spitzer of having failed 
to disclose, in annual reports filed with the state attorney general's 
office, that he had used the eight apartments he owns at 200 Central 
Park South as collateral for the 1994 bank loans. Vacco said that 
Spitzer had either failed to file the required disclosure documents 
or that he had lied about the source of his campaign money. In response, 
Spitzer at first said that he was uncertain whether his lawyers had 
filed all the appropriate documents and that he would tell them to 
make sure to follow all proper procedures. Two weeks later, when asked 
about the issue by The Daily News, Spitzer said, ``It will be corrected, 
but it doesn't go to the issue of whose money it is.'' Vacco pressed 
the matter hard during a debate in a Long Island cable television 
studio last Friday. ``My answer to him is, humbug,'' Spitzer said. 
He said there was a promissory note that proved that he was spending 
his own money, and he accused Vacco of waging a campaign through news 
releases smearing Spitzer's father. What Spitzer did not say during 
that debate, or during a subsequent one on Sunday, was that the promissory 
notes for the 1994 loans were to his father, not to J.P. Morgan &AMP; 
Co. Spitzer also admitted that the reports on the cooperative apartments 
filed with the state had, in fact, been accurate: He did not need 
to notify the state that the apartments he owned were encumbered, 
because the 1994 bank loans for which they had served as collateral 
had been paid off. During the interview on Monday, Spitzer was asked 
why he had not spoken more accurately about the reports to the state 
and more candidly about how he was paying off the 1994 campaign debt. 
``Having been attacked and having had my father attacked by Dennis 
Vacco, it simply reached a point where I felt I had responded sufficiently,'' 
he said. ``I didn't wish my family to go through any more. I am confident 
that everything I have done is legal and proper. I felt that enough 
was enough.'' There is another noteworthy financial connection between 
Spitzer and his father, a review of his income tax returns for the 
last five years showed. Starting in May 1994, just as Spitzer was 
beginning his first statewide race, he has been paid about $200,000 
a year in consulting fees for managing his father's investments. In 
the last four years, this has been more than the wages he earned as 
a lawyer. In 1993, his adjusted gross income was $288,000; in 1994, 
$270,000; in 1995, $240,000; in 1996, $507,000, and in 1997, $1,007,000, 
of which half was in capital gains. The consulting fees clearly help 
Spitzer's personal finances, and thus make it easier for him to repay 
the loans by his father. Spitzer said that was not the purpose of 
the consulting arrangement, stating emphatically that he had worked 
hard to manage his father's investments and had earned the fees. He 
also said he began the work in 1994 because he had left a large Manhattan 
law firm to run for attorney general. ``I have spent an enormous amount 
of time managing a stock portfolio,'' he said. ``That income is well 
earned.'' ``I have worked long, long hours for my dad and for various 
businesses,'' Spitzer said. ``Look, I'm not saying that I am underpaid. 
But any effort to challenge the propriety of that fee is way off base.'' 
</TEXT>
</DOC>