<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981027.0146 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
If you ever doubted that people who shop in natural-foods stores are 
different from people who shop in convenional supermarkets, take a 
look at their yogurt-buying habits. While most Americans have decided 
they would rather have a little bit of fat in their yogurt, as well 
as in their cookies and potato chips, people who shop in markets where 
they can buy organic and additive-free foods still want fat-free. 
In natural-food markets sales of nonfat yogurt are up 3 percent, according 
to a survey by Spence Information Services, a marketing-research company 
for the natural-products industry; in conventional supermarkets, sales 
are down 1.5 percent. All the nonfat shoppers are missing, it seems, 
is the fat and the calories. A tasting of nine plain, nonfat yogurts, 
two low-fat yogurts and three full-fat varieties showed surprisingly 
little difference, though the whole-milk yogurts were a little creamier. 
The nine nonfat yogurts were from Brown Cow Farm (one in New York 
and two varieties from Brown Cow Farm of California), Butterworks 
Farm, Colombo, Dannon, Horizon Organic, Stonyfield Farm Organic and 
LaYogurt; the two low-fat ones were from Brown Cow of New York and 
Colombo, and the three full-fat brands were Brown Cow of New York, 
Dannon Organic and Stonyfield. The texture of plain, nonfat yogurts 
is generally firmer than the full-fat because of added pectin, a thickening 
agent. Butterworks Farm's yogurt was thinner than the others because 
it contains no pectin. The creamiest, and therefore the best, of the 
nonfat yogurts came from Brown Cow Farm of Newfield, N.Y., not to 
be confused with Brown Cow Farm of California. While all yogurts provide 
a significant source of calcium (in short supply in the American diet), 
plain, nonfat yogurt generally provides more calcium than full-fat, 
low-fat and flavored yogurts. One cup of the plain, nonfat yogurt 
contains 30 percent to 45 percent of the recommended daily intake. 
Full-fat and low-fat contain 25 percent to 35 percent. The great advantage 
of the nonfat, plain yogurt over low-fat or full-fat varieties is, 
of course, the levels of calories and fat. For example, a cup of Stonyfield's 
whole-milk yogurt has 180 calories and 10 grams of fat, while its 
nonfat counterpart has 100 calories and no fat. The difference in 
calories between Colombo nonfat and low-fat is not great: only 20. 
But the first has no fat while the second has 4 grams. All of the 
yogurts tested are made with live, active cultures of beneficial bacteria, 
and the role of these cultures in health is now better understood. 
By definition, yogurt must contain two cultures: Lactobacillus bulgaricus 
and Streptococcus thermophilus. Other cultures are often used, particularly 
L. acidophilus and bifidus. Stonyfield Farm, the largest maker of 
organic yogurt in the United States, has introduced two additional 
cultures: L. casei and L. reuteri. L. reuteri is the newest and, in 
terms of public health, the most interesting. Clinical tests on humans 
and animals have shown that L. reuteri provides some protection against 
certain harmful bacteria like E. coli 0157H:7 and salmonella. Kasi 
Reddy, the vice president for research and development at Stonyfield, 
says that one eight-ounce serving daily offers this health bonus. 
For people who do not want to know they are eating yogurt, there are 
many ways to slip it into the diet: as a substitute for mayonnaise, 
sour cream, milk or cream.The best way to find out how much yogurt 
you can use to replace a high-fat ingredient is to start with small 
amounts of each, increasing the amounts little by little until you 
find a ratio you like. In salads, a little mayonnaise adds body and 
flavor: a good ratio is twice as much yogurt as mayonnaise. If you 
are substituting for milk or buttermilk, you can substitute cup for 
cup. Yogurt can be used in cooking, though the beneficial effects 
of live cultures are destroyed by the heat. But the benefits of calcium 
remain the same, hot or cold. When yogurt is boiled, it separates. 
Adding a bit of cornstarch to the yogurt before it is cooked prevents 
separation. For each cup of yogurt, add one tablespoon of cornstarch. 
First mix the cornstarch with a little of the yogurt to make a smooth 
paste and stir into the remaining yogurt. With so little difference 
between nonfat and full-fat varieties of yogurt, it makes more sense 
to save those extra calories and grams of fat for occasional treats 
like sour cream and ice cream. There, the difference is noticeable. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>