<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981027.0425 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
By most ordinary reckoning, Parris Glendening should be a shoo-in 
as he seeks re-election as governor of Maryland. He is a moderate-to-liberal 
Democrat in one of the nation's most reliably Democratic states. He 
has presided over a state that has prospered more than most in the 
strong national economy. And he has been endorsed by the leading newspapers 
in the state. But Glendening is in the race of his life, an election 
that seems even closer than the one in 1994, when he won by fewer 
than 6,000 votes, or four-tenths of 1 percent, over the Republican 
candidate, Ellen Sauerbrey, who is his opponent again this year. With 
a week to go before the Nov. 3 election, Glendening is at a loss to 
explain why the race is so close, although some analysts suggest the 
reasons range from a subtle shift in the state's once staunchly liberal 
leaning to the governor's indecision over whether to embrace or shun 
President Clinton during the height of the Monica Lewinsky scandal. 
A Washington Post poll found that among people who say they are certain 
to vote, 50 percent favor Mrs. Sauerbrey and 49 percent Glendening, 
a statistical dead heat. ``We had the most bitter primary,'' the governor 
said at a campaign stop here in vote-rich Montgomery County, just 
outside Washington, as he searched for an explanation for the closeness 
of the race. ``We've taken on the tobacco lobby, the National Rifle 
Association, the casino and slot industry. Your enemies remember more 
than your friends do.'' But the issues he offered as reasons for his 
poor poll showing have been used successfully by candidates in states 
considered less liberal and less Democratic than Maryland. Mrs. Sauerbrey, 
on the other hand, has several possible explanations as to why she, 
a conservative Republican, is doing so well in the polls and has an 
excellent chance of being elected Maryland's first Republican governor 
in 32 years. ``The 1994 election showed that Maryland is not as liberal 
as everybody thought,'' Mrs. Sauerbrey said as she also campaigned 
in Montgomery County, which she does not expect to carry but where 
she hopes to reduce Glendening's majority. ``There has been a net 
gain for the Republican Party. Statistics at the Maryland Board of 
Elections confirm that. From August 1994 to last August, the Democrats 
increased their enrollment in the state to 1,459,760, a gain of 25,854. 
But the Republicans, starting with a smaller base, did better, rising 
to 767,391, an increase of 92,331. So the Republicans had a net gain 
of more than 66,000 over the Democrats. Eric Uslaner, a professor 
of government and politics at the University of Maryland, said Glendening 
had failed to build on his popularity because of some early decisions 
that were not popular throughout the state. One was state support 
for the construction of a new football stadium for the transplanted 
Cleveland Browns, now the Baltimore Ravens. It was partly financed 
by the state lottery and, Uslaner said: ``People thought that some 
of that money should have gone into education. It was especially opposed 
in Montgomery County.'' Uslaner was asked in an interview whether 
Glendening's seeming aloofness, verging on dullness, had contributed 
to his lack of a strengthened base. In its editorial endorsing the 
governor for re-election, The Baltimore Sun said politely, ``He is 
not charismatic.'' The Washington Post, which also endorsed him, said 
Glendening had a ``plodding personality.'' ``It's more than just dull,'' 
Uslaner said. ``He doesn't connect well with the voters. He was a 
professor. Some of us just don't make great political candidates, 
and being from a one-party area, he cut his teeth in an old-fashioned 
machine, where loyalty to a party can be more important that establishing 
a rapport with a large number of voters.'' Glendening, 56, taught 
political science at the University of Maryland for 27 years before 
he was elected governor. He was previously on the Prince George's 
County Council and served as the county executive, working his way 
up through the ranks until being elected governor. Mrs. Sauerbrey, 
61, lives in Baltimore County, the suburb outside the city, and taught 
biology in high school before being elected to the state Legislature. 
In the 1994 election, Glendening carried only the three most populous 
areas in the state: Montgomery and Prince George's counties, both 
Washington suburbs, and Baltimore. Mrs. Sauerbrey carried all other 
voting districts, but they did not provide enough votes to overcome 
Glendening's big margins in the areas he carried. The governor's campaign 
has not been a smooth one. For a long time, the two leading elected 
black officials in the state _ Prince George's County Executive Wayne 
Kurry and Baltimore Mayor Kurt Schmoke, both Democrats _ put off endorsing 
the governor. When they did, on Oct. 8, less than a month before the 
election, they did it without much enthusiasm and without even notifying 
Glendening that they were doing it. Glendening badly needs the black 
vote to carry the state, and both Prince George's and Baltimore are 
predominantly black. Glendening's biggest problem involved Clinton. 
In September, the governor sought to distance himself from the president 
over the Lewinsky scandal by canceling a fund-raising event with him 
and then did not appear at a visit by Clinton to a school in Montgomery 
County. But later Clinton campaigned for the governor _ again in Montgomery 
County _ and the two were reconciled. Asked about his reversal in 
an interview, Glendening said: ``We did what we believed to be right. 
The president has done a great job. However, his actions were wrong 
and he should have apologized. Then he did apologize. He asked for 
forgiveness. Not one of us has not made mistakes.'' Had he made a 
mistake as great as the president? ``No,'' Glendening said. ``Not 
a doozy of a mistake.'' 
</TEXT>
</DOC>