<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981027.0324 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Is the bear market over? Or is the recent rise in stock prices just 
a seductive rally intended to suck investors in before the market 
slides once more? That's what seasoned investors and traders wondered 
on Tuesday as they watched the Dow Jones industrial average spurt 
up 101 points in the first hour of trading, and then lose it all and 
more by the end of the day. The average closed Tuesday at 8,366.04, 
down 66.17 points, or 0.78 percent. The move was a reversal of fortune 
for investors who were beginning to regain confidence that U.S. stocks 
could ride out the rest of the world's economic storms. Indeed, in 
the last eight weeks or so, the Dow has risen about 1,000 points, 
or 13 percent, from its Aug. 31 low of 7,539.07. Blue-chip stocks 
were not the only ones to see an early rally fizzle. The Russell 2000, 
the small-capitalization stock index which has risen for two consecutive 
weeks, jumped 1.2 percent in the morning, only to close down 0.57 
point. Investors in bigger Nasdaq stocks, happy to see technology 
companies reporting positive earnings, could not sustain their push 
either. So where are we now? At a bull-market rest stop _ or waltzing 
into a bear-market trap? The question may be particularly timely now 
because many investors, who are relative newcomers to stocks, have 
not yet experienced the trauma of a bear trap. During the two bear 
moves before this year's turmoil _ the decline in 1990 that took stocks 
down 21 percent and the 1987 crash _ there were no intermittent bear-market 
rallies to sucker investors. As a result, those who have been in stocks 
for only 10 years or so may not realize that bear markets can have 
deceptively sharp rallies that only serve to lure investors in, and 
then take them down. ``The last couple of bear markets we've seen 
haven't lasted long enough to test people's psyches,'' said Charles 
White, president of Avatar Associates, a money-management firm in 
New York with $3.5 billion in assets. And while he noted that the 
market's breadth has improved _ the number of stocks going up has 
risen considerably from a month ago _ White added, ``It still seems 
as though we're challenged to break out of some levels, which indicates 
that this is nothing more than a rally in a bear market.'' Bear-market 
rallies are particularly vicious, because they last just long enough 
to lull investors back into a bullish mood. In the 1973-74 bear market, 
for example, when stocks fell 45 percent over 22 months, there were 
three meaningful rallies that _ erroneously _ led investors to believe 
the worst was over. And in the 36 percent decline that began in December 
1968 and lasted until May 1970, investors were also treated to three 
such rallies. But the biggest ``gotcha'' of all was in 1930 _ when 
stocks recovered from the brutal decline of 1929 that took the Dow 
average down almost 48 percent. In early 1930, stocks rose almost 
50 percent, and then crashed, losing 83 percent of their value in 
the next two years. As in most downturns, investors today are hoping 
that the pain they have been through this year is all they will have 
to endure. Sometimes markets do go straight down and then rebound. 
In 1962, stocks fell 27.1 percent in six months, and then bounced 
back into a four-year bull market that produced compound average returns 
of 19 percent annually. But Alan Kral, a portfolio manager at Trevor, 
Stewart, Burton &AMP; Jacobsen in New York, is arguing against such 
a recovery now. ``Nothing that's happened over the past four weeks 
has changed the longer-term outlook for the economy which will drive 
the market,'' he said. ``Over the past year we've seen enough of the 
props of the economy _ exports and profits _ start to be chipped away 
so that growth is now threatened,'' Kral said. The final and most 
important prop is the consumer, who accounts for two-thirds of the 
nation's economic growth. On Tuesday the Conference Board said that 
earlier this month consumer confidence fell to its lowest level in 
nearly two years. If consumers pull back on their purchases, the economy 
will slow significantly. To be sure, investors have had reason to 
be optimistic. The biggest lift has come from the Federal Reserve 
Board, which has cut rates twice since the end of September. Lower 
interest rates are always a positive, since lower borrowing costs 
can mean higher corporate profits. And concentrated rate cuts are 
extra-bullish. Market historians note that in three of four cases 
when the Fed has cut rates twice in a row, stocks rise an average 
of 19 percent in the ensuing three months. Since the Fed last cut 
rates on Oct. 15, stocks are up almost 5 percent. More support for 
stocks has come from a raft of upbeat earnings announcements. Companies 
as diverse as IBM, Estee Lauder, Amgen and Northern Telecom have posted 
better-than-expected numbers recently. But with most third-quarter 
earnings announcements completed, the bounce from positive surprises 
is probably already built into stock prices. As a result, Kral believes 
that the market is at a danger point. He believes that the nation's 
employment cost index, out Thursday morning, will once again focus 
investors on rising labor costs and declining corporate profit margins. 
``GDP growth slowing and labor costs going up are not good from a 
profit standpoint,'' he said. ``There's a lot of risk in the market 
here.'' 
</TEXT>
</DOC>