<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981027.0159 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Stumped for Halloween ideas? Being clever comes easily with the help 
of ``Halloween Treats: Recipes and Crafts for the Whole Family'' by 
Donata Maggipinto (Chronicle Books, $14.95). In less than 100 pages, 
this colorful book covers everything from pumpkin-seed candies for 
children to make, to pumpkin-based menus and centerpieces for grown-up 
autumn dinner parties. Some of the ideas, like taking a rolling pin 
to marshmallows so that they can be cut in the shape of ghosts to 
float atop excellent homemade hot chocolate, or applying licorice 
string legs and cinnamon candy eyes to turn chocolate sandwich cookies 
into spiders, are winningly simple. Others, like adding a shade with 
bat-wing cutouts to a flashlight, are not so easy, and require a shopping 
trip to an arts and crafts supplier. Ms. Maggipinto gives five pages 
detailed instructions for carving an array of jack-o-lanterns, using 
squash as well as pumpkin. The book begins with a list of kitchen 
and craft guidelines, including safety tips that are useful, and not 
just when the activity involves children. For example, readers are 
reminded that pot lids should be lifted away at an angle to avoid 
injury from escaping steam. Another good tip is to wash sharp implements 
one at a time; do not put them into soapy water where they cannot 
be seen. Among the recipes, you will also find one for candy apples 
that are made with lady apples, which are so much easier for both 
children and adults alike to eat than big ones. In ``Halloween Treats,'' 
they are impaled on natural licorice sticks, which look like twigs. 
But a tip, that the just-cooked caramel is dangerously hot and should 
not be tasted, would have been useful. Except that the black risotto 
made with tapenade is barely gray, most of the recipes are very good, 
notably the pork loin with quince and apples, macaroni and cheese 
and pumpkin creme brulee. I baked the chocolate cupcakes with cobweb 
icing twice. The first time, following the recipe exactly, they were 
acceptable. But unlike the fine devil's food cake in the book, they 
could have been more chocolatey. And the weblike streaks were made 
by tinting some of the icing with food coloring. When I made them 
again, I doubled the cocoa from three to six tablespoons, and used 
chocolate ganache instead of colored icing for the webs. And speaking 
of adapting these recipes and crafts projects, many of them, like 
the curried pumpkin soup or the hanging ``stained glass'' candy decorations, 
can segue from Halloween to Thanksgiving and even Christmas. COCOA 
COBWEB CUPCAKES Adapted from ``Halloween Treats'' by Donata Maggipinto 
Time: 2{ hours, including cooling 4 tablespoons softened unsalted 
butter, plus butter for baking pan, if needed 2 cups unbleached all-purpose 
flour 6 tablespoons unsweetened cocoa, preferably Dutch-process 1 
teaspoon baking powder { teaspoon baking soda \ teaspoon salt 1{ cups 
sugar 1 egg 3 teaspoons vanilla extract 1 cup buttermilk 2 egg whites, 
fresh or reconstituted dried 3 cups confectioners' sugar, sifted 1 
to 2 tablespoons fresh orange juice Black or dark brown food coloring, 
optional 2 ounces chopped semisweet chocolate, optional 2 tablespoons 
heavy cream, optional { tablespoon cold unsalted butter in small bits, 
optional. 1. Preheat oven to 350 degrees. Butter 12 muffin-tin wells 
or line them with fluted paper cups. In a medium bowl, whisk the flour, 
cocoa, baking powder, baking soda and salt together. 2. Using an electric 
mixer, beat softened butter and sugar together until light and fluffy. 
Beat in the egg and 2 teaspoons vanilla. At low speed, beat in the 
flour mixture alternately with the buttermilk in three batches. 3. 
Spoon batter into prepared muffin tins and bake about 20 minutes, 
until a toothpick inserted in the center comes out clean. Cool to 
room temperature. 4. Place egg whites in the bowl of an electric mixer. 
If you are hesitant about using raw egg whites, reconstituted packaged 
dried egg whites, like Just Whites, can be substituted. Beat egg whites 
at high speed until softly peaked. Add the confectioners' sugar, remaining 
vanilla and one tablespoon of the orange juice and continue beating 
until thick and shiny. The mixture should be spreadable. Thin it with 
more orange juice if necessary. 5. If using food coloring, transfer 
one-third of the icing to a small bowl and tint it brown or black. 
Otherwise, combine the semi-sweet chocolate and cream in a small saucepan 
and cook over low heat just until the chocolate has melted. Remove 
it from heat and beat it, adding cold butter bit by bit. 6. Transfer 
tinted icing or chocolate mixture to a pastry bag fitted with a fine 
round tip. 7. Spread white icing on cupcakes. Then, starting at the 
center of each cupcake, pipe a spiral of the dark or chocolate icing 
over the top. Using a small, pointed knife, drag the dark icing from 
the center of the spiral to the edge of the cupcake. Wipe knife and, 
moving it about 1/2 inch to the left or right, drag it from the edge 
back to the center. Continue this process, working your way around 
the cupcake. Repeat with remaining cupcakes. Yield: 12 cupcakes. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>