<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981027.0163 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Walking home from the greengrocer along Ninth Avenue, I pass from 
a sliver of Korea to outposts of Pakistan, Thailand, Senegal and Puerto 
Rico in six blocks. Having lived in Hell's Kitchen for 15 years, I've 
learned to measure the world in mere steps. I've also learned to stop 
and smell the cooking. Despite the creeping Sohoization of west midtown, 
there is no other street in the world that has as much diversity in 
its ethnic fare. But if you want to taste the flavors in their fresh-off-the-boat 
state, you have to move fast. The revitalization of Times Square has 
quickened the pace of assimilation. Ninth Avenue is quickly becoming 
a test market, where far-flung flavors are tamed and airbrushed for 
the mainstream. Witness the new permutations of pizza _ halal, Korean, 
Mexican, Indonesian and dozens of upwardly mobile, too-gourmet-for-you 
pizzas _ that have appeared in the last two years. Yes, you can still 
taste the unmanicured, most recently arrived flavors, but you have 
to look south to the tiny storefronts below 42nd Street. The area 
is now able to support several home-style, steam-table luncheonettes. 
At Kashmir 9 (478 Ninth Aven., near 37th Street), the curried goats' 
feet and the lamb stewed with lentils are as homegrown as the Pakistani 
videos and CDs for sale. The same can be said for the Himalayas Restaurant 
(568 Ninth Ave., near 41st Street), home of Pakistani pizza, where 
the spice and fire of the steam-table samosas and the pakoras almost 
compensate for their oiliness. Mexicans, primarily from the Pueblo 
region, are dominating the piecework garment industry at the moment. 
And their peasant-style cooking _ definitely on the heavy side _ has, 
in the last several years, moved from pushcarts along Eighth and Ninth 
Avenues into storefronts like Los Dos Rancheros Mexicanos (507 Ninth 
Ave., at 38th Street). With its pinball-like soccer machine in the 
front window and an adjoining Mexican grocery, the place has become 
a community center. Its inexpensive and delicious barbacoa de chiva 
(goat barbecue), posole (hominy and pork soup) and moles have made 
the place popular among food aficionados. Meanwhile, a steady trickle 
of South American expatriates has given the avenue a new world of 
food. Amazonia (498 Ninth Ave., near 38th Street) is a trim storefront 
playfully festooned with plastic vines and vivid flowers. It serves 
up Brazilian soup and a selection of salads and sandwiches for the 
terribly hip crowd that hides behind Ray-Bans during lunch. Farther 
up the avenue, Cafe Brasil (746 Ninth Ave., near 50th Street) opened 
over the summer with a wide range of healthy fresh bebidas, or sweetened 
fruit juices. The cafe is owned by the same people who own the three-year-old 
restaurant Rice 'n' Beans (cheek-by-jowl at 744 Ninth Ave.), which 
has recently expanded its slightly Americanized Brazilian menu. The 
two-year-old Chimichurri Grill (606 Ninth Ave., near 43rd Street) 
is a trim little Argentine steakhouse. Who knows whether it's Argentina's 
Italian influence or its cautious business-lunch clients that set 
the tone. But the truffled mashed potatoes that accompany the grilled 
Patagonian tooth fish are nonetheless delicious, like most of the 
restaurant's Italianate cooking. And the concept seems to have been 
successful enough to inspire other places. Being an enthusiast but 
by no means an expert in Hispanic cooking, I defer to Hispanic magazine, 
which calls Pomaire (371 W. 46th St., just off Ninth Avenue) one of 
the top three Hispanic restaurants in New York City. This Chilean 
restaurant is a fancy, night-on-the-town sort of place, and the sweet 
meat-and-corn pie, the shell steak broiled with onions and fried eggs, 
and the chicken, potato, squash and rice porridge are scrumptious 
and soulful. There are American specialities, too, in the neighborhood. 
Soul Fixins (371 W. 34th St.) offers credible down-home fried chicken 
and fish, meatloaf and barbecue. Soul Fixins' sweet potato pie is 
the best I've tasted in the city. Cajun soul reigns at Chantal's Cajun 
Kitchen (510 Ninth Ave., near 38th Street), where the very, very hip 
join cab drivers, meat cutters and neighborhood eccentrics to claim 
the five tables, pick up plastic forks and dive into very well rendered 
chicken and sausage gumbo. African cooking may well have mothered 
American soul cooking. And Chez Gnagna Koty's African Restaurant (530 
Ninth Ave., near 39th Street), its front window painted in vivid tempera, 
draws its menu from Goree, an island in Senegal. The soft nuttiness 
of palm oil pervades the stewy dishes like dakhine, or lamb stewed 
with onions and beans in peanut sauce, and even the deep-fried oniony 
cake made of black-eyed pea flour. A Pan-Asian influence is starting 
to leaven the formulaic Cantonese bike-basket cuisine. Little Saigon 
Kitchen (374 W. 46th St., off Ninth Avenue) serves among the best 
southern Vietnamese fare in town, with a more pronounced Indian influence 
than in northern cooking. Lakuwana (358 W. 44th St., off Ninth Avenue) 
is, to the best of my knowledge, one of only two places in the city 
to serve Sri Lankan food, a melding of traditional Indian cuisine 
with Dutch and Portuguese influences. The lentil soup with coconut, 
the rice-flour-and-coconut pancakes called hoppers, which are used 
to dip into curries, the roti enriched with grated coconut, and the 
rack of lamb with black curry are extraordinary. Some restaurants 
have improved over time. At Bali Nusa Indah (651 Ninth Ave., near 
46th Street), a slender, quiet and mirrored place, the otak-otak (fish 
mousse with spicy peanut sauce), perkedel jagung (corn and shrimp 
fritters), sop ikan laut jawa (a spicy Javanese-style fish soup) and 
the nutty and powerfully flavored but light-bodied sambals have grown 
from ordinary to habit forming. The Filipino dishes at Ritz Lauren 
(537 Ninth Ave., near 40th Street) are bright in the way this cooking 
should be and rarely is. The Continental offerings, though, can be 
mediocre. For all the exotic outposts, the neighborhood also has something 
for seekers of predictable quick business lunches and staid pretheater 
dinners. The self-described Tex-Mex Fresco Tortillas (766 Ninth Ave., 
near 51st St.) and the Cal-Mex Mama's Fresh Tortillas (857 Ninth Ave., 
near 56th Street) are recently opened taquerias that evoke the magic 
concept: amalgamated cuisine. This is not to say that the tacos and 
burritos are not good; they are, and they are also inexpensive and 
filling. A Thai restaurant explosion has also hit the avenue: at the 
best of the recently opened places, Thai Jasmine (860 Ninth Ave., 
near 56th) and Chanpen Thai (761 Ninth Ave., at 51st Street), the 
food is still tame; this is nothing you would find in a secret culinary 
haven in back-alley Bangkok. These places seem to be doing some intra-Asian 
amalgamating of their own: the Thai fish patties, tod man, for instance, 
are difficult to differentiate from the Indonesian version, and the 
chicken sate tastes almost the same as the Pakistani grilled chicken 
kebab. Likewise, the spate of Mediterranean-style restaurants that 
have opened along the avenue in the last several years don't recall 
any specific old country as much as they pay homage to America's current 
infatuation with any old country that serves pasta, pizza, decent 
salads and grilled food. There is also room in Hell's Kitchen for 
fancier fare. Mitchel London, the baker and Upper East Side caterer, 
opened Mitchel London Foods (542 Ninth Ave., at 40th Street) two months 
ago and dishes up a rotating menu, including Parisian-style breakfast 
pastries, from his spare storefront in the shadow of Port Authority. 
Despite his Tiffany prices, after two months, he said, he can't keep 
enough food in his shop. When I pass by on my way home in the evenings, 
he is usually sold out, and he waves from behind an empty counter, 
shaking his head and raising baffled eyes to heaven. What an ornery 
unpredictable hodgepodge of a neighborhood. How could I even think 
of living anyplace else? 
</TEXT>
</DOC>