<DOC>
<DOCNO> PRI19981027.2000.0374 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
This is The World, I'm Lisa Mullins. Slobodon Milosevic played beat 
the clock today, and he seems to have won at least for now. Today 
was the deadline NATO had set for the Serbian leader to withdraw most 
of his forces from Kosovo where they have been enforcing a nearly 
eight month crack down on ethnic Albanian separatists. A White House 
spokesman says Milosevic appears to be in substantial compliance with 
NATO demands to pull back his troops. But the west has reason not 
to trust Milosevic. To monitor his actions, the Organization for Security 
and Cooperation in Europe plans to send 2000 more civilian verifiers 
to Kosovo during the coming weeks. In a moment we'll ask a Canadian 
diplomatic observer, who has been in the province since August, what 
he thinks of the OSCE mission. But, as The World's Naned Schevek reports 
from the provincial capital Prescina, ethnic Albanians have already 
reached a verdict. To hear a retired US general William Walker say 
it, the OSCE mission he heads is a strong unified effort that is poised 
to get the job done. I cannot tell you how impressed I am by the reaction 
of the international community to put together this mission, very 
quickly, very robustly. But in the offices of Kokadetorie, Kosovo's 
main Albanian language newspaper, co-editor Ardland Ardifie doesn't 
share Walker's optimism about the mission, or the agreement that created 
it. It's not something that Albanians expected or something that Albanians 
would prefer. And it's not something that Albanians are ready to accept. 
There's nothing substantial that this agreement brings, meaning changing 
the situation here, the over all situation here in Kosovo. What is 
needed, says Edita Taherie the Foreign Affairs Spokeswoman for the 
main ethnic Albanian party, the DLK, is more than unarmed verifiers, 
I think that international community should work further to the consensus 
of sending to Kosovo NATO troops on the ground. Because, to address 
security issue means to really try to have international military 
presence on the ground. Without them, says political analyst Bechlei 
Bechei clashes between Serbian forces and the Kosovo Liberation Army 
will continue. The verification mission is a step forward, but a far 
smaller one from the one we were hoping for. I don't think it will 
change the situation on the ground. But rather just make the two sides 
change tactics. We shall see violence on a smaller scale during the 
winter, and on a very large scale once again in the spring. The Holbrooke/Milosevic 
Agreement doesn't address the real problem, just its consequences. 
The real problem is the future status of Kosovo. Serbia is offering 
an enhanced degree of autonomy to the province, but refuses to discuss 
independence. Likewise, the international community doesn't want Kosovo 
to secede. Because the west fears that the political fallout could 
destabilize the whole region. With no international support to speak 
of for its independence drive, the Kosovo Liberation Army's political 
representative Adam Damachi considers more violence inevitable. I 
am afraid that my people must pay again with new blood shed. But we 
are ready to pay every price for our freedom. Because only freedom, 
only liberty have no price. We are ready to pay what is possible. 
And it's not just the more militant Albanian factions that will settle 
for nothing short of independence. Edita Teherie from the DLK party, 
which has advocated peaceful resistance, is just as insistent. No 
one here would like to accept autonomy. And our goal is independence. 
But I must say that, not only Kosovo Liberation Army but all population 
have shown their political will through the referendum for independence. 
And I don't expect that anyone will withdraw from this demand. And 
if it comes to war, says Adam Damachi, the KLA's political representative, 
the international community will be responsible. I am sad because 
the international community don't understand the problem. And they 
force Albanians, and they recommend to Albanians to accept some kind 
of solution under Yugoslavia or under Serbia. Therefore, I am afraid 
that we must go, a new war, a new blood shed. Seven years ago, the 
OSCE sent in a few hundred unarmed observers to monitor from Croatia. 
The next year the United Nations sent more than 1000 observers into 
Bosnia. Their presence did nothing to prevent a war. That lesson, 
ethnic Albanians say, seems to have been lost on the international 
community, now seeking to prevent another Balkan war in Kosovo. This 
is Nenad Schevek reporting for The World. Gavin Balkin is a member 
of the Canadian contingent of the Kosovo observer mission. He has 
been in Prescina for the past three months now. Mr., Balkin what do 
you say to the sentiment of the ethnic Albanians in Kosovo, who are 
skeptical that 2000 unarmed monitors from the OSCE can prevent a war? 
I think there are clearly limits to what can be accomplished by an 
observer force, particularly an unarmed observer force. But if you 
look at what's happened in Kosovo over the last three months, I think 
a limited observer presence has helped to keep this from becoming 
another Bosnia. You have not seen the sort of wide spread atrocities 
that were common in the earlier conflict. And when at the end of September 
we did begin to get reports of that sort of event, it was probably 
the key trigger for the stronger action that has been taken by western 
governments since then. And what do you mean when you say, the key 
trigger for it? I think in this day and age, western governments, 
in particular, are much less willing to accept that atrocities are 
a natural part of conflict. And in situations where the law of international 
armed conflict is not being respected, they are going to be ready 
to take steps. So then, bring us to the presence. What is the challenge, 
then, for the 2000 unarmed OSCE observers who will be arriving soon 
in Prescina ? The challenge for the observer is a very serious one. 
They are going to have to come into a situation where there is no 
formal cease-fire between two warring parties. Where there is a fragmented 
opposition force, which is very difficult to negotiate with. And they 
are going to have to build confidence and trust between both sides 
so that the situation can be prevented from deteriorating. And so 
the people can get back to the business of living their normal lives. 
And do you think that is actually an achievable goal, given the kind 
of conditions that you mentioned, and the kind of things that will 
hamper them on their arrival? I think it's a goal that is achievable 
if people work toward that end with good will. And if governments 
in the west put their money where their mouth is. I think that some, 
including perhaps, in the west, are concerned that the missing link 
in all of this is the KLA. Does it worry you that there appears to 
be no one talking at this point with the Kosovo Liberation Army? And 
that once the Serbs have completed their pull back, that the KLA could 
regroup? BALKIN Well the KLA has never really gone away. On the ground, 
we certainly never stopped seeing KLA. To say that they may regroup, 
certainly. Whether they resume the offensive is another question. 
It is going to be very important to bring the armed opposition, the 
KLA into the circle of negotiations at the earliest possible opportunity. 
It's important that we not miss this opportunity to move forward and 
to build a process that is as inclusive as possible. Mr. Balkin, what 
are you seeing on the ground now, can you tell us, in terms of your 
own first hand experience. Are you seeing, at this point, a substantial 
pull out of Serb forces? We are. Last night, our monitors observed 
the pull out of, by our estimates, at least 4000 Serb troops. Today, 
on the ground, we have seen many, many Serb positions, which have 
been occupied for the last three to eight months, vacant. There was 
someone who I spoke to today, who said this was the first day in five 
months that they had dared to cross the main Prescina road. That sounds 
convincing, but I wonder if you believe that it is enough to avert 
a NATO air strike, which of course has been threatened, if the Serbs 
don't fully comply with the Holbrooke agreement and the deadline expiring 
tonight. That is something that is for the people in Brussels to decide. 
I can only say what I see on the ground. I can't really speculate 
on how it will be interpreted elsewhere. Does it feel safer to you, 
at this point? Since the Serb pull out last night, all I can say is 
that the atmosphere today was very positive. I do feel that security 
in Kosovo was better today then it has been in a very long time. Gavin 
Balkin is a member of the Canadian contingent of the Kosovo observer 
mission, speaking to us from Prescina. Thank you very much for the 
update. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>