<DOC>
<DOCNO> PRI19981027.2000.3270 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Yung Shin Llamo has become the musical darling of the Free Tibet movement. 
In recent years, the singer has shared the lime light at Tibet benefit 
concerts with Richard Gere, the Beastie Boys, and Cheryl Crowe. But 
as The World's Marco Werman explains, Yung Shin Llamo is no Johnny-come-lately 
to the cause. A monk gave Yung Shin Llamo her name when she was a 
girl. It means Goddess of Song. That monk turned out to have foresight. 
Llamo became a professional singer when she was 25, encouraged by 
her grandmother and her religion. Buddhism for us, is very, very important. 
And my grandmother, she taught me the reason for singing. And she 
said, you have beautiful voice, and you should use as part of your 
spiritual practice. Yung Shin Llamo sings what she calls devotion 
songs. She fled her homeland eight years ago, because the Chinese 
government wouldn't allow her to sing those songs in Tibet. No one 
in Tibet can hear her music today, barring an underground cassette. 
Yung Shin Llamo sang her first album on Peter Gabriel's Real World 
label, accapello. Her recent release, "Coming Home" adds instrumentation. 
That she says is partly to dispel western stereotypes. People think 
of Tibet, oh they stay high on the mountain, and among monasteries, 
chanting. That's all they think. They don't think, artist. And actually 
there is much more than that, as far as I am concerned. Yung Shin 
Llamo uses her "Coming Home" album as a political statement. In conversation, 
she refers softly to political oppression and poverty in Tibet, and 
to Beijing's monopoly of the culture there. In Tibet, everywhere there 
are TV or radio, and the music is always played by Chinese. So, the 
young people they like, seems like Chinese pop. Which is not much 
meaning for the songs. And it's very hard. People cannot listen to 
any other world music, only they have Chinese. So if you want to sing, 
or anything, you have to act like Chinese. Not Yung Shin Llamo. Her 
music, she says, has more to do with Buddhist spirituality than Chinese 
pop. American record buyers may not get the political message of the 
song, "Defiance". Yung Shin Llamo sings all of her songs in Tibetan, 
but over the distorted guitars, anyone can hear the bitterness of 
a women who hopes that some day coming home won't just be a record 
title. For The World, this is Marco Werman. Music from Tibet's Yung 
Shin Llamo brings this addition of the program of the program to a 
close. In Boston, I'm Lisa Mullins, join us again for another spin 
of The World. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>