<DOC>
<DOCNO> PRI19981027.2000.2020 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
This is The World, a co-production of the BBC World Service, PRI, 
and WGBH in Boston. I'm Lisa Mullins. Considering that he has already 
lived eight years longer than the average Russian man, Boris Yeltsin 
is in pretty good shape. But considering that he is the nation's president, 
Yeltsin's health is clearly not up to snuff. Today, President Yeltsin 
checked into a sanitarium near Moscow, a day after doctors ordered 
him to cancel a foreign trip because of high blood pressure and extreme 
fatigue. Masha Lipman is the Deputy Chief Editor of the Russian News 
Weekly, Etoki, and she's on the line with us now from her office in 
Moscow. What do we know, Masha, about just how ill Boris Yeltsin is 
right now? I don't think we have precise information about his health, 
otherwise it would be back to two years ago during his heart surgery. 
However, what we know, and what we could see on television, just recently 
during his trips to two central Asian republics, was that he nearly 
lost his balance and he was blabbering instead of talking. And everyone 
takes it for granted that he is just simply old and week, and that 
he no longer plays the role that he used to play in Russian politics. 
But if they have sort of written him off in that way, then, and if 
it seems as though his authority is undercut every time that he stumbles 
in public or slurs his words at a state dinner, why isn't there more 
pressure on him to officially hand over his authority to somebody 
else? There's a very clear reason for this, among people who want 
to compete for his office. Very few are actually ready to start the 
race right now. So I wonder how you explain, for instance, for your 
readers in the magazine, what kind of impact Yeltsin's ill health 
has had on what's happening in Moscow today? I think his role is tiny. 
For all practical purposes, the man who has taken all the important 
decisions lately, is the Prime Minister Yugenie Primikov, not Yeltsin, 
with being away from the scene most of the time. And even when he 
is on the scene, he is mostly out of it. Now, this is the man who 
is the heir apparent. This is the new Prime minister, as you mentioned, 
Yugenie Primikov who has not, as you said, been visible since he was 
appointed. A time when Russia surely is in need of a visible active 
leader. Today he did go in place of Yeltsin, though, to meet with 
European leaders in Austria, the first time he has been seen in a 
long time. What is he doing? Keeping the country politically stable. 
That was the main reason he was nominated by Yeltsin in the first 
place. He is the figure that proved to suit the communist dominated 
Parliament in Russia, so his nomination and his approval resolved 
the acute political crisis the country was in. When we talk about 
his ability, perhaps, to keep Russia politically stable, lets look 
at keeping the country economically stable. I wonder, as Deputy Editor 
of the Russian equivalent of News Week Magazine, do you think the 
west, which is very concerned about what's happening in the economy 
of Russia, can be accused of being overly concerned, too concerned 
about what's happening today? Or maybe, on the other hand, not being 
concerned enough? Well, I don't think there is a reason for the west 
to be too deeply concerned, now. Right now, it is very unlikely that 
anything dramatic is likely to happen in Russia, like a communist 
coup, or any coup. Russia has shown that it is not headed toward anything 
dramatic. However the position, the stand the west has taken so far, 
and that is to stay away financially. Not to give any more money to 
Russia, I think this policy is correct. Because this government of 
today does not have a clear policy, does not know what to do with 
Russia, where to lead it. So, the west might wait and see for Russia 
to, while keeping the same prime minister, whether Russia will change 
the economic policy. Mash Lipman is Deputy Editor-in-chief of the 
Russian News Weekly, Itoki. She spoke with us from Moscow. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>