<DOC>
<DOCNO> PRI19981027.2000.0955 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
The kitchens of Britons best known chefs are getting a little more 
steamed up than usual at the moment. Delia Smith who is the Doyen 
of TV cooking in Britain, a kind of Martha Stewart of the UK, has 
just launched her new TV series, simply called, "How To Cook". It 
aims to teach some of the more rudimentary tasks like how to boil 
an egg, or even boil water. Rival TV chef, Gary Rhodes has described 
the show as insulting to people's intelligence. But others, like London 
Restaurant owner, Carolyn Waltagrave has leaped to Delia's defense. 
I think that everybody needs to go back to the beginning and learn 
the basics of cooking. There are different phases of boiling water. 
You have fast boiling water, and less fast boiling water. But, I'm 
sure if Delia did it, there was some point to it. Well, who better 
to talk about boiling water, then The World's in-house traveler Maximov 
who himself has spent years living in Britain bars, So Boris, are 
English cooks so bad that they need to be taught how to boil water? 
Well let me point out a couple of things. First of all, we're talking 
about the country where cooking for centuries, until basically today, 
consisted of boiling either meat or vegetables or anything mineral 
actually. In either water, or boiling fat for at least three or four 
hours, and produce it, plunk it on a plate, and cover that in either 
red or brown sauce. Look at the history of Britain. Why do you think 
Britain was so successful as an empire? I mean all of those guys and 
girls, as well actually, who grew up on that kind of stuff on their 
plates. They'll do anything, absolutely anything to run away from 
home. And look where they went? They went to India, they went to Nigeria, 
they went to Singapore, and they went to China. They went to nice, 
perfect places, well of course North America is a bit of an exception. 
But still, they run away as far away as possible. That explains - 
and the cooking is responsible. Well, perhaps there is really some 
reason to this. I mean maybe boiling eggs is simply more demanding 
than we ever thought it was. But of course it is more demanding. Boiling 
an egg could be seen many ways. I mean look at Jonathan Swift, who 
in his Gulliver struggle, had a whole chapter on boiling eggs, and 
peeling eggs. And, sort of their two civilizations fighting each other 
over from which end you should peel the egg. And Delia Smith goes 
in those footsteps of that incredible literary tradition. I'm sure 
a whole chapter on how to peel a hard-boiled egg. And it is an art 
in itself. I especially like the chapter called understanding eggs. 
Of course you have to understand them. They are round, you know the 
cover is hard, they are soft inside. They are almost feminine. Cynics 
might say that Delia Smith has simply run out of ideas. Delia Smith 
cannot possibly run out of ideas. Delia Smith is a British of St. 
Patrick. St. Patrick who brought Christianity to Ireland. Delia Smith 
for the first time, is the first person to bring cooking, to bring 
food to Great Britain. Delia Smith can do no wrong. Delia Smith is 
a prophet of food for Britain. Well despite the evidence, there are 
apparently some signs now, that British food is actually improving. 
Well yes, remember the point about the empire. You know the one strange 
side effect about the British empire, that all those people that Britain 
has colonized have come to Britain itself. And London now is the culinary 
capital of - well if not the world, at least a large chunk of the 
world. But, yes, it's a mixture of foods from all over the world, 
and not much of it is of traditionally British boiling origin. Well, 
if any of our listeners would like to check out Delia Smith's recipe 
for boiled eggs, they can do so at The World on-line. The address 
is www.theworld.org. The World's Boris Maximov thank you very much. 
My enormous pleasure. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>