<DOC>
<DOCNO> PRI19981027.2000.2998 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
This is The World, I'm Lisa Mullins. In Germany, today, a new Chancellor 
took the oath of office. Gerhardt Schroeder was sworn in, ushering 
in Germany's first center-left government in 16 years. Schroeder's 
Social Democrats will govern in coalition with the Greens. And therein 
lies the rub, in some foreign capitals. The Greens, a loose alliance 
of environmentalists and left-wingers are used to being outsiders 
to power, gadflies who have not needed to compromise their views to 
get things done. Well now, they hold three posts in Schroeder's cabinet. 
The World's Margaret Evans reports on Germany's new Green Foreign 
Minister. At first glance, Germany's new Foreign Minister Yashika 
Fischer is hard to distinguish from most other politicians. He is 
clean cut, he wears conservative suits, and he speaks in soothing 
tones, of policy continuity. But, it hasn't always been so. The man 
who will be sitting along side Madeleine Albright at G-7 and NATO 
meetings is a former Marxist adjutator, who won his political stripes 
on the streets in sixties protest movements. Fischer got his start 
in West Berlin in 1967, at rallies like this one, denouncing American 
Imperialism. After a crackdown by police at one of the protests, Fischer 
fled to Frankfort, and joined a Marxist group called Revolutionary 
Struggle. The first time we went out on the street and tried to practice 
the rules of democracy like we had seen in the United States or in 
some other western countries, we were clubbed by the police and -- 
In 1980, Fischer gravitated toward the Green Party, as it was being 
founded in the midst of German protests against the deployment of 
US Cruise missiles. Today, Fischer's friends and colleagues say his 
transformation from revolutionary to respectable is remarkable. He 
has dramatically changed since 1975 or so, when he threw Molotov cocktails, 
and was really somebody who was a street fighter. Freedbert Flueger 
is a Christian Democrat Legislator, who is a political opponent, but 
soccer pal of Yashika Fischer. Ten years ago, he became Minister for 
Environment in the state of Hessan, and he came to the ceremony of 
Inauguration with sneakers and blue jeans, without a tie. Since then, 
Fischer has toned down his image even further, according to German 
journalist, Utta Falka. He saw how reality was, and so he adapted 
his views. And I think he always studied a lot, I don't know, of literature, 
of present affairs. So that he changed his attitudes. Fischer's past 
has left some lingering concerns among Germany's allies, including 
the United States. But, Utta Falka says that he has gone out of his 
way to assure Washington that Germany will remain a reliable partner. 
First, the United States, I think, when Fischer was there, he really 
made a big effort to prove that he would not change things. Fischer 
will keep some of former Chancellor Helmut Kohl's key foreign policy 
advisors on staff. He also symbolizes the Green Party Reallos or realists. 
They are more pragmatic then party fundamentalists about compromises 
that they'll have to make to stay in the governing coalition. Fischer 
was able to deliver Green votes when NATO needed Germany's Parliament 
to approve military intervention in Kosovo. That, despite the fact 
that the Greens are pacifists who want Germany out of NATO. But some 
observers, including Steffan Balderdorf of the German Chamber of Commerce 
say Fischer may not be able to control the more radical Greens. Fischer 
is a very intelligent man, and I think he will be a good minister 
for foreign affairs. But, after my opinion, he's not strong enough 
to convince the party that they have to change their policy when they 
are in power. And I'm not so sure if the Green Party is ready to do 
a realistic foreign policy. But the new Chancellor Gerhardt Schroeder 
says he has every confidence in his new foreign minister. And Green 
members, themselves, are ecstatic about being in power for the first 
time ever. Fischer will spend his first day on the job, tomorrow with 
even handed visits to both France and Britain, a sign that he wants 
to reassure his European partners that he won't play favorites. And 
that Germany will remain an important player within the European Union. 
Reporting for The World, I'm Margaret Evans in Bonn. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>