<DOC>
<DOCNO> PRI19981027.2000.2268 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
As if Russia's financial crisis and ailing president weren't enough 
to worry about, the Kremlin has another long-standing problem crying 
for action. The dispute over ownership of the Kuril Islands has soured 
relations between Russia and Japan for most of this century. In 1956, 
Japan gave up the Northern Kurils as World War II reparations. But 
Tokyo argues that a couple of the southern islands were never part 
of the bargain. The quarrel has left more than 10,000 residents of 
the southern Kurils impoverished and their future in limbo. The World's 
Lucy Kraft takes us to one of the disputed islands. Russia's KUNASHIRI 
Islands, it's a mere 12 miles off Northern Japan, just hours a way 
by boat. And with its primitive economy, and non-existent infrastructure, 
Kunashiri might as well be light years away, not only from Japan, 
but from the rest of Asia. In fact, Kunashiri is 100% Russian. Red 
Army soldiers kicked out the less than 20,000 Japanese living in the 
Kurils toward the end of the war, forcing them to flee to mainland 
Japan. They were replaced with Russian settlers, generously subsidized 
by Moscow as an incentive to live on the frontier. Arriving at KUNASHIRI's 
main village of Eujnokurils is like stepping back into old Appalachia. 
There are no paved roads here, so battalions of dump trucks and earthmovers 
work from dawn to dusk. Like an army of ants, they perpetually smooth 
the muddy ridges and fill huge potholes. Most residents live in shabby 
apartment blocks without hot water, or central heat. There are nearly 
as many dogs on KUNASHIRI as people. Milk cows wander the streets, 
unmolested, like sacred cows in New Delhi. They are allowed to chew 
up gardens and feed out of garbage, because cottage cheese and cream 
are among the few affordable foods left here. It takes a certain kind 
of toughness to survive on Kunashiri. The collapse of the Soviet Union 
took away subsidies leaving prices sky high. A devastating earthquake 
in 1994 ruined homes and fishing vessels. KUNASHIRI and the neighboring 
isle of Shikotan support less than 8000 residents, about half as many 
as before the quake. Alexi Nedko who edits KUNASHIRI's small newspaper, 
has lived on the disputed islands for 25 years. We built our houses 
and our economy all by ourselves. We struggled with typhoons, with 
the climate. We're proud that we provide food for all of Russia. And 
we're proud that the first place that the sun rises in Russia is here. 
But Kunashiri's pride is tinged with bitterness. Nearly all of the 
revenue from its rich marine resources, such as salmon and kelp goes 
straight to Moscow as taxes and other fees, or is skimmed by organized 
crime. I wish life here was as good as it is in Japan. Math teacher 
Elaina Berazuke and her family live somewhat better than most Kunashiris, 
but she expresses frustration over the vast gap in living standards 
between Kunashiri and Japan. We can't understand why we have such 
a poor standard of living. Life in Japan is normal, but here life 
isn't normal at all. The border dispute has shut off almost all trade 
and travel between Japan and the Russian Islands at its doorstep. 
A few Japanese products find their way to the island, but it's steep 
markups. A tub of margarine costing a dollar or two across the border, 
fetches $7 here. A bunch of bananas $6. Japanese cars, used in Kunashiri, 
cost about as much as brand new vehicles bought in Tokyo or Osaka. 
At Kunashiri's grade school, isolation means some children don't have 
notebooks, scribbling their lessons on scraps of paper instead. We 
have no interesting things to help us teach our peoples. There are 
no computers, no TV sets. There were problems in chalks, and then 
papers of course, and then pens, and so on and so on. Nearby, in a 
converted hospital is Town Hall. For officials like Deputy Mayor Valentine 
Schmortzkoff, the answer to the island's plight is simple and obvious. 
We need factories and plants to process fish. This would enable us 
to produce prepared fish, not just the raw product. Every year, Kunashiri 
sells between two and four million dollars worth of marine products. 
By keeping production on the island, Kunashiri could earn several 
times as much, and create desperately needed jobs. That can't happen 
now, because Japanese companies are not allowed to invest in the disputed 
islands. That's not to say that the Japanese aren't a ubiquitous presence 
here. On the contrary, Japan has become a year round Santa Clause 
in the southern Kurils, giving the islanders a new school, a pier, 
power plants, medical and school supplies, and Japanese teachers, 
among many other gifts. This charm offensive has had mixed results. 
Some feel that becoming part of Japan would be the quickest way to 
improve their lives. But many echo the sentiments of English teacher 
and Kinashiri native, Berros Bekhova. Japanese are a very industrious 
people. And they are very interesting and very clever, but I want 
to leave and to work in Russia with Russian people. Deputy Mayor Schmortzkoff, 
like a number of Kunashiris favors a European Union open border style, 
with Japan. He fears Russians would be second class citizens under 
a Japanese administration. We're afraid of becoming part of Japan. 
We see how difficult life is for Japan's other minority groups, people 
like the Chinese, the Koreans, and the Anue Aborigines. Japan and 
Russia have vowed to sign a peace treaty by the year 2000, but observers 
are skeptical the two sides will find common ground on the island'' 
issue any time soon. So the islanders wait. And like Russians in Moscow 
or Vladivostok struggle to hang on in the hope that things will get 
better. For The World, this is Lucy Craft, on Kunashiri Island, Russia. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>