<DOC>
<DOCNO> PRI19981027.2000.1258 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
This is The World, I'm Lisa Mullins. If you think you're hip to the 
new films coming our of China, like "Shanghai Triad" and "Temptress 
Moon ", we've got news for you. That's old wave. The new generation 
of Chinese directors is making waves, new waves, with a grittier looking 
hipper style of movie. A festival of their works, called Beijing Underground 
is touring the United States. It's next stops are New Mexico, and 
Wisconsin. The World's Beth Akimondi profiles one of Beijing Underground's 
hot young directors. Chinese films like Jhang Emo's "Raise the Red 
Lantern" and Chang Kaiga's "Farewell My Concubine", served up a sumptuous 
feast of Asian exotica for western art house audiences in the early 
90's. But young Chinese directors who studied these modern classics 
saw a world far removed from contemporary China. I suddenly, but Chinese 
film is not so exciting for me for my self. Director Wong Shal Shua 
is part of the new wave of talent that has come to be known as the 
sixth generation of Chinese film makers. I want everybody knows Chinese 
people's real lives, like my life, my friends life. China's life. 
So, yeah, this is a big hole, a big gap that nobody do it. So, if 
I make a film, I will do something to fill Th. is gap. Wong Shal Shua 
is typical of the so-called sixth generation film makers, who are 
less interested in romantic views of China's past, and in the reality 
of China in their life time. Paul Piquwitz is co-author of "New Chinese 
Cinemas". The new films are called, sort of, the new urban cinema 
in China, which is a new kind of thing, trying to deal with the harsh 
realities of life in urban China, in the post-Mao period. Which means 
the period of the reforms, the period of moving away from socialism, 
moving toward the marketplace. I mean life is, you know, full of all 
sorts of insecurities. Those modern insecurities are what a pair of 
young Chinese painters confront after graduating from College in Wong 
Shal Shua's 1994 production, "The Days." They start a whole new life. 
They are going to face the society, find a job for living, and also 
a lot of questions like, has my love gone to the end. And there are 
so many questions, and nobody knows what's ahead after, at that time, 
I think. And so, the idea of "The Days" comes from the feeling of 
being lost and confusing about the future, of the younger generation. 
China's 20-something directors seem to define their work by rebelling 
against the conventions of the previous generation. Paul Piquwitz 
believes, that puts the sixth generation filmmakers on the cutting 
edge of their art. I would call them really Avant Garde film-makers. 
They will go out there, have no connection to any film studio whatsoever. 
And, of course, that's a no-no. That's bad. And then, they go out 
with video cameras, they go out with 16-mm cameras But this is, and 
these younger people are very critical of Chang Kai Gai Jimo. They 
basically see them as sell-outs. You know, they're going for the big 
money, they're going for Hollywood, they' and art houses audience 
abroad. And they're doing these incredibly beautiful exotic oriental 
images of the 1920s and '30s. We're doing, you know, kind of mean 
streets. Films like Jhang Yang's Bastards", and Wong Shau Shua's "The 
Days" are shot covertly on Beijing streets and in cramped apartments, 
with budgets as low as $10,000. These films possess a raw, gritty 
style, but revealing a surprising lack of overt political anger. Yet 
Christian Gains,, director of the Hawaii International Film Festival 
still sees these sixth generation film makers as defiant. There is 
a real daringness to what they do, and much more of a willingness 
to deal with contemporary urban settings, and modern day contemporary 
issues, like homosexuality or relationships, Gen-X style relationships, 
or urban problems. These are not a retelling of 4000 year-old fables. 
These are modern Aegean - a lot of that you could say has something 
to do with an influence from American Cinema and kind of the Gen-X 
thing. The price Wong pays for making films independently, is that 
his first two films were shown only at foreign film festivals. But 
Wong has been able to have one screening of "The Days", at his alma 
mater, the Beijing Film Academy. That was great, that was good, because 
I got mixed people and mixed teachers of mine feel quite excited, 
that you can do it, the film, the whole film by your self. Completely 
by yourself, even specially the financial things. So, it brings them 
a new concept of Chinese new films. It also brings a new concept of 
Chinese film to western audiences. Four of the films that catapulted 
the sixth generation to prominence will be showcased in the touring 
film festival, Beijing Underground. In addition to "The Days", the 
festival will screen Hze Hwan Jhun's "Red Beads and Postman" and John 
Hyun's "Beijing Bastards. For The World, this is Beth Akimondi reporting. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>