<DOC>
<DOCNO> VOA19981027.0500.2412 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Ten hours, 40, Universal time. In Africa, regional talks on Congo 
civil war have entered their second day today. Scott Sterns reports 
mediators are pushing for an immediate cease fire and the withdrawal 
of foreign troops. Foreign ministers and defense officials from more 
than a dozen countries met late into the night, without reaching agreement 
on a draft proposal to end the fighting in Congo. They try again Tuesday, 
as mediators work toward conditions for a cease-fire between the Army 
of President Loron Cabala and Congolese rebels in the east who control 
more than a thousand kilometers of the country. Zambian President, 
Fredrick Taluba is hosting the talks. He says there is no way to find 
a lasting solution to Congo's internal differences unless the fighting 
stops. War can indeed succeed. But success is but temporary and a 
mere palliative to underlying political differences. Every war must, 
of necessity, be settled around a negotiating table. The war in the 
Congo is not any different. Its cessation can only come about by way 
of dialogue. The dialogue here in Zambia includes officials from Angola, 
Zimbabwe and Newmibia, who sent troops to defend President Cabala's 
government, the Kinshasa. Rebels are meeting on the sidelines of these 
talks, but their allies, Rwanda and Yugonda, are at the table along 
with officials from Kenya, Mozambique, Burundi, Tanzania, and Gabon. 
Rwanda and Yugonda were once President Cabala's biggest allies, sending 
troops to lead the war that brought him to power last year. Now, they 
say they have been forced to move against his government because President 
Cabala has failed to stop cross-border raids by armed militia. Rwanda 
and Uganda have also fallen out with Angola, who they joined in the 
original Cabala alliance. But now oppose, as Angolan troops stopped 
a rebel advance on the capital three months ago. Organization of African 
Unity Secretary General Saleem Machmensaleem says the breakdown in 
regional alliances over Congo civil war could signal even greater 
violence in the future. The confrontation that has been holding in 
the BRC. Also involved, countries with enormous circumstances. Our 
very close allies who have walked together in the past. It is therefore, 
clear to us that this confrontation, if allowed to escalate, will 
take us to uncharted terrain. Whose consequences are too ghastly to 
contemplate. Regional officials are expected to come up with recommendations 
for a heads of state summit on Congo next month. Secretary General 
Saleem wants them to agree on a mechanism for the withdrawal of all 
foreign troops in Congo and a national dialogue to open up the County's 
political process. Scott Sterns, VOA News, Lusaka. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>