<DOC>
<DOCNO> VOA19981027.1600.2711 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
That square black box next to your car's engine, along with the electrical 
system it supports, will more than triple its voltage to a whopping 
42 volts. If a group of researchers from Massachusetts Institute of 
Technology and/or industry supporters get their way. They are called 
the MIT Industry Consortium On Advanced Automotive Electrical, Electronic 
Components and Systems. Well, that name is a mouthful, but its membership 
is a who's-who of international automobile manufacturers and their 
electrical components suppliers. Everyone from General Motors, Ford, 
BMW, Dinler-Benz, and Renault, to Motorola, Bosch, Delfie, Siemens, 
and Usaki. At a conference in Detroit this week on transportation 
electronics, members of the 20-company consortium lined up solidly 
behind the 42-volt standard in a series of engineering presentations. 
As they had done in a similar conference in Germany two weeks ago. 
Why a new higher-voltage standard for automotive electrical systems? 
We asked MIT research scientist, Thomas Kime, a co-director of the 
consortium. The electrical demand on the electrical system in automobiles 
is increasing because of new and energy-requiring features, which 
are found on new automobiles. And what are some of these features? 
Some of them says Thomas Kime, are creature comforts. Like electrically 
heated seats. But many of them are more substantive and would significantly 
enhance engine reliability, power, and cleanliness. For example, electrically 
controlled valves. If you can actually do valves electrically, then 
you can vary the valve timing under computer control and maybe get 
an engine that produces a lot more power for its size and at the same 
time, runs cleaner. Electrically-actuated valves would open and close 
more precisely and be less mechanically cumbersome than current systems 
which are driven either hydraulically, or by push rods contacting 
the engine's cam shaft. Catalytic converters, which chemically remove 
harmful pollutants from the engine's exhaust stream, function much 
more efficiently when their precious metal catalyst are hot. Mr. Kind 
says electrically heating the catalyst would reduce exhaust emissions 
during those critical first seconds after the engine has been started. 
There are also new systems that sort of fit into the safety and comfort 
arena. Like for example, electrically assisted power steering. Experts 
believe electric motors would drive power steering systems much more 
efficiently than the current maze of hydraulic pumps and hoses that 
are prone to leaks and mechanical malfunctions. So the question now 
becomes, why a 42-volt standard? Mr. Kime says the reason is safety. 
Essentially at today's 12-volt level, if you touched the positive 
terminal of your battery and touched the frame of the car, it is an 
unthreatening event for the person who does that. We want to retain 
that. We asked Mr. Kime whether an anticipated push toward total electric 
vehicles would bypass the need for higher voltage systems serving 
internal combustion engines. First off, let us recognize that even, 
if the world goes to all electric transportation, there is going to 
be a substantial period of transition. If internal combustion goes 
10 years, you are going to need 42 volts. Personally, I suspect it 
will go longer than that, but whether it does or not, we need 42 volts. 
Thomas Kime believes the 42 volt system could be implemented within 
five to ten years with more expensive, feature-laden vehicles as the 
first candidates. I am Brian Sislack. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>