<DOC>
<DOCNO> VOA19981027.1600.2156 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
The world has become smaller and smaller in recent years. More tightly 
intertwined than ever before by telecommunications, trade, and investment. 
Will the Asian crisis and its global financial consequences push nations 
in the opposite direction, everyone for himself. In today's part two 
of a five-part series on the Asian crisis, Dateline looks at the impact 
the crisis has had on keeping markets open. Here's is VOA's Linda 
Cashtan. This is the first decade in history in which countries around 
the world participated in a genuinely global economic system. The 
fall of communism and almost universal espousal of free market economics, 
paved the way, as did innovations in technology. New communication 
systems enabled international markets to interact instantaneously 
and continuously. Sophisticated credit instruments provided unprecedented 
liquidity. The world prospered as never before. After years of economic 
growth, however, when financial problems in Asia spread quickly and 
uncontrollably to other continents, the world discovered the downside 
of global economics. Morgan Stanley international economist, Joseph 
Quinlan, says the global crisis altered attitudes about open markets. 
When times are good, we can embrace globalization. When times are 
bad, we like to point the finger on that globalization, amidst the 
more open trade, investment flows. You see it in China, you see it 
in Malaysia, in India, even in Germany, for that matter, you know, 
in Europe where there is a collision coming between the external forces 
and the domestic forces. Increasingly, economist Joseph Quinlan says, 
we seem to be witnessing a retreat from the tenants of free market 
capitalism. Malaysia, one of the first countries affected, was the 
first to blame its recession on foreign speculators. In a controversial 
move at the beginning of September, Malaysia's Prime Minster, Mahatier 
Muhammed, announced its currency, the ringet, would no longer be traded 
outside the country. VOA correspondent, Ed Warner, reports economists 
are debating Malaysia's attempt to restrict the free flow of money. 
A minority of economists accept controls as a temporary measure to 
relieve pressure on a currency, but in the long run, it is agreed 
they lead to more bureaucracy and corruption. At a recent meeting 
at the Heritage Foundation, Radolpho Saverino, Secretary General of 
the Association of Southeast Asian Nations, said Malaysia's resort 
to exchange controls, while controversial, should not be exaggerated. 
First, it is limited to Malaysia. The authorities in Indonesia, the 
Philippines, Thailand, have explicitly said that they will not go 
for this route. It is also is limited in scope. There have been headlines 
that say Malaysia is isolating itself from the world, but I think 
it is clear that the controls are applied only to trading and the 
Malaysian currency outside of Malaysia. But a trading regime, and 
the investment regime to remain as before. Julian Weiss, an economist 
who specializes in Asia, says the new capital controls may not discourage 
foreign investors since Malaysia remains very competitive with regard 
to costs, taxes and the quality of its work force. If nothing else, 
the Malaysian authorities have raised a critical issue concerning 
the impact of technology and the rapid movement of capital overnight 
or within seconds, in some cases, at a keystroke. Not all the people 
raising these questions now can come up with the right answers, but 
at least they are asking the right questions and that, in the long 
term, for Malaysia and for its East Asian neighbors may be very important. 
Mr. Weiss says high tech U.S. investors are showing considerable interest 
in a planned multimedia super corridor in Malaysia, akin to California's 
silicon valley. A now subdued Asian tiger is expected to recover its 
roar. VOA correspondent, Ed Warner. Many economists today agree that 
financial speculators who make their money by betting on a currency's 
likely fall, do undermine market confidence and can precipitate dire 
financial consequences. On the other hand, U.S. Federal Reserve Board 
Chairman, Alan Greenspan, warned a recent meeting of finance ministers, 
when you install capital controls, you discourage investors from putting 
money into a country. And foreign investment creates jobs. To be sure 
any economy can operate with its borders closed to foreign investment. 
But the evidence is persuasive, that an economy deprived of the benefits 
of new technologies and inhospitable to risk capital, will be mired 
at a suboptimal standard of living and slow growth rate associated 
with out-of-date technologies. U.S. Federal Reserve Board Chairman, 
Alan Greenspan. While economist debate the pros and cons of currency 
controls, however, there is little debate on another aspect of globalism, 
world trade. Economist Robert Liten of Washington's Brookings Institution 
echoes the views of many when he says free trade and economic prosperity 
go hand in hand. The one bright spot is that so far, there has not 
been a lot of protectionism, as a result of this crisis. In fact, 
I think there has been a significant degree of market opening in Asia, 
since the crisis, because that has been a condition for them to get 
IMF money. On the other hand, there are signs, here in the United 
States and Latin America, China, and in other countries that they 
may now want to turn to more protectionist measures in the trade area. 
But the United States, Robert Liten says, the impetus for protectionism 
stems from having to absorb an extraordinary share of the world's 
imports since the crisis began. Currency devaluations in the effected 
countries have made their products cheap and in a desperate effort 
to earn foreign exchange, many have lowered prices further to make 
as many sales as possible. Such tactics have angered some industries. 
Like steel, for example, Merrill Lynch metals analyst, Robert Shernosky, 
says Russia, South Korea and Japan have been selling their steel in 
the U.S. market below the cost of producing it, injuring U.S. competitors. 
You may actually begin to see some of these companies, domestic producers 
actually go bankrupt. Because to give you a sense of the amount of 
capacity domestically coming into the marketplace, you would need 
to take out 90 percent of the imports just to stay status quo with 
the new production that is coming up domestically. Robert Shernosky 
says the latest U.S. trade figures point to the biggest overall deficit 
since the government recalculated the way it measures trade flows 
in 1992. U.S. trade representative, Charlene Barshesky, is going what 
she can to counter protectionist pressures. As we hear in this report 
from VOA correspondent, Rick Munez,. Charlene Barshesky views the 
financial panic that erupted in Asia as the most dangerous economic 
predicament the world has faced in half a century. She says the tangible 
effects of the shock have already reached U.S. shores. These days, 
about two in every five containers leaves the port of Los Angeles 
empty. This is a graphic illustration of the downturn in our goods 
exports, our exports to Japan this year in goods is expected to drop 
by about $8 billion to China, Hong Kong, Taiwan, about $3 billion, 
to the rest of Asia, $20 billion. The U.S. trade official says Washington's 
top priority must be to keep its markets open during the economic 
storm. We have to keep our market open and available or else we will 
be hurt, our trading partners will be hurt, the crisis will get worsened 
and we will be in a vicious cycle. Ms. Barshesky points out that merely 
80 percent of the world's consumption takes place beyond the United 
States, making U.S. exports all the more important in the coming years. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>