<DOC>
<DOCNO> VOA19981027.0500.0356 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Just hours from now, NATO's ambassadors are going to be combing over 
reports to determine what Slobodan Milosevic has done to withdraw 
Yugoslav military forces from the Kosovo province. If he has not done 
enough to fulfill his commitment, to stand down in the ethnically 
Albanian province, NATO planes could fly over Kosovo later tonight. 
From Brussels, John Frazier joins us. He has been tracking the story 
for VOA. John, we have heard various reports that Yugoslav forces 
are on the move. What is it going to take to satisfy NATO that Mr. 
Milosevic has done enough? Well, certainly there is evidence that 
he has begun a quite sizable troop withdrawal from Kosovo. Not just 
the Army forces, but also the special police forces, who have also 
been instrumental in the oppression of ethnic Albanians in the Kosovo 
province. What NATO has to decide really is whether he has gone far 
enough. Over the weekend, NATO's two senior commandos traveled to 
meet President Milosevic and his aides. And they gave them specific 
details of every unit, every deployment inside Kosovo and told him 
exactly what he has to do and the assessments are now coming in. NATO 
ambassadors have to decide whether he has substantially bowed to NATO's 
demand. Now, that is one phrase we have heard substantial compliance. 
What is NATO's definition of substantial compliance? They will not 
tell us and I think that is because it is a political decision. They 
are going to have to weigh out all the intelligence. Obviously, it 
is easy to look at one extreme or the other, if all the troops are 
still in Kosovo, that clearly is not compliance. If every last tank, 
every last soldier, and every last policeman has been withdrawn, then 
that is full compliance. And certainly the message from NATO headquarters 
is that they want full compliance or something approaching it or, 
at least an assurance that that will happen within hours or days, 
rather than weeks. I think without that, then NATO would be forced 
to match its words with actions and to launch these air strikes. Now, 
you have introduced two points there, John. One, could NATO decide, 
could the NATO ambassadors decide today that they will give Milosevic 
more time? And, two, are they serious? You seem to indicate that, 
yes indeed, they will not back down from this threat, if it is shown 
that he has not done-met this test of substantial compliance. On the 
issue of more time, yes they can. And they have already extended a 
four-day deadline with a further 10-day deadline. That latest ten 
days expires today, this evening, Brussels time. Are they serious? 
They have to be serious. It is not just the oppression of people in 
Kosovo which is at stake, it is NATO's reputation. The Alliance did 
make a firm decision two weeks ago that it would launch air strikes 
against the Serbian targets in Kosovo and possibly in Yugoslavia, 
in Serbia, itself and rest of Serbia, unless President Milosevic backed 
down and withdrew his forces and agreed to a series of other conditions. 
Including a dialogue on a peaceful settlement to this problem. So, 
I think that the Alliance knows that if it were to let Milosevic get 
away with it this time, than any further threat, any future threat, 
to another individual in that region or elsewhere would not have sufficient 
credibility. We saw in Bosnia that NATO was prepared to match its 
words with actions. And certainly the message from NATO headquarters 
is that, that hasn't changed. They are serious. If Milosevic does 
not comply, then the air strikes will go ahead. Now, we have got to 
be wondering how much of a factor the NATO air strikes over Bosnia 
several years ago is weighing on the minds of these ambassadors as 
they meet. Have you heard any discussion about that, any comparisons 
with what might happen this time from last time? Well, certainly, 
they are well aware that NATO has-there is a precedent for NATO action 
in the region. And indeed, it, I think the consensus of the international 
community is that, without those NATO air strikes at the time, there 
would not have been the move towards peace, the basic peace process, 
and the move towards some kind of stability in Bosnia. Obviously, 
it is not perfect yet. But, certainly, the civil war ended there. 
The message to Milosevic at the weekend from NATO's commanders was 
that he cannot afford to ignore NATO's warning. And the message that 
they brought back was that he did accept that. He has promised to 
do what NATO has said, but NATO is judging him not by his words, but 
by the withdrawal of his forces. And that, which is being assessed 
now, the reports are coming into NATO headquarters as I speak. And 
within a few hours, I think the ambassadors will be in a position 
to make up their minds on whether or not Milosevic has substantially 
complied with the demands of the international community. John Frazier, 
joining us from Brussels. Thank you. Thank you. Pleasure. We will 
be looking forward to your coverage of this throughout the day. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>