<DOC>
<DOCNO> VOA19981027.0500.0785 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
And here in the U.S., nearly 30 percent of California's residents 
are Hispanic. And they are becoming an important political force in 
the West Coast State. VOA's Mike O'Sullivan looks at one congressional 
race in next week's elections where the Hispanic vote is the key to 
victory. California's 46th Congressional District in suburban Orange 
County, south of Los Angeles, was historically conservative, and Republican. 
That has changed in recent years with an influx of Spanish-speaking 
immigrants from Mexico and other parts of Latin America. In 1996, 
nine-term Republican Congressman, Bob Dornan lost a tightly contested 
race to his democratic challenger, Loretta Sanchez, by less than 1,000 
votes. Mr. Dornan claimed that illegal votes by non-citizens gave 
Ms. Sanchez her victory. He appealed to the U.S. Congress to overturn 
the election, but after a long investigation, it refused. Ms. Sanchez, 
who is now the incumbent congresswoman, has a substantial lead in 
this year's campaign. Three election polls show her ahead of Mr. Dornan 
by more than 10 percent. Political scientist Fred Smaller of Chaffman 
University, says two controversial measures on the California ballot 
brought Hispanics to the polls two years ago. The first eliminated 
public welfare benefits for illegal immigrants, the second ended preferences 
for minority group members in hiring for state jobs and admission 
to state universities. Many republicans, including Mr. Dornan, endorsed 
both measures. Mr. Smaller says anger over the measures has led to 
a support of Democrats, such as Ms. Sanchez, who is Hispanic. Particularly 
when you have a candidate like Sanchez, it really does bring people 
to the polls and they are overwhelmingly supporting her. Although 
Hispanics comprise 29 percent of California's population. Many are 
not yet citizens. And so they make up just 19 percent of California 
voters. And since some choose not to vote, Hispanics or Latinos make 
up just 12 percent of the active electorate. Those citizens who actually 
turn out to cast ballots on Election Day. Marty Camillo, the director 
of California's Field Political Poll, says while this percentage may 
be low, it is growing. I would not discount their affects statewide. 
That 12 percent figure has been growing with each election cycle. 
Four years ago, for example, only about eight or nine percent of the 
electorate were Latino. So we are seeing an increase this time around. 
But, the affect of Latino voters is much greater in certain districts 
where there is a high concentration of Latinos and certainly where 
Latino voting comprises in many districts half or more of the vote. 
Those congressional districts are mostly in southern California, in 
Los Angeles, Orange County, and San Diego. In the 46th District, challenger 
Bob Dornan recognizes the strength of Hispanic voters and now openly 
courts them. He says he is a champion of traditional Hispanic values, 
including a focus on family and opposition to abortion. But in California, 
60 to 70 percent of Hispanics, vote democratic. And as their numbers 
grow, Democratic Party candidates, such as Loretta Sanchez, are likely 
to benefit. Mike O'Sullivan, VOA News, Los Angeles. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>