<DOC>
<DOCNO> VOA19981027.0500.1828 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Russian President Boris Yeltsin is entered a sanitarium outside Moscow. 
It is not the first time he has been to the same facility. But this 
time, he has canceled an important trip to meet with European union 
officials and international bankers. VOA's Peter Heimline is on the 
phone with us now from Moscow. On the line, I should say. Pete, is 
this the same place he has been a number of times before? As a matter 
of fact, it is, Paul. Barvica Sanitarium is not far from the Dacha, 
the country home where Mr. Yeltsin has been spending a lot of his 
time lately. It is a well-equipped medical facility and it is where 
he spent a lot of time, for instance, recovering from his heart surgery 
two years ago. Now, of course, his health has been a real cause for 
concern and that has been mounting over the last few weeks against 
all of that backdrop, what does this admission mean? Do you think? 
Well, Charlene, it is hard to say exactly what it means. The Kremlin 
has been saying that he is suffering from a weakness, what they call 
asthenia, exhaustion, and erratic blood pressure. But there is growing 
speculation here that what it really means is that people in the Kremlin 
are battling among themselves about what to do about Mr. Yeltsin's 
health. Many people say he does not-they do not want him to look bad. 
Two weeks ago, he went to Central Asia and he stumbled and staggered 
during a public welcoming ceremony. And there is fear that his weakness 
might lead to another embarrassing performance like that. Well, if 
you look at the pictures of President Yeltsin on television, he certainly 
did not look good. This might set the stage for a political power 
struggle in the Kremlin. Has there been any talk of such seating power 
maybe to other people? Well, the Kremlin, officially, does not talk 
about that. But there is certainly a lot of talk in the news media 
about it and the potential presidential candidates are already making 
plans to get their campaigns geared up. Moscow mayor, Yuri Luchcoff, 
being among the most prominent of those had some meetings yesterday 
and a group of politicians got together and pledged their support 
to him. But the person who seems to be acting as president, at the 
time, is a Prime Minister, Yevgeny Primakov. He is a long time trusted 
ally of Mr. Yeltsin and he is, of course, the man who went to Vienna 
to stand in when Mr. Yeltsin was unable to go. Peter, I have got one 
last question. Under the U.S. Constitution, if the president is disabled, 
the Vice President automatically takes control. Is there such a mechanism 
for that in the old Soviet Union, in Russia. Well, you know, there 
is no vice president any more. There was, but the vice presidential 
position was done away with. Under the current system, the prime minister 
would take over for a few months, if the president were determined 
to be incapacitated, and would have to call new elections. So, the 
system has not been tested and it is not exactly sure and there has 
been a lot of talk maybe of bringing back the position of vice president, 
so in case Mr. Yeltsin is unable to serve, a vice president could 
take over. Peter, thank you so much. He is our bureau chief in Moscow 
and, of course, I am sure we are going to be updating this story for 
the day. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>