<DOC>
<DOCNO> VOA19981027.0500.2700 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
American children watch an average of three to four hours of television 
each day. Nearly two-thirds of those programs include acts of violence. 
Study after study has shown that repeated viewing of such scenes may 
cause youngsters to become immune to violence and gradually accept 
it as a way to solve problems. The American Academy of Child and Adolescent 
Psychiatry calls violence on television a significant contributor 
to aggressive behavior. A new study in Britain looked at the effects 
of media violence on adults. As Lori Casman reports from London, researchers 
found that men are less affected than women by televised violence 
and want fewer restrictions on TV programming. Bloody scenes of street 
fights, wife beating, and rape on TV can be enough to make you wince, 
cover your eyes, or shield your children from viewing. That is if 
you are a woman. A recent study for Britain's Broadcasting Standards 
Commission, says most men just do not care that much. One of the key 
things that came out in the study, was the way in which men really 
do not think that screen violence is an issue. They were not concerned 
with it. Phillip Schlessenger teaches film and media studies at Scotland's 
University of Sterling. He brought together a cross-section of British 
men ranging in age from 18 to 65 in 15 different discussion groups 
to compare their reactions to an earlier study of female viewers. 
We interviewed using focus groups, 88 men from all over the UK. They 
were varied according to ethnicity, age, class, education, and sexual 
orientation as well. The study shows men were sometimes shocked by 
scenes of domestic violence, but could relate to scenes of street 
violence. They rarely talked about what impact the scenes might have 
on their families. We also found that when men were viewing violent 
programs or film, they were not really thinking about the consequences. 
They were not thinking about how women might think about what they 
were viewing, nor about how children might be affected. And again, 
this contrasted very strongly with earlier research in which we found 
that when women were viewing such programs, they actually wanted to 
get inside of the heads of men who might be perpetrators of violence. 
They wondered how their partners might be viewing it. And they also 
were very concerned about the impact on children. Mr. Schlessenger 
says both men and women easily distinguished between fact and fantasy 
but reactions among men appeared to vary by ethnic and religious backgrounds. 
Ethnic background was quite significant but and quite suttle ways. 
We got unsolicited comments about racial stereotyping in soap opera. 
The Pakistani respondents, who were Muslim, have really quite strong 
views about the role of alcohol in causing violence and were apt to 
read a lot of the violence in those terms. The results of the study 
have fueled debate among British broadcasters about how much and what 
kind of violence should be shown on TV. There really seems to be quite 
different values at work. But I -we do not know whether those different 
values lead to different choices in terms of the programs and the 
films that people watch. But, that is certainly something that will 
need to be looked at. Few men responding to the latest study support 
cutting the violence out of action films. They say it is all part 
of the fantasy. Women urged greater control of TV programming to reduce 
the influence on children who do not make that distinction. Lori Casman, 
VOA News, London. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>