<DOC>
<DOCNO> VOA19981027.1600.0576 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Social Democrat, Gerhard Schroder, has been sworn in as Germany's 
new chancellor, ushering in that Nation's first Center Left Government 
in 16 years. Mr. Schroder is Germany's seventh chancellor since the 
end of World War II. He was earlier elected to the top political post 
by the newly seated parliament. Correspondent, Suzanne Kelly, spoke 
with VOA's Frank Witis and Steve Norman about the mood in Bonn. Well, 
obviously, if you are Gerhard Schroder the mood is extremely ecstatic. 
Gerhard Schroder first rattled iron gates in the chancellery when 
he was just a young man. It was about 16 years ago, actually. And 
today is his day in the spotlight, absolutely. He wanted into the 
chancellery and now he is officially in the chancellery. Most of the 
SPD is quite excited as well as their coalition partners. That is 
the environmental Greens Party in Germany. This is also their first 
taste of power at the federal level in more than 15 years. So it is 
quite an exciting event for both parties. We also have something, 
Suzanne, going on there, too that is new. A new president of a parliament. 
Let us talk a little bit about Wolfgang Tiersa and what he is going 
to be like as president of the parliament. Wolfgang Tiersa gave a 
very touching speech yesterday to parliament as his first parliament 
match. The new parliament match. He is a 55 year-old East German and 
that is unusual in Germany because he is the first East German to 
achieve such a high post serving as president of parliament. He has 
been a member of parliament for eight years and he wanted to be Schroeder's 
ambassador to the East. That didn't work out, but I would say he ended 
up with a pretty good job instead. He has been the eastern leader 
of the SPD since 1990. And in 1989, Mr. Tiersa was in a dissident 
group, a member of a dissident group, and that group's forum help 
led to the fall of the Berlin Wall. In a speech yesterday, he said 
that this is absolutely more than a symbolic gesture, that Germany, 
perhaps, is getting one step closer to the unity they have been looking 
for since the fall of the Berlin wall. Now, Suzanne, a little of difference 
here in this government, unlike Britain. The new chancellor is not 
head of his party, is he? No, he is not head of his party. The chancellor 
role here is very much that of a statesman. The chancellor really 
focuses on foreign policy and overseeing domestic policy as well. 
But there is also a president and then there is also a leader of the 
party, the parliamentary president. So, it is a much different structure 
than you find in the United States or in Great Britain. Gerhard Schroder 
now comes to power at a time when lots of changes are taking place, 
of course, the cost of unification has set in. And the capital moves 
to Berlin soon. Let's talk a little bit about the change in government 
back to Berlin and about the symbol, the division, the unity, the 
whole sense of what it is like there with these changes. The most 
of the Berlin is expected to come in 1999 and Gerhard Schroder has 
already said he will do everything he can to speed it up and make 
sure that the government moves in early 1999. Now as you can really 
understand, anybody who has moved from one house to another is a huge 
process and moving an entire government is even more complicated and 
difficult and requires a great deal of planning. However, Schroder 
feels that Berlin is really truly the capital of Germany and Wolgang 
Tiersa, the new parliamentary president also says that the move once 
the government goes back to Berlin, will show once more a sign of 
unity. It is closer to east and west and it does bring the two countries 
together, symbolically, they say. However, there are some groups in 
Bonn who are very much against the move and say that the Federal Public 
of Berlin is something that should be feared because of, obviously, 
Germany's history. Any concern about the new rise of ultranationalism, 
particularly of citizenship laws that are about to be liberalized 
by the new government? We are just always concerned here about ultranationalism, 
although the politicians here try to keep it out of the spotlight 
and focus on other issues and the positives in Germany, which is understandable. 
However, there are some protests by far right groups that happen on 
a fairly regular basis. But Wolfgang Tiersa said yesterday, in his 
speech, that we will do everything he can to sort of keep these groups 
of people in check and protect democracy and Gerhard Schroder, of 
course, has said something along the similar lines to that, as well. 
The new immigration policy is, in fact, going to be a legal way to 
change the structure of Germany, if you will, from the citizenship 
base, so more people, more foreigners will actually be German. And 
ultimately, the politicians are hoping that the far right groups will 
eventually fade away. Correspondent, Suzanne Kelly, speaking from 
Bonn with VOA's Frank Whitis and Steve Norman. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>