<DOC>
<DOCNO> VOA19981027.1600.1359 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
One of the most famous small towns in America is Johnstown, Pennsylvania. 
Unfortunately for Johnstown, it gained its fame through a tragedy. 
The deadliest flood in American history. VOA travel reporter, Ted 
Lanfare has the story of that flood and the fascinating museum in 
Johnstown that has preserved that story from more than a century ago. 
Fascination with the terrible Johnstown flood of 1889 still draws 
thousands of visitors to the flood museum in the little steel town 
in Pennsylvania's Allegheny Mountains. Johnstown was the nation's 
mightiest steel center, more prosperous than Pittsburgh. Turning out 
steel rails and barbed wire. The air was yellow and black from the 
smoke. But the pay was good and the workers, happy for the jobs. Johnstown 
lay on a flat plain at the base of a mountain valley so steep that 
the hillsides rose straight upward from the river, creating almost 
a funnel pointed directly downhill at Johnstown. Perhaps you have 
heard the fable about crying wolf. The wolf is coming. The wolf is 
coming. The wolf never comes and people become complacent. So when 
the wolf does come, nobody believes the warning. It was like that 
in Johnstown in the 1880s. The people warned of the dangers of a catastrophic 
flood. The state had built a huge earthen dam way up river in the 
mountains, almost 22 kilometers away from Johnstown. Behind that damn 
was a big reservoir, a pleasure lake full of yachts and sailboats, 
the private play land for wealthy industrialists from Pittsburgh. 
The damn had developed leaks, so when it started to rain hard on the 
night of May 30, 1889, a few alarmists wondered if the damn might 
bright break. The flood is coming. The flood is coming. But even if 
it did break, it was so far from Johnstown, that folks thought the 
water would surely flatten out by the time it reached town. But drenching 
thunderstorms kept pounding the mountainsides on to the next day. 
Up at the lake, water rose fast, increasing the intense pressure against 
the damn. Crews worked frantically to free a spillway so some of the 
water could escape. At in the afternoon, the damn burst with the force 
of Niagara Falls, sending millions and millions of liters of water 
down that funnel toward Johnstown. An engineer whose train was parked 
safely up the hillside raced his train backward toward town sounding 
his whistle. A few lucky people heard it and ran for their lives. 
Richard Burger, the Executive Director of the Johnstown Flood Museum, 
says hundreds of others never got the chance. A flood wave picked 
up everything in its path. Trees, houses, boulders, locomotives, dead 
animals, you name it, and it formed a giant wall of wreckage and it 
plowed ahead of the damn. So that when people saw the flood wave, 
it did not look like a wall of water, it looked like a mountain of 
wreckage going across the landscape. The museum's videotape tells 
what Johnstown had in store. Within a period of 10 minutes, the center 
of the city had been swept away. Twenty-two hundred men, women, and 
children were dead. One out of every three bodies found would never 
be identified. Ninety-nine whole families had been wiped out. John 
Berger says the stories spawned by the Great Flood are almost endless. 
There were, I think 14 books written about the disaster. There were 
major recreations on Coney Island and the Boardwalk in Atlantic City. 
You know, depicting the Johnstown Flood. There was a 1926 Hollywood 
film starring Janet Gainer as a Paul Revere of the Johnstown Flood. 
After the cataclysm, hundreds of reporters and photographers descended 
on Johnstown to tell of the callous rich above and the humble victims 
below. Clara Barton, founder of the American Red Cross, made her reputation 
tending to the injured and displaced in Johnstown. These days, steel 
is still being made in Johnstown and tourism thought the valley is 
growing highlighted by the Flood Museum. Ironically, it is located 
in a library building donated by Andrew Carnegie right after the Great 
Flood. Carnegie was one of the owners of the pleasure club that cavorted 
on the lake behind the damn. Neither he nor any other wealthy club 
member was ever held accountable in court for what happened to the 
damn and the flood that devastated Johnstown, Pennsylvania. I am Ted 
Lanfare. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>