<DOC>
<DOCNO> VOA19981027.1600.3176 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
It is time for our weekly look at the most popular films at North 
American theaters. Alan Silverman has the list starting with a futuristic 
drama at number five. In soldier, Kurt Russell stars as a warrior 
genetically selected at birth and raised to be an ideal and ruthless 
fighter. He gets plenty of action but not much dialogue. Russell speaks 
barely a hundred words in the entire film. The guy just does not speak. 
He has never been asked an opinion, he has never been asked to think. 
He has always simply been told what to do so that he could be a perfect 
sort of soldier. It is a little bit robotic and yet underneath a mask, 
you realize at some point in the story, when he just completely breaks 
down, that he is just a fractured human being. Based with a barrage 
of negative reviews, Soldier barely musters a fifth place opening. 
A twisted horror comedy slips to number four. Bride of Chuckie, the 
return of the homicidal child's doll first introduced a decade ago 
in Child's Play. Bride of Chuckie ends up in fourth place. At number 
three, an animated adventure that is a big hit with family audiences, 
Antz, spelled A-N-T-Z, features Woody Allen as the voice of Zee, a 
neurotic ant desperate to be more than just another worker. Also featuring 
the voices of Sharon Stone, Sylvester Stallone, Jennifer Lopez, and 
Danny Glover, Antz is still strong in third place. Last week's top 
film drops a notch to number two. Practical magic stars Nicole Kidman 
and Sandra Bullock as sisters from a long line of witches who are 
destined to be unlucky in love. Bullock says it is as much about the 
family relationship between the two women as it is their search for 
romance. It is a great thing to be around women that get it. And I 
think in a business where we spend so much time pitting ourselves 
against each other, women, it was great. That is what I loved about 
this story was between two women that were, really needed and loved 
each other and were not taking each other's husbands, and stabbing 
each other in the back. So it was just great to have a love story 
and to get everything we could from that relationship, as you would 
romantic relationship between a man and a woman. You want that chemistry 
and that love to be there. Practical Magic weaves its spell in second 
place, pushed down by a clever fantasy that opens up at number one. 
In Pleasantville, a teenage brother and sister from the 1990s are 
magically zapped into a 1950s black and white TV show. Their influence 
brings color and turmoil to the seemingly serene world of Pleasantville. 
Reese Witherspoon plays the sister. Toby McGuire costars as her brother. 
To me, you know, it is very much this fantasy utopia that really does 
not exist underneath and I think you can feel that before Pleasantville 
gets disrupted. You know, by Reese and myself, I think you can feel 
it lurking underneath that there is other stuff going on. I think 
particularly, you know, in Bill and Jones' characters, you can sense 
it before we even get there, that it is not quite what it seems. Joan 
Ellen and William H. May played the TV parents in the social fable 
written and directed by Gary Ross. Pleasantville starts its run at 
number one, the new most popular movie at North American theaters. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>