<DOC>
<DOCNO> VOA19981027.1600.0840 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
President Clinton's political and legal troubles stemming from his 
affair with former White House intern, Monica Lewinski, may not have 
much of an impact on the forthcoming congressional elections. Only 
a few candidates for the House of Representatives are even mentioning 
the impeachment process and many voters say, they just do not want 
to hear about it. VOA's Paula Wolfsen takes us to the small towns 
and rural communities of the state of Ohio for a view from the heartland. 
In southeastern Ohio, it seems everyone has something to say about 
the president's problems. From a high school teacher in a rural area. 
People are just, they just want it over with. And it is becoming difficult 
to make decisions because we have this fear that he has become ineffective. 
To the chief fire fighter in the town of Bellaire. Too much money 
was spent on an investigation that appeared to be an illicit affair, 
$40 million, or more. People have strong opinions about the presidential 
scandal. But when it comes to the congressional election campaign, 
voters do not make a connection. Yes. We are voting for the congressman, 
not the president. I do not think that, that. I am not considering 
that at all. Vicki Hall works with high school students in Woodsfield, 
Ohio. A community with high unemployment and a school system in financial 
trouble. I always vote for a person. I do not really attach a political 
party. I vote for what the person, the issues that the person stands 
for. At campaign events in Southeastern Ohio, the Monica Lewinski 
case is rarely, if ever, mentioned. At debates and town meetings, 
the issues that dominate are those that directly affect the lives 
of voters. Jobs, education, and the fate of government programs that 
help the elderly. It is an area with a strong democratic party base 
and a republican congressman. Bob Ney is leading in his race for reelection. 
He says he is living proof that hometown issues and not national party 
politics are driving the electorate. Out here, people are frustrated 
with the situation with the White House, but they are going to vote 
local. Mr. Ney says his concern is that some voters will be so disillusioned 
by all the talk of scandal in Washington, that they just stay home 
on election day. He says that is a worry for both political parties 
across the country. But in Southeastern Ohio, turnout usually runs 
above the national norm. Voters like Gene Samuels say they have plenty 
to ponder. As they prepare to cast ballots. I think each voter should 
vote it the way they feel for the candidate, not by what is going 
on in Washington. It is said as Ohio goes, so goes the nation. Here 
in the heartland, it appears this will be a status quo election. There 
was little talk of change. Lots of talk about local issues and an 
attitude that any discussion of presidential impeachment is a matter 
best left for another day. Paula Wolfsen, VOA News, Bellaire, Ohio. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>