<DOC>
<DOCNO> VOA19981027.0500.1351 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
This year marks the 150th anniversary of the Mexican American War. 
A conflict over territory that includes Texas. Though Mexico lost 
that war, in cultural terms, it might be considered the victor today. 
Texas is home to millions of Mexican Americans proud of their dual 
heritage that created Tex-Mex, a unique hybrid of Texan and Mexican 
cultures. Still, a legacy of poverty and discrimination persists. 
Caroline Weiber reports. Mexican Americans call themselves Chicanos 
elsewhere in America. But in Texas, they are Tejanos. Many trace their 
roots in Texas back four or five generations. And in San Antonio and 
some other areas, more than half the population is Mexican-American. 
Tejanos point out that Texan culture itself, is largely Tex-Mex. It 
is difficult to imagine Texas without Conhunto music or hot chilies 
and corn tortillas or the cowboy culture that Texans borrowed from 
Mexico. There are so many things that it encompasses, I think one 
of the main things that it does for us is that we feel like we have 
two cultures. For me, it is knowing how to sing and dance and have 
a happy home and dancing and good food and just a lot of neat things. 
Seventy year-old, Sylvia Rodriguez of Houston is a fourth generation 
Texan. When she was a child, she remembers, school children mocked 
those who brought tortillas to eat at lunch because they were a badge 
of being a poor Mexican-American. And now I laugh because people are 
eating them and buying them and I am going like, my mother told me 
that was going to happen. And I think it is, we are strong people. 
And I do not think anybody is going to follow us up. My mother had 
a land grant. And some how or other it got lost. And so we laughed 
about that because, it sounds horrible to say it, but our children 
would marry back into it and get it back one way or the other. And 
that has happened in my family already. In Austin, the state's capital, 
the center of Tejano culture, might be LaPena, a community arts center, 
and Los Monitas Restaurant right next door. They were founded by two 
sisters, Cynthia and Lydia Perez. Cynthia explains they wanted to 
give Tejanos a place where they can enjoy their traditional culture. 
There is the music, the art, the poetry. It is just a natural ability 
to draw people together so we can discuss these things. Doing that 
helps us understand who we are, helps us build our own children's 
self esteem, so that they know who they are, what their identity is. 
That is important, Mexican-Americans say. But the Chicanos in Texas, 
as elsewhere in the United States, remain an underclass, disproportionately 
poorer, and less likely to attend college. Rebecca Flores-Harrington 
is a fourth-generation Tejano from San Antonio. She is struck by the 
disparity between the popularity of Tex-Mex culture and the continuing 
problems Chicanos face in getting equal access to housing and jobs. 
She says it is not all traceable to the poverty of new immigrants. 
The legacy of discrimination also holds back those who have been in 
Texas for generations. When I was going to school, I mean we still 
had a segregated school. When I was going to school. We had the Mexican 
school, we had the black school, and we had the white school. And 
what it meant to be in the Mexican school was that you did not go 
to college. That those classes that were being given to you were classes 
for a trade and, of course, the powers that be thought that that was 
our future, right, that we were poor. We had to work, so therefore 
they were sticking us in trade school. Rebecca Flores-Harrington managed 
to make it to college, but she says most of her classmates were screened 
out. Despite the continuing problems, she says, Texas still is much 
more welcoming for Mexican-Americans than most other places in America. 
Texas has no strong anti immigration or English-only movements she 
points out, and there is also the comfort of sheer numbers. Texas 
is our home, right. This is where we are from and I do not know what 
it is about it. But whatever the races in it, the segregation, discrimination 
that we have suffered here, this is our place, and we do come back 
to it and we feel that we can move and do different things. One thing 
that really kind of always makes me real happy and I the blacks tell 
me the same things about Atlanta. Is that than when you are in San 
Antonio, you have Mexicans everywhere, right. And they are all over 
the place, they have the best jobs, and they have the worst jobs. 
But whatever you see, all different kinds of folks walking down the 
street and it is like, this is like your home. You feel totally in 
place. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>