<DOC>
<DOCNO> VOA19981027.0500.2234 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Thailand says its troops have killed four Cambodian soldiers who had 
slipped illegally across the border. Tai military officials said a 
gun battle broke out Monday after about 20 Cambodian soldiers raided 
a Comier refugee camp inside Thailand. They said one Thai soldier 
was wounded in the fight and the remaining Cambodian soldiers escaped 
back across the border. Thai officials said the Cambodians had raided 
the refugee camps, which were set up in Eastern Sisiket province primarily 
to house Comier Rouge families. Cambodia has not commented on the 
Tai report of the clash. Thousands of Cambodian refugees have fled 
into Thailand in recent years to escape factional fighting in their 
homeland. Cambodia has many grim legacies from its many years of civil 
war. Among them, the fact that is has between four and six million 
land mines buried in its soil. Now, 250 delegates from around the 
world have gathered in Quanam Pen to study ways to dispose of land 
mines, to learn from Cambodia's relative success. But as Hugh WATKIN 
reports from the Cambodian capital, the conference has become embroiled 
in controversy over allegations that the meeting is waste of money. 
With between four and six million land mines buried in the patty fields 
and forests of Cambodia, the country is among the most heavily mined 
places on the planet. Some 40,000 Cambodians have been maimed by land 
mines and countless more killed, with most of the casualties being 
innocent civilians. But with international help, Cambodia has made 
significant progress towards reducing the terrible human and economic 
costs which is the legacy of decades of civil war. Public education 
campaigns and comprehensive identification of mine fields have seen 
casualty rates from around 500 killed and maimed each month in the 
early 1990s to around 150 a month now. Cambodian Mine Action Center 
chairman, Ing Muhlee says it will take decades to finally rid the 
country of the land mine scourge, but he adds he is confident casualties 
can be further reduced over the next few years. Cambodia's relative 
success makes it a model for other countries similarly plagued by 
the land mine menace. But this week's conference has drawn criticism 
as a waste of money. The Japanese-funded meeting is being held at 
a five star hotel in the capital and the bill for the three-day conference 
is in excess of $300,000. Paul Heslof, Cambodia Program Manager for 
the Halo Trust Mine Clearing Organization, says the amount of money 
spent on this meeting and others could be better utilized. He says 
if the money spent on conferences in the past five year had gone into 
mine clearing, there would be a lot fewer mines in the ground and 
much fewer casualties. That sentiment is echoed by Archie Law, the 
Cambodia Director of the Mines Advisory Group, who says that the number 
of meetings and conferences held around the world is detracting from 
the main objective of actually clearing land mines and reducing the 
terrible human toll. This is Hugh Watkin for VOA News, Pinompen. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>