<DOC>
<DOCNO> PRI19981009.2000.2628 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
And now not to leave the subject of apples entirely, we're going to 
give you the answer to today's "Geo Quiz". Remember, it was a historic 
region of rolling hills and apple orchards that juts out into the 
English Channel. For the answer and for a local apple recipe, we're 
going to turn to Chef Alain Sailhac of the French Culinary Institute. 
And Monsieur Sailhac, where are we? We are in Normandy. In Normandy. 
And our recipe is...? Apple wrapped in pastacherie and cooked in the 
over for 25 or 30 minutes. Puff pastry around just a baked apple? 
That's right. It is because in Normandy, there are a lot of apples 
and a lot of butter. In fact, our Bordeaux-style. Now you say that 
the ingredients in Normandy are crucial to the taste. You have very 
good apples there. Here in the United States if you wanted to make 
this, is there any particular kind of American apple you should use? 
Yes. I think, you know, I use the Courtland apple. Courtland, yes? 
The Courtland apple, which is not too hard and not too soft altogether, 
you know. And is better not to take a very, very, very large apple, 
you know. Because if it's too large, the dough will cook so fast and 
the apple will not be cooked at all inside. I'm looking right now 
at the French Culinary Institute's booklet. It says "A Salute to Healthy 
Cooking." That's right. Tell me something about this, what would you 
call it, campaign? I don't want to say it's a campaign. I would like 
to say that that taking the classical aspect of French cooking, if 
you reduce the amount and if you reduce the portion, and if you reduce 
the butter, eggs and even the flour and sugar, you can arrive at whatever, 
you know, like less calorie, less saturated fat and practically no 
cholesterol at all inside. And if you reduce entirely the whole thing, 
I mean, you're going to have on Normandy for example, we have a three-course 
practically not even a thousand calories, most of them are 750 or 
800 calories, which is practically nothing. This is really almost 
like a dream come true for people who enjoy really good French cooking. 
Definitely. I'm looking at the photograph of the four top chefs who 
are part of this culinary institute, yourself among them, and there 
isn't a single one among you who is even one ounce overweight. I think 
you -- what we eat, we eat just two meals a day. And we eat lunch, 
and we eat dinner. And we don't eat between. We don't have a lot of 
snacks. And I think we enjoy also to sit with a friend. Because to 
eat by yourself is the most awful thing to do, you know. And just 
to shovel food in the mouth instead of eating and appreciating and 
talking and enjoying, and the body smile is very, very, very happy. 
I want to tell our listeners that if they would like recipe for your 
roasted apples... Bordeaux. Bordeaux-style, they should go to our 
World Web site, which www.theworld.org, and click on our recipe link, 
or drop us a postcard at THE WORLD, 125 Western Avenue, Boston, MA 
02134. Alain Sailhac, chief extraordinaire, senior dean of studies 
at the French Culinary Institute, merci. Merci. Au revoir. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>