<DOC>
<DOCNO> PRI19981009.2000.2401 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Here in the United States if you want apples, fall is the time and 
the Pacific Northwest is the place. In fact, growers there are now 
forecasting a bumper crop, which means plenty of apples will be on 
American shelves this season. But those same growers are also worried 
because the financial crisis in Asia is taking a bite out of the overseas 
demand for apples. During the past year, Washington state apple sales 
to Thailand, China, Malaysia and Indonesia dropped 50 to 85 percent. 
Craig Na, is president and CEO of the U.S. Apple Association in Washington 
D.C. says that U.S. Apple growers are facing a crunch. The crisis 
we face today is probably more severe than at any time in our past. 
Our growers are actually being squeezed on both ends with the declining 
situation in Asia and the Russian Far East. We're seeing our exports 
to that region of THE WORLD decrease rather dramatically. And on the 
flip side, we're seeing a flood of cheap apple juice concentrate entering 
this country from China, further driving down returns that growers 
would otherwise receive. Meaning many of our growers are faced with 
the choice of leaving their apples in the orchards to rot, because 
they can't recoup their cost of harvest. What else is connected to 
this problem? As the apple goes, so goes what else? Well, it's not 
all bad news, and that's one of the things we'd like to reinforce, 
although we are in the midst of harvesting our second-largest crop 
in history, one of the positive aspects of this crop is we're going 
to be able to offer the consumers a wider array of varieties than 
they've seen ever before in their supermarket. And so we're hoping 
we can increase domestic consumption of apples. But if we fail on 
that challenge, not only will the growers be impacted, so too will 
the transportation companies that, you know, transport our product 
to market, the ports along the coasts that, you know, ship the product 
out, and all the laborers who are involved in either the picking or 
processing of those products will obviously see their incomes decline 
as a consequence as well. Let's take a specific market for apple growers, 
the Japanese market. It was a big market for apples, has been. The 
apple growers fought very hard to get into it, and now they're losing 
it. What is the feeling specifically about what's happening with Japan? 
It took our industry 23 years of a concerted effort to gain access 
to the Japanese market for the first time in 1993, and in that first 
year we shipped approximately a half a million cartons of apples to 
that market. Since that time, in fact last year, not a single box 
of U.S. apples was shipped to Japan. And that's because Japan limits 
the number of varieties they allow us to import, and because of a 
very costly program they require our growers to use before we can 
ship apples over there. Is the problem with Japan strictly a trade 
problem, or has the financial crisis been behind this as well? Certainly 
the financial crisis hasn't helped, but it hasn't been the primary 
obstacle our industry has faced in being able to ship our apples to 
Japan. Japan has a domestic apple industry that enjoys considerable 
political clout, and with that clout has been successful in, you know, 
for 23 years preventing our industry from even shipping apples there. 
And once we gained access for the first time, quickly closing the 
market back down. So our primary remedy rests with U.S. and international 
trade law. Kraig Naasz is the president and CEO of the U.S. Apple 
Association. He's been speaking to us from Washington, D.C. Thank 
you very much. Thank you. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>