<DOC>
<DOCNO> PRI19981009.2000.2995 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
This is THE WORLD. I'm Tony Kahn. We got our weekly audio letter from 
THE WORLD's Eddie Mayer in London today. In his latest missive, Eddie 
tells us about a woman with an ugly past and an uncertain future. 
Her name probably won't mean much to you: Myra Henley. But mention 
it to any one in Britain, and you'll get an instant reaction. In terms 
of her notoriety, she can be compared with Charles Manson or Jeffrey 
Dahmer. And this week, she's asking for her freedom. Myra Henley has 
been in prison for 32 years. Along with her accomplice, Ian Brady, 
she killed two children in sadistic fashion and buried them in a windswept, 
desolate moor. The body of one of the victims has never been recovered. 
When she was sentenced to life back in 1966, it was recommended she 
serve 25 years before her case could be reviewed. But now those 25 
years have passed, Britain's home secretaries, the politicians responsible 
for law and order, have elected not to release Henley. Every legal 
avenue she's explored so far to overturn those decisions has gone 
nowhere. Henley's supporters argue, with some justification, that 
other people have been convicted of crimes just as heinous but been 
freed after serving much shorter sentences. Henley's key problem is 
her notoriety. Her name has become a byword for evil. The tabloid 
newspapers still put her on their front pages with a photograph taken 
around the time of her arrest. Black and white, sinister, beehive 
hair, and those glaring eyes. They call her "Evil Myra." Petitions 
are organized to keep her in jail, and thousands sign them. The aging 
relatives of child victims appear on television in tears, still distraught 
at their loss, and they vow to kill Myra Henley themselves if she's 
ever released. She's an ogre figure for our times, her fate a subject 
for national debate. It's against this background that Henley's supporters 
argued she's being kept in jail because the elected home secretaries, 
who could release her tomorrow if they wished, are terrified of a 
public backlash. None of them wants to go down in history as the politician 
who released Myra Henley. In effect, Henley's advocates say, this 
woman is being kept in jail not because of justice but because of 
public opinion. They say she's been reformed, which after all is what 
prison is supposed to do. They say she was goaded into the crimes 
by her partner who abused her. They say she's tried to help locate 
the body of the missing child to help ease the relative suffering. 
This woman, who's been out of the British public site for so long, 
is etched on its consciousness. "Evil Myra" or "Misunderstood Myra", 
will she die in jail or welcome the new millennium with her freedom? 
The Court of Appeal will decide. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>