<DOC>
<DOCNO> ABC19981130.1830.0070 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> CAPTION </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Good evening. We are going to begin with the latest attempt by the 
federal government to make sure that certain people in the country 
are not allowed to walk in to a registered gun dealer and buy a gun. 
As of today, any licensed gun dealer in the country selling any gun 
must do an immediate background check on any Buyer. The five-day waiting 
period, which has been in force for the last five years on handguns 
only, is a thing of the past. This is the busiest time of year for 
the nation's registered dealers. There are more than 100,000 of them. 
And any change in the gun law is cause for debate. First, here is 
ABC's Tom foreman. The changes to the Brady law mandate that all buyers 
of new handguns, rifles and shotguns must submit to an FBI background 
check. The licensed gun dealer will call in the purchaser's driver's 
license, date of birth, address and other information to FBI computer 
operators who will scan for criminal records or mental health problems. 
The sale will be approved or rejected immediately. But there is a 
huge loophole. Brady does not cover private sales of any guns. The 
same amount of firearms will be sold, it's just that they won't be 
sold from people like me. They'll be sold by individuals out of their 
trunks. Those who favor stricter gun control may indeed turn to weekend 
gun shows where there are plenty of private dealers and almost anyone 
can buy a gun. We know that today a lot of criminals, in fact, buy 
and buy successfully at gun shows from unlicensed dealers. We have 
to close that loophole. Another problem -- critics say because the 
FBI's system searches only computerized records, people with recent 
arrests, which are not yet in the computer, could be wrongly approved 
for gun purchases. And with the instant check system in place, there 
is now no federal waiting period to buy a gun. Gun opponents say that 
opens the door for more crimes of passion and impulsive suicides. 
New Mexico started instant check two months ago and dropped the waiting 
period. Wendy connerly says that allowed her husband, David, who was 
having personal problems, to buy a pistol and kill himself in 30 minutes. 
I truly think that if he had had more time to think about it, that 
he would be here today. Five years ago, when Brady was being debated, 
people who favored stricter gun control, gave up the waiting period, 
just to get the law passed. Gun rights advocates agreed to include 
all guns in exchange for instant background checks. But now, those 
compromises are taking hold in these changes to Brady, and both sides 
are finding Devils in the details. Tom foreman, ABC News, FT. Collins, 
Colorado. As we said, it's controversial. The national rifle association 
said it will sue over the system calling it an illegal national registration 
of gun owners. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>