<DOC>
<DOCNO> APW19981130.0802 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Quebec's pro-independence government sought re-election Monday, hoping 
for a decisive victory that could accelerate the drive for secession 
from Canada. If the Parti Quebecois returned to power, Premier Lucien 
Bouchard has pledged to hold a referendum on secession whenever he 
judges conditions right for a separatist victory. Most polls in the 
final stages of the campaign forecast a comfortable victory for Bouchard's 
party, which entered the election holding 74 of the provincial legislature's 
125 seats. His main opponent was Jean Charest of the anti-separatist 
Quebec Liberal Party, which held 45 seats and needed to gain 18 to 
eke out a slim legislative majority. The weather in most of the province 
was overcast but dry as 21,365 polling stations opened at 10 a.m. 
EST (1500 GMT). Voting was to end at 8 p.m. (0100 GMT Tuesday). Party 
organizers were seeking to get their supporters to the polls early 
enough so they could get home for the 7:30 p.m. start of ``La Petite 
Vie,'' a hugely popular TV comedy that has been drawing more than 
3 million Quebec viewers every Monday. About 5.2 million Quebeckers 
were eligible to vote. Turnout in the province usually is high; it 
was 93.5 percent for a 1995 referendum on secession. Charest insisted 
he still had a chance of victory. But he spent the campaign's final 
days trying to solidify support in Liberal districts, while Bouchard 
ventured into anti-separatist territory in a bid for a landslide win. 
Critics said Charest, who left federal politics in March to enter 
the race, failed to convince the bulk of Quebec's French-speaking 
majority that he was the best choice to defend their interests. A 
decisive separatist victory could intensify the push for a referendum 
on secession, while a narrow win might prompt a more cautious approach. 
A surprise loss to Charest's Liberals would derail the separatist 
cause for years. Twice before, separatists lost secession referendums, 
by a big margin in 1980 and narrowly in 1995. Bouchard, not wanting 
a third defeat, plans to call another referendum only when convinced 
the separatists would win. In the meantime, he says he would press 
for more autonomy for all 10 provinces, particularly in regard to 
control over social programs. He expressed hope that anti-separatist 
animosity in the rest of Canada would subside after the election, 
even if his party won. ``If I was the person who is described in English 
Canada I would be the first to detest myself _ a dangerous man, negative, 
ungrateful,'' he said. ``Afterwards, things should become more normal, 
and we will be able to resume a healthier dialogue.'' Charest said 
voters should be wary of Bouchard's promise to cooperate with other 
provinces. ``If someone chooses to vote for the Parti Quebecois they're 
giving a mandate to the government of Quebec to enter into a new period 
of confrontation and conflict with the rest of the country,'' Charest 
said. The final round of polls showed support for the Parti Quebecois 
at about 47 percent and the Liberals at about 41 percent, with most 
other voters backing a third party, Democratic Action, led by 28-year-old 
Mario Dumont, which favors greater autonomy for Quebec but stops short 
of supporting outright secession. But many Quebeckers support Bouchard 
even though they do not favor secession. Several polls have suggested 
that two-thirds of the voters do not want a referendum on independence 
during the next government's five-year term in office. Though the 
secession debate dominated coverage of the election in the rest of 
Canada, many French-speaking Quebeckers saw the campaign as a simple 
choice of a day-to-day government, with the issue of another referendum 
to be settled at a later date. ``The time wasn't right for deep existential 
debates,'' said the Montreal daily Le Devoir in an editorial. ``Lucien 
Bouchard understood that and reduced the election to its most essential 
element, that of confidence.'' About 83 percent of Quebec's 7.4 million 
people are French speakers. The rest are divided among English-speakers 
with long-term roots in Canada and more recently arrived immigrants 
from various countries. Quebeckers favoring independence generally 
feel they have a different culture from the rest of Canada and would 
like to call their own shots and have their own national symbols. 
There are many francophones who do not want independence, and there 
are a few non-francophones who do. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>