<DOC>
<DOCNO> APW19981130.0778 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Here at the scruffy Soweto Golf Club, where shacks face the fairways 
and branches mark the holes instead of flags, they are waiting for 
Tiger. Tiger Woods arrived Monday in South Africa for the first time, 
to play at the Million Dollar Open at Sun City Thursday through Sunday. 
The prospect of a part-black golf hero in the former land of apartheid 
has excited the barefoot caddies, the would-be pros and members of 
the black middle class who play here. ``To have a mega-star coming 
here is an honor to South Africans. The young people are taking him 
as a hero,'' said Thomas Coplan, 47, a retired paramedic as he cleaned 
his clubs. ``We never thought there could be a black person on top 
of this game, because this game was made for whites. Now we realize 
it's not only whites who can prosper,'' he said. Woods' arrival, like 
the current first-ever tour by the black athletes of the West Indies 
team and the recent appointment of a black man to head the rugby league, 
is a small morale boost for the majority of this country's people, 
who still live in an economic apartheid after the fall of white minority 
rule in 1994. All three events are particularly significant because 
those sports -- golf, rugby and cricket -- are mainly white, and attract 
mostly white fans. Soccer is the sport of the majority. The lack of 
blacks in some sports is keenly felt. The head of South African cricket 
last week criticized the national team for fielding no blacks in the 
match against the West Indies. The government Sunday said it would 
set up a commission to help integrate the mainly white sports. Golf 
has always had a small but stalwart following among blacks in this 
wide-open country of sunny weather, even when they were banned from 
setting foot on white courses. If black golf has a heartland, it is 
here, in this oasis of green undulating through the depressing urban 
grit of Soweto's Pimville section. ``Without it I'd be stealing cars 
somewhere,'' says Mawanga Nomwa, 28, an aspiring pro. The club president, 
Mike Nompula, is striving to promote golf among the youngsters of 
Soweto. There's always a group hanging around the clubhouse, though 
Nompula chases them off during the day when they should be in school. 
They can play afterwards, using donated clubs. Dues are a paltry 150 
rand (dlrs 25) a year. The Golf Development Trust brings groups of 
kids here twice a week to play. With the fall of apartheid, many of 
the old members moved on to the fancier clubs in Johannesburg's northern 
suburbs. Soweto has about 200 members, a fifth of the number in the 
club's hey-day in the mid-1980s. Reality is never far away. One recent 
day, a man was gathering wild spinach next to a fairway. Wild dogs 
wander on the course. Residents regularly steal the flagpoles for 
curtain rods. The course itself is pockmarked with barren patches. 
Clumps of overgrown trees and underbrush crowd the fairways. Nompula, 
61, who as a boy used a wooden plank to flatten out ``greens'' in 
the sand of empty lots, is hoping for a visit from Woods. ``Everyone 
is talking about Tiger. Now let him come here,'' he said. The prospect 
is unlikely. After meeting with President Nelson Mandela Monday, Woods 
said he wouldn't be able to make a stop because he had to leave Sunday 
night, immediately after the tournament is over. But Soweto, the vast 
black township south of Johannesburg, will be watching him play. Nompula 
plans to set up a television set for people to watch the tournament 
in the clubhouse -- a barren room with pink linoleum and a few lavender-colored 
vinyl couches. ``He's the one great black golfer we have seen. He 
has made it,'' Nompula said. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>