<DOC>
<DOCNO> APW19981130.1100 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Chancellor Gerhard Schroeder and French President Jacques Chirac agreed 
Monday on the importance of creating jobs and strengthening the defense 
industry in Europe. Chirac, however, expressed displeasure with Germany's 
willingness to move ahead on an aerospace industry merger with Britain 
without including France from the start, a French source said on condition 
of anonymity. Germany prefers a three-way merger including France 
and Britain but would move ahead with Britain first if the French 
don't participate immediately. Schroeder said last week that the ``door 
would be held open'' for France to join later. The leaders met on 
the first day of a two-day summit, aimed at revitalizing Germany's 
ties with its most important European partner, aides say, after a 
slowdown under former Chancellor Helmut Kohl. ``We have set out to 
bring a new dynamic to the German-French relationship, and we will 
do that,'' Schroeder told Chirac at a banquet. Schroeder and Chirac 
addressed each other by their first names, exchanging warm remarks 
as Schroeder presented Chirac with two Japanese plates as a birthday 
present. Chirac turned 66 on Sunday. Schroeder spoke of a new beginning 
in German-French relations not only among politicians but among citizens, 
referring to plans announced Monday for a joint German-French university. 
In separate consultations, Foreign Minister Joschka Fischer asked 
his French counterpart, Hubert Vedrine, for support for a German-Italian 
initiative to try Kurdish rebel Leader Abdullah Ocalan before an international 
court, said ministry spokesman Martin Erdmann. Italy arrested Ocalan 
two weeks ago on a German warrant, but Schroeder has ruled out bringing 
him here to trial for fear of violence within Germany's large Kurdish 
population. The summit got under way with military drills and strains 
of the French and German national anthems that greeted Schroeder and 
Chirac on arrival in historic Potsdam, the city outside Berlin where 
the Allies signed the treaty on the occupation of Germany after World 
War II. They immediately held a private meeting, where they discussed 
unemployment and the aerospace merger. The summit also is expected 
to discuss EU economic and jobs policies, reform of the EU budget, 
world finance and the political situations in Russia, Kosovo and the 
Middle East. Germany and France hold summits twice yearly, but this 
meeting has special significance ahead of Jan. 1, when Europe launches 
its single currency, the euro, and Germany takes over the rotating 
six-month presidency of the European Union. Together, France and Germany 
have been the engine behind the drive for European unity. The summit 
is the first for Schroeder, who won September elections for the center-left 
Social Democrats. Though both countries are now governed by the left, 
Schroeder's victory has actually sent them drifting apart on one issue: 
the role of nuclear power. The new German government wants to shut 
down the nation's 19 nuclear plants. Paris worries this would mean 
lost business for a French nuclear fuel reprocessing plant whose biggest 
foreign customer is Germany. With economics ministers from both countries 
attending the summit, the issue seems likely to come up. Efforts for 
a European aerospace merger to compete with U.S. giants Boeing and 
Lockheed Martin are a central theme. The big European aircraft makers 
_ Daimler-Benz Aerospace, British Aerospace and Aerospatiale _ agreed 
in principle in March to seek a merger. Daimler-Benz Aerospace and 
British Aerospace are in advanced talks on a two-way alliance. One 
stumbling block to Aerospatiale's early participation is that the 
aircraft maker is still partly government-owned and progress toward 
full privatization has been slow. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>