<DOC>
<DOCNO> APW19981130.0507 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Chaos rocked the sensational corruption and sex trial of ousted deputy 
prime minister Anwar Ibrahim on Monday when one of his defense attorneys 
was sentenced to three months in jail for contempt of court. Zainur 
Zakaria, a prominent lawyer in Anwar's defense team, refused to apologize 
for accusing two prosecutors of trying to get a potential witness 
to lie. High Court Judge Augustine Paul, who had demanded the apology, 
held Zainur in contempt of court and ordered him to surrender to police 
by 4 p.m. (0800 GMT). Zainur's defense colleagues said they were too 
disturbed to continue, so Paul adjourned the trial until Tuesday. 
Zainur immediately appealed the contempt ruling to the Court of Appeals. 
He was allowed to remain free on 10,000 ringgit (dlrs 2,631) bail 
until his appeal hearing Friday. Anwar, prevented by police from talking 
to his attorneys in the courtroom, angrily shouted to reporters that 
he could no longer get a fair trial. ``I can't even discuss this with 
my lawyers now,'' Anwar said. ``Where is justice?'' Anwar was arrested 
Sept. 20, two weeks after he was fired as deputy prime minister and 
finance minister. His subsequent jailing and beating while in custody 
has led to international interest in the case and support for his 
fledgling political reform movement. His trial involves four counts 
of corruption. Anwar will be tried on another corruption count, as 
well as five counts of sexual misconduct, at a later date. Anwar denies 
the charges, calling them part of political vendetta orchestrated 
by his former mentor, Prime Minister Mahathir Mohamad. Monday's uproar 
was sparked by an affidavit Anwar filed in the High Court Saturday. 
In it, he accused two prosecutors of trying to cajole a potential 
witness into fabricating evidence of sex crimes by Anwar. Anwar asked 
the court to remove senior government prosecutors Abdul Gani Patail 
and Azahar Mohamed from the corruption and sexual misconduct trial. 
High Court Judge Augustine Paul refused Monday to listen to defense 
attorneys' arguments on the affidavit, saying there was nothing to 
support the allegations. Instead, he ordered Zainur, who submitted 
the affidavit, to apologize to Attorney General Mohtar Abdullah. The 
attorney general, who does not normally attend the trial, was in court 
Monday and asked to speak. ``What has been done by Zainur Zakaria 
undermines the integrity of the trial,'' Mohtar told the court, recommending 
an immediate contempt hearing. There was then an angry exchange between 
the judge and Anwar's leading defense attorney Raja Aziz Addruse. 
When Raja Aziz objected to Paul demanding an apology, the judge ordered 
him to sit down. Raja Aziz replied, ``We should have been heard before 
your Lordship came to the conclusion already that the allegations 
are scandalous.'' Zainur, who has been practicing law since 1975, 
then refused to apologize. The judge rejected the defense request 
that it be given three days to prepare for the contempt hearing. ``Nothing 
shocks me very much,'' Raja Aziz said of the contempt ruling, which 
left many in the courtroom stunned. In the affidavit, Anwar said the 
two prosecutors had tried to negotiate a plea bargain with his former 
tennis partner, Nallakaruppan Solaimalai. Nalla, as he is known, was 
indicted shortly before Anwar's arrest and charged with unlawful possession 
of 125 rounds of live ammunition. He faces a mandatory death sentence 
if convicted. The bullets were said to have been found in Nalla's 
house during a police investigation of allegations published in the 
book, ``Fifty Reasons Why Anwar Ibrahim Cannot Become Prime Minister.'' 
In the book, it is alleged that Nalla set up sexual trysts for Anwar 
while Anwar was still in power. Anwar said Abdul Gani and Azahar indicated 
that they would try Nalla under a lesser charge if he was prepared 
to lie about how Anwar committed sexual offenses with ``various married 
and unmarried women.'' In reply to allegations that the prosecution 
was threatening to use the death sentence as a bargaining tool to 
gather evidence from Nalla against Anwar, Judge Paul said the prosecution 
has the power to enter into such bargains, the national news agency 
Bernama reported. It said the judge added that this is practiced in 
all civilized law and has been accepted as public policy. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>