<DOC>
<DOCNO> CNN19981130.1130.0127 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> CAPTION </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
The United Nations and Iraq have squared off repeatedly in the past 
several months over weapons inspections. Iraq says it has cooperated 
and deserves a review of U.N. sanctions. David Ensor reports, the 
results of a secret mission indicate otherwise. CNN has learned that 
a team of top Iraqi missile engineers visited bucharest, Romania, 
in may and tried through go-betweens to obtain sophisticated missile 
technology from a company controlled by the romanian government. The 
Iraqis were trying to obtain guidance equipment that would allow them 
to build a missile capable of hitting major Middle Eastern capitals 
like tehran, Riyadh and Tel Aviv. What the Iraqis in bucharest did 
not know was that the intelligence agencies of three nations, including 
the U.S., were watching and listening. We had the information. We 
had the goods on the Iraqis, clear and irrefutable evidence of Iraq's 
prohibited activities. We caught them red-handed. How did the intelligence 
agencies, and through them, U.N. arms inspectors, find out about the 
Iraqi mission? Through a secret effort begun three years ago code-named 
operation teacup. A tightly compartmented effort approved by the executive 
chairman and known initially to only four people. Operation teacup 
was an effort to cooperate with the intelligence agencies of a number 
of U.N. member states. The UNSCOM inspectors' interest in Romania 
started in 1995 when after saddam Hussein's son-in-law defected to 
Jordan, thousands of documents were found at his chicken farm concerning 
Iraq's programs to develop weapons of mass destruction. A contract 
found there and obtained by CNN showed that romanian aerospace company 
aerofina had committed to selling illegal missile technology to iraq. 
At that time, the new romanian government cleaned house. Lots of people 
in the echelons of our defense establishment were basically fired. 
But six months after that house-cleaning, UNSCOM learned that further 
shipments were planned between Romania and Iraq. When the Iraqi delegation 
turned up in bucharest in may, their every move was under surveillance 
-- by the U.S., Romania and one other nation. What I can say is that 
there was full cooperation between the two sides, in which these kinds 
of operations are handled currently between Romania and the U.S. perhaps 
could be an example of good cooperation in this field. That cooperation 
assured that the Iraqi trip would fail. But the intelligence agencies 
involved vetoed UNSCOM's proposal to make the matter public. We had 
the proof. We couldn't present it. And that's where we are today. 
We asked the Iraqi government about its relationship with romania's 
aerofina. Iraqi officials said they will withhold comment until after 
they have reviewed the full report on CNN newsstand. David Ensor, 
CNN, Washington. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>