<DOC>
<DOCNO> CNN19981130.1600.1497 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> CAPTION </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
The actors behind the voice necessary a bug's life say acting class 
just couldn't prepare them for their roles. Dennis Michael talked 
with some of the stars. Flaming death! a bug's life gave the group 
of actors the kind of opportunity that doesn't come along very often. 
You can play a doctor or a lawyer, but how often do you get called 
on as john ratzenberger was to play a flea? Indirectly at the flypaper. 
I thought great, because now in order to study the character I get 
to spend time on the back of a dog. Ratzenberger had the advantage 
of some experience. He played a piggy bank in toy story. So, where 
you from? I went from a pig to a bug. So, so they didn't teach us 
that in acting school. I think I was absent that day. During the transition. 
Come on, it's a great story. In order to put a voice to the assistant 
bad guy character molt, actor Richard kind didn't go the entomology 
text, but rather to the film library. Remember the old Warner brothers 
movies, the Edward G. Robinson gangster films? You know -- oh, yeah, 
yeah, yeah, say, yeah. And then you always had the henchmen going, 
"hey boss, can I get you a cup of coffee, huh? What do you need, boss?" 
And so I knew exactly where I was in the context of Hopper's life. 
So it came really easy to me. Trading her daughter? Oh, yes. As a 
result of a bug's life, a new group of actors find themselves forever 
linked to classic Disney characters. Which is kind of like a tattoo, 
you have it for life. What are we gonna do?! It's not for life, this 
is for immortality. That's even bigger than life. It's for my kids, 
and for the grandkids and for my nieces and nephews and their kids. 
Yeah, I, it's history. It's truly cinema history. I mean, "toy story" 
I consider cinema history, as much as I consider "snow white and the 
seven dwarfs" from 1939 cinema history. It really changes things. 
You always cast me as the broom, the pole, the stick. A splinter. 
If it's like having a tatoo, it's like having a really great tattoo 
on a Really good part of your body. That's a simile that you started. 
I'm not sure we should we should finish. Yeah, my fault, okay. It's 
a children's movie, basically. You join the pantheon when you do a 
Disney picture. I'm up there with zsa zsa gabor now I guess. And regardless 
what you may think of zsa zsa gabor's acting ability, she was never 
called on to play an insect. Wow, the city. Dennis Michael, "CNN Entertainment 
News," Hollywood. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>