<DOC>
<DOCNO> MNB19981130.2100.2895 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> CAPTION </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Tonight we have a look at what is slowly becoming a big business in 
America by moving very fast and now by reaching out to women more 
and more. It is the number one spectator sport in the United States, 
but the term auto racing is too broad in the 1990's to simply leave 
it at that. Before we meet one of the big reasons this sport is so 
popular, first a Look at Nascar, a multibillion dollar operation with 
its humble roots in the American south of 50 years ago. Electric devices 
at each end of the mile time the cars to a fraction of a Second. It 
started out with the notion of weekend Warriors of the oval track. 
They all had day jobs, but on the weekends, whether it was on the 
hardened beaches of Daytona, Florida, or nestled in North Carolina 
hill country, they did it for fun. They had no idea they would be 
the pioneers of what it's become today. Daryl waltrip was among them. 
I think what makes us so popular and so followed, if you will, is 
we're a Blue column yar sport. We're not uppity. We had the stigma 
for years as being good Ole boys. Basically, I think most of us still 
are. I think we appeal to the masses of people that drive Pontiacs, 
that go to the store and buy tobasco. The fans are real brand loyal. 
When waltrip says brand loyal, he means Tabasco sales rose when they 
decided to sponsor a race car, same with tide and Kellogg see corn 
flakes, auto parts. Simply put it's a gold mine for the companies 
involved. Corporate America spent $450 million last year on sponsorships. 
Eight million merks will go to the races next year. Millions more 
will watch on television religiously. It boasts a fan base 40% female, 
a captive buying audience big companies would kill for. Mark Martin 
calls the fan loyalty extraordinary and says it extends down the aisle 
of every supermarket in the country, where a product like tide laundry 
detergent has seen a huge increase in sales. Because tide is on a 
race car and the rest of them aren't. You go into an ought owe parts 
choice, valvovine. Because they think Mark Martin is the man or Richard 
Petty or Dupont paints for Jeff Gordon. It works. It's great marketing 
for these fortune 500 companies. We're joined here tonight in the 
studio by a man just crowned three-time winton cup championship, one 
of the most successful drivers, Jeff Gordon. Good evening, to you. 
Welcome. Thank you. Mark Martin mentioned the sponsorship, the dollars. 
You drive for Dupont. It says oughtive finishes. Has it sold more 
auto motive products? Every sponsor does it in a different way. With 
Dupont, they're pretty much the main sponsor of my car, and Dupont, 
the corporate side, has come on to also yute lies the race car. Their 
big sales come from bringing their key customers, people that are 
maybe owning body shops or buy paint to buy paint out there they kater 
to these people and hope maybe they buy more paint or buy paint for 
the first time. It is worked out well for Dupont. You saw your crew 
chief on television last neigh. On his shirt, small logo like yours, 
it says frosted mini wheats. Do you mean to tell me the placement 
of that logo has led to an increase in their sales? Well, you'd have 
to ask them personally -- There has to be a reason you're wearing 
it. I would say yes. They keep coming back wanting more and more. 
Suppose your gets bigger and bigger. The companies right now, especially 
within my team, really want to be involved. The heavy hitters, major, 
major companies. Americans go into the supermarkets, they're so brand 
loyal if a Nascar fan, they will support the sponsors, and 40% of 
the fans are women? It's crazy, I know. It's true. They are very loyal. 
You go into any supermarket, especially in the southeast, it's grown 
within the whole country all the way around, and now you're going 
down the grocery aisle and you see kelloggs and pick that over another 
brand. You go down a soft drink aisle and pick maybe Pepsi because 
you're a fan of mine over another brand. If Dupont finishes paint 
was there, that would work, too There is a fund based on Nascar-related 
businesses. Was that kind of the signal that it's a business and less 
fun than it used to be? Are you having fun out there? Do you feel 
it's getting too big? There are certainly days I feel like I'm just 
a product out there, but at the same time, I'm having a lot of fun 
endorsing a lot of different products out there and being involved 
with major companies. I've certainly learned a lot about the business 
be sides just trying to learn how to be a race car driver. If I hadn't 
been a race car driver before that I would never have been in the 
shoes I'm in now, to be able to represent some great companies out 
there. You're 27 years old. You're newly married, worth a couple of 
mill dollars. You don't drink or smoke. One person swore they saw 
you with a beer once, but it's an ugly rumor. Parents are thirsting 
for role models around the country. Do you mind that label? Not at 
all. If you're in the limelight, on television, it could be you or 
Michael jordan, you know, whether an athlete or whatever, I think 
that if their kids, especially kids out there, that are following 
you, you're a role model. I enjoy that. I enjoy seeing the kids. I 
enjoy seeing the look on their face and the realism in their eyes 
and their smile when they either greet you for the first time or get 
a picture or autograph. I definitely want to be a role model for those 
kids and show people that hey, you can live your life right and do 
things within the rules, not have to -- you don't have to be wild 
and crazy to have fun. You can have fun and enjoy life and still, 
you know, keep your life in a Straight line. What do you say to the 
people who say they're overgrown kids, this is just a sport, let's 
remember that, number 24 machine will do 220 miles per hour. What 
business do you have going so fast? The business is on the racetrack, 
not on the streets. We do everything to keep the race cars as safe 
as we possibly can. There are times when we actually keep the speeds 
down on the car that nascar will put restrictor plates on the cars. 
You have to be, I say, a trained professional. You have to be a professional 
to get to this level and do what he we do on the racetrack. You have 
no business doing it off of the racetrack. A man who visited victory 
Lane 13 times this season. Jeff Gordon, pleasure having you. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>