<DOC>
<DOCNO> MNB19981130.2100.0270 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> CAPTION </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
and with us tonight for their reaction, and to preview this whole 
perjury portion of the proceeding, lanny Davis, former whoss counsel 
to the president and Michael madigan, former chief counsel to senator 
Fred Thompson, among other positions. He is with us tonight from Houston, 
Texas. Lanny, let's begin with you. Why isn't it fair when Henry Hyde 
says, fine, you don't want to cooperate fully in the way we like you 
to we'll put a stamp on all the volumes Ken starr put up here and 
call them facts? Well, first of all, as long as it's fair to describe 
what Ken Starr has done, it's fair for chairman Hyde to do that. That's 
an indictment, one-sided view of all those facts. As far as the White 
House has been concerned in most democrats on the judiciary commitee 
has been concerned, even if those facts are stipulated to be true, 
then the question still remains, what is the standard for impeachment. 
I think most democrats, most of the American people and most constitutional 
scholars reached the conclusion that as reprehensible as president 
clinton's conduct was and if those facts are stipulated to be true, 
they're not sufficient to impeach a president of the United States. 
There should be a censure, but not impeachment. Mr. madigan, we keep 
hearing from people like lanny Davis, people in both parties that 
American people said, "let's move on." How much really should that 
matter in this, since there are some in this case up to their necks 
with a lot investigated in it and would like to exhaust it before 
moving on? This is a political matter. Certainly that does matter. 
I don't think the ball was advanced particularly with the answers 
to the questions. It only caused the voferse to arepresent again. 
And what danger of rerl eruption are we looking at mow? How bad this 
is move by Louis freeh and Janet Reno? This has been gone on for some 
time. Chairman Thompson two wreers ago dealt with this matter. There 
are two reports, one by director freeh and one by Mr. LaBella, who 
was hand-picked to conduct this investigation, both recommending an 
independent counsel be appointed. Those reports have been the subject 
of controversy before. They will be, it looks like, again. I know 
you've given this thought before, why were the Thompson hearings almost 
like this round of hearings, teflon coated? Is it the atmosphere that 
as long as the economy is OK, nothing seems to matter that much? I 
think so. I was involved in the Watergate hearings along with senator 
Thompson. Things are different now than then. You don't have anybody 
on the minority side to stand up and try to look at the facts. No 
matter how good will the chairman is and no matter what the good intentions 
are, if you have a minority group that is intending to turn it into 
a food fight and bickering process, that's what's going to happen. 
That's what we've seen happen so far. Lanny Davis, you had an interesting 
relationship with your friend and former boss Bill Clinton. When you 
read his answer to "like are you a chief law enforcement officer in 
this country," are you frustrated by his use of language where the 
81 questions pertain? Law school does that to the best of minds, Brian. 
No, I think the president is acting as somebody in the face of a prosecutor 
who simply has never relented on a desire to bring him down and bringing 
everything to bear to bring him down. In the very last week we have 
the prosecutor's press spokesman saying that that office is going 
to stay open for another two years probably to indict bill Clinton 
after he leaves office. If he's not supposed to be above the law, 
Brian, he is certainly entitled to not be blow -- blow the law. Any 
private citizen is going to try to defend himself. The fact remains 
if you stipulate the facts to be true, even if the president committed 
perjury, most constitutional scholars would say that you have to have 
abuse of power to impeach a president. Richard Nixon was accuse fed 
of having committed perjury on his tax return. The democrats didn't 
consider that portion of the allegations to be an abuse of power. 
That remains the question the American people have answered the question. 
No, this is not an impeachable offense. Republicans seeking campaign 
finance are just going desperately looking for other methods to bring 
this president down. If our other guest was some someone else, would 
you make that comment about yale law school? I don't think so. How 
much longer did this process get after what happened today? I think 
it did make it longer. That was the point of the questions, to stipulate 
to the facts. It looks like that is not going to happen. The process 
is going to be longer. How much longer and where it's going to lead, 
nobody seems to know. It looks like it will be over by the end of 
the year. Michael madigan, lanny Davis, gentlemen, thank you very 
much for your time. Thank you, Brian. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>