<DOC>
<DOCNO> MNB19981130.2100.0058 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> CAPTION </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
First bad news for all of those hoping the investigation was winding 
down somehow in Washington. The director of the F.B.I. is being summonned 
by subpoena to Capitol Hill. Subpoenas are also going out to the White 
House and department of justice for documents the house wants that 
they say are in the possession of the president and attorney general. 
Many democrats tonight are unhappy at this development as tomorrow's 
chapter in the hearings on the hill promise to be contention as well. 
The subject of perjury will be brought up all day long. We're joined 
from the White House by chip Reid. Chip, what happened today? Well, 
what happened just this evening, just a short time ago is that the 
judicialy committee sources made clear what they're going to do tomorrow 
is not only subpoena Mr. freeh and Mr. LaBella, who was the top deputy 
in the campaign finance investigation -- both gentlemen recommended 
she appoint an independent counsel counsel in the campaign finance 
investigation and she refused. What they want are memos that they 
wrote recommending that appointment. So far they have refused to turn 
them over. They're also going to, hoping to the republicans are, subpoena 
the president and Janet Reno to get their hands on those memos. We're 
told by justice department sources that they consider those to be 
grand jury material. The president and the attorney general don't 
even have the power to turn them over to the house Judiciary committee. 
Only a judge would be able to do that that ad -- ads -- adds power 
to the investors. We're see if this explodes the perjuryish shoe. 
You will see some angry back and forth between the democrats and republicans 
over this. Today, Janet Reno postponed deciding whether to appoint 
an independent counsel to look into the matter of Harold Ickes and 
whether he lied under oath with regard to some campaign finance matters. 
That's an investigation that if an independent counsel were appointed 
there, it could expand to include the president and vice president 
and other matters. The republicans at this point are just oozing with 
frustration over refusal by Janet Reno to appoint an independent counsel 
and also the refusal of the president to admit that he perjored himself 
with those 81 questions he answered again in very legalistic terms. 
Two questions. Number one, every move in Washington is countered by 
a court fight. Does this mean we're in for weeks more of haggling 
over whether or not documents exist in the first place, whether the 
hill can get their hands on them? And number works how dangerous is 
this for the head of the F.B.I.? It's hard to tell. So far, he has 
refused to turn over the memo. He is certainly not the target here. 
The target is Janet Reno and also the president. They want to get 
their hands on that memo. What they would like to do is show, and 
they believe the memos would show that the White House has been engaged 
in an effort through all these investigations to stand in the way 
of legitimate investigations by the house and by the justice department, 
for that matter. The question is, are they trying simply to establish 
that or do they want to go into the entire campaign finance scandal? 
If that's the case, we could be in for month's more of this investigation. 
In front of the White House that turned how to turn this into a virtual 
virtue. Chip Reid for the White House 
</TEXT>
</DOC>