<DOC>
<DOCNO> MNB19981130.2100.1805 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> CAPTION </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Kenneth Starr's investigation with the president would seem to be 
winding down as the independent counsel is making himself more visible 
than ever these days. Tonight from "Dateline" NBC, a woman who says 
every time her name is mentioned in connection with any part of this 
investigation, she gets hit with another threatening letter from the 
independent counsel's office. For the first time on PrimeTime television, 
Julie Steele told her story to jane pauley. Here now that interview 
from "Dateline" NBC. It started 1 1/2 years ago. Julie Steele was 
a P perively figure in the Paula Jones case. "Newsweek's" Michael 
isikoff was ahead of the pack. Tracking down one woman to Richard, 
Virginia. Kathleen Willie was an unpaid volunteer. Thanksgiving that 
year, she learned her husband was in deep financial trouble. A long-time 
Clinton supporter, she made an appoint toment ask the president for 
a job. That's when Willie says the president made an unwanted sexual 
advance. Michael isikoff wanted a corroborating source. My voft began 
with Kathleen Willie asking me to lie to Michael isikoff. I did so. 
That was a huge mistake. This much is fact. Willie called from her 
lawyer's office and in Michael isikoff's presence arranged a meeting. 
I said, you are going to tell me why he's coming, right? You're going 
to call me, right? Minutes later, already on his way over, Steele 
@E ] talk. no. What did she say? It was to tell him that she had come 
to my house from the train station, hurt, crying, upset as a result 
of being groped in the White House, three, that the president had 
pulled on some piece of clothing -- I didn't get that right. Steele 
said this was the first time she heard the tale. Isikoff arrived at 
her home and they talked. I said she was upset and crying, which is 
what she said. What did she tell me? It was that she had been groped. 
I said grappled. I was nervous and didn't know way was talking about. 
Had you been given the specific words to use? Yes, groped. Steele 
says it was to be off the record but isikoff was taking notes. I told 
him, if in this lifetime you have any reason to think you want to 
write something with this, we're off the record, you need to call 
me first. He agreed he would do that as it worked out, he did. Inseed, 
several months later as he was checking his story, Steele recanted 
and told him she lied. She thought the whole thing would go away Something 
he said made me realize he's going to print this. I said, surely, 
you don't mean you're going to print an off the record retracks of 
an off the record story? He explained it wasn't his fault. It was 
beyond him. It was too big to not print and he had to go with it. 
He was under pressure. That you could talk to a "Newsweek" reporter 
while he's taking notes and think that it was off the record. I've 
never talked to a major reporter in my entire life. He told me it 
was off the record and I believed it was so. The August 11, 1997 issue 
hit the stands. Both versions of her story were included. She subsequently 
sued isikoff. He says because of the lawsuit he can't comment. "Newsweek" 
insists both Steele conversations were on the record. They call Steele's 
claim fantasy. But did isikoff talk to Willie and her lawyer off the 
record? "Newsweek" wouldn't say. Steele was now on the record. She 
quickly found a Buyer for a photograph in her possession of Willie 
and the president. The "national ininquirier" paid $7,000. I realized 
this was a big mistake. Knee-jerk reaction. In January, she was drawn 
further into the Paula Jones case. She agreed to provide an affidavit 
for President Clinton's lawyers saying kathleen Matthews asked her 
to lie. Do you regret giving that affidavit? no. I needed to tell 
the truth again in the place it mattered most. Kathleen Willie says 
she believes Steele was pressured to change her story. That is what 
Kenneth Starr thinks? Is he looking for evidence that someone intimidated 
her into changing her story? With all the resources available to them, 
wouldn't thl suppression prosecutor be able to establish whether Kathleen 
Willie made that second phone call from her car phone? To your home? 
I would feel certain they could. But if there was definitive proof 
that no phone call came to you, you lied. Well that's fine, Jane. 
I didn't lie. There's going to be a phone call somewhere to me after 
I spoke with isikoff. Meanwhile Steele says Starr's investigators 
execute niesed her so relentlessly, they made her life miserable. 
It just keeps getting worse. Her lawyer represents the Clinton-Gore 
199 election committee. She says Starr's investigators subpoenaed 
Steele's tax records, bank and phone records, friends, neighbors, 
her daughter, her brother, even men she's dated. Why does Julie Steele 
figure as prominently as she has come to in this case? I think that's 
the $64,000 question. It appears that over the last few months, she 
stood in the way of Starr's being able to refer the Kathleen Willie 
matter. Here is one complication, Linda Tripp who would later deliver 
evidence kenneth Starr needed to send up articles of impeachment in 
the Monica lewinsky scandal figures in the Kathleen Willie story, 
too she says Willie seemed joyful after emerging from the oval office 
that day. That makes Julie Steele's testimony that Willie was upset 
that day, version number one, critical. Steele has been called before 
the grand jury twice, sicking -- sticking to her second version, that 
the first was a lie. My good name has been damaged. My health has 
deteriorated. I have had to hide myself and my child from news media 
in my driveway. Og upsets her more than the question starrs investigators 
have been asking of her adoption of a child. Why were you so desperate 
for a child that you would personally go to romainia alone? I lost 
a child. My third child had died. I had made room for another child 
in my life. I wanted to do that for myself, for my child that died, 
and for another child. That's what I did. After her 4 day-old baby 
died in her arms, she brought her son Adam home from romainia eight 
years ago. Is was a legal adoption. What evidence they are looking 
for is unclear. Or is it evidence that the Starr investigation is 
out of control? That was the meaning behind the pointed question from 
the president's lawyer David Kendall. It was not lost on Mr. Starr. 
In respect of some of her claims, some of her claims, and I'm going 
to say this even though there is an acted part of our investigation 
under way, utterly without merit. And utterly without foundation. 
Utterly without factual foundation. This is one of those claims? no. 
I did not say that Mr. Kendall. Did you hear from the special prosecutor's 
office after that? The next day I got a letter telling me that if 
I couldn't tell them some reason why not, I would be indicted on Tuesday. 
for? For everything but axe murder. Specifically, the letter references 
false statements, perjury and obstruction of justice. As of tonight, 
there's been no indictment. Her attorney says Kenneth Starr rewards 
witnesses who says what he wants to hear and punishes witses who don't. 
You can't presume you know what the truth is from the outset, and 
then decide who gets treated in what way because they either support 
or detract from your view of the truth. He treated Monica horribly 
until she told him his truth. He treated Kathleen Willie very well. 
She got immunity and no tough questions. S office of the independent 
counsel said it was prohibited from commenting on the investigation, 
even to correct or respond to misinformation. Julie Steele doesn't 
know if her troubles are nearly over or getting worse by the hours. 
She says just this month, her sister got an anonymous call saying 
if Julie knows what's good for Adam and her, she'll back Kathleen 
Willie's story. I won't allow him to ride the school bus. I take him 
to school early, pick him up early. No one else in the hall when we 
go in we have -- they don't let him go down the hall by himself. For 
the first week, we didn't let him go to recess. Isn't this going a 
little far? is it? is it? Is it or not I want to know. Why are you 
talking so publicly, almost thumbing your nose at Kenneth starr? Because 
we've tried everything else. He does not stop. I'm at the point I 
can't tolerate being taunted any longer. If he thinks he's got a case 
for indictment, I think he needs to file it. That would be the thing 
to do Do you feel guilty? no. I feel guilty for speaking to isikoff. 
I feel proud that I stood up and corrected that I feel concerned that 
the message is if you make a mistake, you better stick with it. I 
don't want that to be true. I didn't think it was supposed to be true 
here. I thought we were better than that. Jane pauley's interview 
with Julie Steele for "Dateline" NBC. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>