<DOC>
<DOCNO> NBC19981130.1830.0919 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> CAPTION </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
NBC news "in depth." It's the eve of December. But in many places 
tonight, it might as well be spring. In fact, the first ten months 
of this year have been the second warmest january through October 
on record, with an average temperature in the high 50s. Now add to 
that a record-breaking hurricane season. What's behind it all? NBC's 
Robert Hager with the answers tonight, "in depth." In Washington, 
it was 66 today. And a record-setting 73 Sunday. Cafe's serving outdoors, 
and tomorrow it's December. It's been four or five straight days of 
beautiful, blue sky. It's awesome. We've got plants that are almost 
ready to bud. So they think it's springtime. In New York, a lot of 
the old leaves are still green, never fell. I prepared with sweaters 
and jackets. I'm walking around and it's hot. Record highs for the 
end of November set today in Detroit, 65. Youngstown, Ohio, too. Records 
yesterday in Omaha, 72, Des Moines, 70, and Pomona, New Jersey, 71. 
What's causing all this warmth? For nearly a month, persistent high 
pressure aloft has been pushing warm air north and deflecting colder 
air from Canada. Global warming may play a role, as well. Already, 
signs the cooling of water in the pacific, the so-called "La nina," 
may not be as widespread or dramatic as feared. The winter forecast 
now calls for warmer all across the south and up into the middle atlantic. 
Wet across the north. But northern temperatures may be near wintertime 
averages, not colder, as once feared. Meantime, today marks the end 
of the 1998 hurricane season. A season the weather bureau says today, 
is now the deadliest in more than two centuries. In all, 14 big storms. 
50% more hurricanes than average. 30% more tropical storms. $3.2 billion 
damage in insured damages in the U.S. 21 deaths in the U.S. most from 
tropical storm charley in Texas. And in central America, at least 
11,000 deaths from heavy rains after hurricane Mitch. Jerry jerrell 
heads the weather service's hurricane center. The death and destruction 
was of Biblical proportions. And jerrell says it could have been almost 
as bad in the U.S. during hurricane georges. We will never know how 
close we came to a comparable disaster in key west, florida. Half 
the population of key west chose to ride out the storm, which could 
have washed over the entire island if it had strengthened, instead 
of weakening. As for next year? Hugh willoughby heads the government's 
hurricane research. This season was kind of a wake-up call for us. 
And scientists say global warming could mean bad news ahead. What 
we are planning on for next year is an above average year. More unsettling 
signs with the fear of more storms and damage and loss of life. Robert 
Hager, NBC news, Washington. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>