<DOC>
<DOCNO> NBC19981130.1830.0067 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> CAPTION </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Good evening. On a day when a new phase of gun control in America 
kicks in, a massive manhunt for an escaped killer in Texas is now 
in its fourth full day, and still no sign of the fugitive. The whole 
scene is beginning to resemble a made-for-television movie, but no 
one can yet see the ending. NBC's Jim Cummins tonight in Texas. Tonight, 
more than 500 law officers, 70 dogs and 3 helicopters continue to 
search six square miles near death row in Texas for convicted killer 
Martin gurule, the same six square miles they have scoured since gurule 
broke out of prison shortly after midnight last Friday morning. why? 
We have no hard evidence to say that he has gotten outside of this 
perimeter, and that's why we keep focusing on that perimeter. The 
authorities say that Thursday night, gurule and six other inmates 
were roaming the recreation area after Thanksgiving dinner. They placed 
dummies on their bunks back in the cell block, cut a hole in one fence 
and were sprayed with gunfire from the guard tower when they tried 
to escape. The other six hit the ground and surrendered. But gurule 
managed to scale these last two fences, topped off with razor wire, 
and make his getaway. There was blood at the scene. We don't believe 
we hit the man. We think that probably the blood came from being cut 
up on the razor wire. Sergeant Tommy Freeman is in charge of the dog 
teams pursuing gurule. We tracked him to a paved road. And we tracked 
him down a paved road to this highway here for probably a Quarter 
mile, our unit entrance road, before we lost his scent. Today, the 
police were searching every car in the area. But so far, no leads. 
Late today, the authorities disclosed that a car was stolen here in 
huntsville over the weekend, 12 miles from where he broke out. So 
far, no trace of that stolen car. The big concern is that gurule is 
desperate, because the only thing he has to look forward to is death. 
He was sentenced to die for a double murder at this restaurant in 
corpus christi six years ago. Detective Ralph Lee investigated the 
case. He's very cold and calculating. He's very intelligent. He has 
no compulsion about doing things once he makes up his mind. He's going 
do them. And the people who live near death row aren't taking any 
chances. James Colburn says most of them are armed. I got that 22 
loaded up. Maybe he'll come up here. The authorities say gurule's 
escape will not slow the pace of executions in Texas. Six men are 
scheduled to die by lethal injection in 12 days, beginning thursday. 
Jim Cummins, NBC news, Huntsville, Texas. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>