<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981130.0411 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
In the most ambitious attempt yet by a European bank to compete on 
Wall Street, Deutsche Bank AG announced plans on Monday for a $10.1 
billion takeover of Bankers Trust. The acquisition would be the largest 
foreign takeover of an American bank and would vault Deutsche Bank 
over UBS AG of Switzerland and the new Citigroup as the world's biggest 
bank in terms of assets. The deal is the most vivid illustration to 
date of how banking has become more global and it may lead to others 
making cross-border deals. But Deutsche Bank's increased global reach 
will come at a cost: The bank announced plans to eliminate 5,500 jobs, 
mostly in New York and London. The bank's chairman, Rolf-Ernst Breuer, 
said the job cuts, which would come out of a combined work force of 
more than 20,000 in the two cities, would not all be at Bankers Trust. 
Still, the cuts would come at a time of retrenchment on Wall Street, 
as Merrill Lynch, J.P. Morgan and others have recently announced job 
cuts. In announcing the deal here Monday, there were no platitudes 
about a ``merger of equals'' or about the need for deference to cultural 
and institutional differences. Breuer made it clear he would shape 
the new enterprise. ``We don't believe in autonomy as an instrument 
of management and leadership,'' Breuer said at a news conference. 
``As far as it goes, we want a centralized management of the business.'' 
With that approach, Deutsche Bank is trying to avoid repeating past 
mistakes. Over the last decade, it has spent freely to build up its 
investment banking business _ with largely disappointing results. 
It acquired the British investment bank Morgan Grenfell in 1989, and 
paid billions to acquire star bankers and to expand operations in 
London and New York, giving the bankers wide freedom. When costs began 
to soar, Breuer re-asserted control, and top American executives defected. 
By concentrating power in Franfurt, Deutsche Bank created waves in 
New York and London. But Monday, Breuer seemed to be trying for a 
straddling position that would maintain central control while also 
retaining key executives on Wall Street. The company has committed 
some $400 million in bonus payments to retain top Bankers Trust managers, 
including Frank Newman, chairman and chief executive of Bankers Trust, 
who will be the only executive receiving a seat on Deutsche Bank's 
management board. Some Bankers Trust executives will receive $10 million 
or more each to stay on. The boards of both companies approved the 
acquisition, which had been expected for more than a week, on Sunday. 
In Frankfurt, shares of Deutsche Bank fell 2.2 percent, to 104.65 
marks ($61.77), as some analysts expressed skepticism about the proposal. 
The goals Deutsche Bank has set for itself _ an increase in earnings 
per share of 10 to 15 percent by 2001 _ are ``incredibly ambitious,'' 
said Diane Glossman, a banking analyst at Lehman Brothers Holdings. 
``The greatest challenge will be consolidating the cultures in a way 
that allows them to increase their earnings. That's crucial, and it's 
an area where Deutsche Bank has dropped the ball before.'' On the 
New York Stock Exchange, shares of Bankers Trust rose 1.7 percent, 
to $87, still shy of the $93 a share offered by Deutsche Bank. The 
stock has risen 21 percent since speculation of a deal emerged on 
Nov. 20. The agreement comes amid a wave of big international mergers 
by German companies. Daimler-Benz has just completed its merger with 
Chrysler Corp. Bertelsmann AG, the publishing and media conglomerate, 
is buying the publisher Random House. Indeed, Deutsche Bank's agreement 
with Banker's Trust is only one of three big deals this week. Hoechst 
AG, the chemicals giant, has reached an agreement to merge its pharmaceutical 
and agricultural businesses with those of Rhone-Poulenc of France. 
And Viag AG, an industrial conglomerate in Munich, will merge with 
Algroup of Switzerland in a deal worth $8.5 billion. In some cases, 
the mergers reflect a new-found strength and assertiveness in European 
corporations. But analysts say that many deals are a sign of weakness, 
a need to shore up competitive lapses that companies cannot resolve 
at home. ``Much of this is a corporate response to the difficulties 
at growing earnings in a low-growth, low-inflation environment,'' 
said George Hodgson, head of equity research at ABN Amro. Collectively, 
he noted, the companies involved in this year's 10 largest European 
mergers have underperformed the overall European stock market by about 
4 percent. The Bankers Trust deal is expected to draw attention to 
several lawsuits in the United States against the German bank over 
issues of slave labor during World War II. Though Deutsche Bank did 
not itself employ slave labor, it has been named along with industrial 
giants like Siemens and Daimler-Benz. Lawsuits against Swiss banks 
over wealth plundered by the Nazis led to a $1.25 billion settlement 
last summer, largely because New York state regulators insisted on 
an agreement before allowing the merged bank to operate in New York. 
New York City Comptroller Alan Hevesi is considering filing a lawsuit 
seeking to block the deal because of Holocaust issues, people who 
have been briefed on the plans said Monday. Hevesi's office declined 
to comment. The acquisition is subject to approval by the U.S. Federal 
Reserve, but that is not expected to be a major obstacle. Deutsche 
Bank does own a 12 percent stake in DaimlerChrysler, and while common 
in Germany, ownership in industrial companies is prohibited under 
U.S. banking laws. But Deutsche Bank, which said last week that it 
was not planning to sell its stake, has an exemption to this prohibition 
under legislation passed by Congress in 1978. Deutsche Bank's desire 
for a big American institution has been no secret. The bank's dominance 
at home has been eroded by increasing competition, and big Wall Street 
investment banks like Merrill Lynch and Goldman, Sachs have been winning 
lucrative work advising big European companies on mergers and acquisitions. 
Deutsche Bank, which had been courting Bankers Trust since the summer, 
is believed to have also actively looked at possible deals with J.P. 
Morgan, Credit Suisse Group, Hambrecht &AMP; Quist and others. Bankers 
Trust would give Deutsche Bank a middle-rank investment banking firm. 
A subsidiary, BT Alex. Brown, continues to have a strong franchise 
in bringing younger companies public, and Bankers Trust itself has 
a sizable business in underwriting high-yield junk bonds. Though junk 
bonds are still scarce in Europe, they are attracting new interestas 
more companies undergo management buyouts. Both companies have a substantial 
business in trading fixed-income securities, one of the few areas 
in investment banking where Deutsche Bank has had real success. And 
both companies have a big business in the obscure but lucrative area 
of custodial services, the service of acting as a guardian for securities. 
But the takeover of Bankers Trust will not catapult Deutsche Bank 
into the top ranks of American investment banks, a goal Breuer has 
long had in his sights. Not surprisingly, Breuer contended Monday 
that Bankers Trust was Deutsche Bank's ideal partner. The combined 
company would become the fourth-biggest money manager in the world, 
after UBS; Fidelity Investments, the American mutual fund giant, and 
the Japanese postal system's life insurance fund. To the surprise 
of many analysts Monday, Breuer insisted that he had never wanted 
to take over a top Wall Street firm and disputed widespread speculation 
that Deutsche Bank had settled on Bankers Trust simply because it 
was available. ``This is not a response of the fox to sour grapes,'' 
Breuer said, adding that his bank had ``never looked'' at so-called 
``bulge-bracket'' investment banks at the top ranks of Wall Street. 
``The bulge-bracket banks are not universal banks like we are,'' he 
said. ``Deutsche bank would have in the end had to become a completely 
different kind f bank.'' The acquisition will force Deutsche Bank 
to raise new capital to shore up its balance sheet. That is because 
the $10.1 billion purchase price for Bankers Trust is far higher than 
its tangible value, which is about $5.7 billion. Breuer said the bank 
would organize a new stock offering of 4 billion marks ($2.35 billion). 
Without elaborating, he said the bank would raise additional money 
by issuing ``hybrid'' securities, like convertible bonds. ``I now 
look forward to this next truly major step,'' said Newman, who engineered 
much of Bankers Trust's expansion by orchestrating the acquisition 
of Alex. Brown and other firms. ``I don't speak German, at least not 
yet,'' Newman told a news conference here Monday morning. ``I will 
take lessons.'' But the organizational lineup leaves little doubt 
that Deutsche Bank executives will be in charge. Breuer placed himself 
in charge of the five-person ``transition team,'' and Newman is the 
only person from Bankers Trust included. Though Breuer said he had 
no interest in additional American acquisitions, he is still on the 
prowl in Europe. The bank has long wanted to build a position in France, 
but the French government remains hostile to foreign banks' acquiring 
French institutions. ``Expansion in Europe is sti,l in the offing,'' 
Breuer said. Despite the $10 billion being paid for Bankers Trust, 
he added, money would not be a problem. ``Our shareholders, if the 
story is right, will be more than ready to furnish more money.'' 
</TEXT>
</DOC>