<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981130.0060 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
When their gleaming new international airport opened in the Gaza Strip 
last week, Palestinians saw it as one more step toward the national 
statehood their leaders have been promising. But the opening Monday 
morning in Washington of a U.S.-sponsored gathering of international 
aid donors to the Palestinians is a reminder of how far they have 
to go before assuming real control over their affairs _ and of the 
peculiar challenges of running a non-state state that hovers limbo-like 
between dependence and independence. The Palestinian National Authority, 
midwifed into existence five years ago by the Oslo peace negotiators, 
has effective internal jurisdiction over an expanding territory. It 
polices streets, patrols borders, runs schools and hospitals, manages 
ministries of trade and finance and foreign affairs. But it isn't 
in charge of its own destiny _ or finances. The very fact of a ``donor's 
conference'' hosted by a foreign government highlights the limits 
of the Authority's authority. A poor country in need of aid would 
directly petition multilateral lenders and friendly governments, as 
hurricane-ravaged Honduras is now doing. But the Palestinian National 
Authority has no independent standing in the multilateral agencies, 
and no formal diplomatic relations with major Western aid donors. 
And it has few immediate prospects of commercial funding. Convened 
by the Clinton administration, Monday's meeting is intended to secure 
firm pledges of multibillion-dollar support for the Palestinian National 
Authority over the next three to five years. After Oslo, it was assumed 
that by 1999 the Palestinians would achieve something close to full 
sovereignty, and foreign assistance promised in late 1993 for an envisioned 
five-year transition is now running out. But now, under pressure from 
the United States, Palestinian leaders have backed away from their 
long-announced intention to proclaim statehood next May. And Israeli 
negotiators are talking about postponing any final Palestinian declaration 
of independence for several years more, as discussions continue on 
security issues, the repatriation of refugees, and the heatedly disputed 
``final status'' of Jerusalem. The status of the Palestinian National 
Authority, meanwhile, remains unchanged. Still subsumed economically 
within the state of Israel, it cannot print money, impose import duties, 
draw down loans from the International Monetary Fund, or float notes 
in the sovereign bond markets. There are of course some advantages 
to international financial virginity. There is no vulnerable local 
currency for London traders to attack, no massive foreign debt to 
service, no IMF budget overlord to placate. But this is the Middle 
East, the birthplace of the double-edged sword. And it is the era 
of trade, not aid, when the engines of world capitalism are expected 
to drive progress. Unusually in the developing world, the Palestinians 
have no legacy of binge borrowing or debt defaults. This may sound 
like an unalloyed blessing, but that is not how things work in global 
financial markets. In virtually every tiny Third World capital there 
is a cluster of Western bankers doggedly seeking some sliver of profit, 
some credible investment opportunity, no matter how checkered the 
local financial history. But you don't find dealmakers from Morgan 
Guaranty hanging around the juice bars of Gaza City, or Ramallah. 
The Palestinian National Authority is not unlike a steadily employed, 
bill-paying consumer who has carefully avoided mortgages and Visa 
cards but suddenly needs a loan. To a banker, this is a non-person. 
Even for an incipient nation-state, having no credit history is worse 
than having a bad credit history. Making matters harder still, the 
Palestinians have no dollar reserves or other sovereign assets to 
act as collateral. So for the moment the Palestinians have little 
choice but to go to Washington, kaffiyeh in hand, and hope for more 
aid. In the Monday conference the Clinton administration is expected 
to increase U.S. funding, perhaps doubling it to some $150 million 
yearly; the European Union nations _ by far the biggest donors _ have 
pledged a new multi-year package of $4 billion. But even giving money 
away gets complicated when the recipient is not yet a government. 
The European Investment Bank promised $300 million to the Palestinians 
five years ago, but has delivered not a penny, as it tries to find 
a way around its own requirements for repayment assurances from a 
sovereign borrower. The U.S. Overseas Private Investment Corp. pledged 
$125 million in credit guarantees to American business ventures in 
Gaza and the West Bank, but has provided a scant $6 million, in good 
part because there is no history of U.S. corporate investment under 
a Palestinian regime. Atypically of Third World aid programs, most 
funding for Palestinian programs bypasses local authorities entirely 
and goes to projects managed by the donors themselves. The United 
Nations alone has 26 different agencies dispensing aid and running 
programs. Though the Palestinians welcome the aid, they find its distribution 
suffocatingly paternalistic. The quest for Palestinian self-determination 
is often portrayed as an issue of national pride, of rewards that 
are more psychic and symbolic than hard-headedly practical. But for 
Anis al-Qaq, the Palestinian National Authority deputy minister who 
oversees foreign assistance receipts, achieving something closer to 
national status is above all a managerial imperative. ``The United 
States and others should look at the Palestinian Authority as a state,'' 
he said, ``so that they can leave us to cope with our deficits and 
our financial planning by ourselves.'' 
</TEXT>
</DOC>