<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981130.0242 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
After more than a month of lurching through space in fits and starts, 
an experimental spacecraft crammed with new technologies has begun 
to cruise away from Earth, driven by a recently revived ion propulsion 
engine taken from science fiction. The National Aeronautics and Space 
Administration's Deep Space 1 spacecraft, now more than 3.5 million 
miles from Earth and moving away at more than a mile a second, has 
weathered a sometimes bumpy inaugural period punctuated by several 
small problems. But engineers say these headaches are not unexpected 
and that the 1,000-pound robot craft is settling in for a productive 
mission of trying new devices and techniques. Since Deep Space 1 was 
launched on Oct. 24, it has twice suspended normal operation and gone 
into emergency mode, software problems have occurred that caused subsystems 
to turn on, and the ion engine charged with propelling the craft turned 
off after four and a half minutes of a planned 16-hour test when first 
started on Nov. 10. ``The whole purpose of Deep Space 1 is to test 
advanced, new technologies that are in some ways risky,'' Dr. Marc 
D. Rayman, chief mission engineer, said in a telephone interview from 
NASA's Jet Propulsion Laboratory in Pasadena, Calif. ``If everything 
worked perfectly on the first try, it could mean that we were not 
sufficiently aggressive in selecting the technologies.'' The mission's 
main objective is to do some trouble-shooting technology, not science. 
NASA wants to validate unusual technologies that could make science 
craft more efficient and cheaper, and has filled Deep Space 1 with 
miniature instruments and other devices for trial. Aside from its 
unusual propulsion system, the probe carries an autonomous navigation 
system that keeps track of its location, a miniature integrated camera 
and spectrometer, a group of physics instruments for studying charged 
particles in space, new low-power electronics, and artificial intelligence 
systems that let the spacecraft revise its mission as situations change. 
A centerpiece of the mission is the spacecraft's solar-electric propulsion 
system, a form of ion drive that has been a mainstay of science fiction. 
Ion propulsion has been tested in space, and small ion engines are 
used to stabilize some satellites in high Earth orbits, but Deep Space 
1 is the first craft to employ this kind of engine as its primary 
drive. Instead of burning fuel as conventional rockets do, the ion 
engine's xenon gas fuel is charged electrically to create high-speed 
particles that leave the engine so fast that they produce thrust, 
albeit in minute amounts. The energized particles, called ions, are 
accelerated out of the engine through the pull of two oppositely charged 
metal grids. Deep Space 1's engine should normally produce about one-250th 
of a pound of thrust, comparable to the force exerted by one sheet 
of typing paper resting on the palm of a hand. This small, steady 
thrust should increase the craft's speed enough to boost its velocity 
by 8,000 miles an hour by the end of its mission. After the engine 
faltered, controllers sent the craft new computer instructions to 
help diagnose the problem, believed to have been debris in the engine 
that was causing a short circuit. When engineers turned the engine 
on last Wednesday to test the software and collect more data, to their 
surprise it started right away and ran flawlessly. ``While we were 
prepared for the engine to work, we didn't consider it a high probability 
that it would start and run so well the first time we tried it,'' 
Rayman said. Deep Space 1 will need the ion engine to complete its 
primary mission in July, when the craft is to make a close flyby of 
a small asteroid called 1992 KD. If NASA chooses to extend the mission, 
the ion drive will propel the spacecraft by two comets in 2001, Wilson-Harrington 
in January and Borrelly in September. Engineers said several of the 
other new technologies on Deep Space 1 are working well and some, 
like the physics experiments, have yet to be turned on. Deep Space 
1 has a new kind of solar power array that uses 720 cylindrical lenses 
to concentrate sunlight onto 3,600 electricity-producing cells. The 
arrays, arranged in a pair of panels spanning more than 38 feet across, 
produce up to 20 percent more power than conventional cells. Rayman 
said the panels deployed perfectly and are doing a better job of maintaining 
their orientation toward the sun than earlier types of solar arrays. 
The spacecraft's autonomous navigation system, which allows Deep Space 
1 to chart its course, also has worked as expected, he said. The system 
periodically takes pictures of stars with asteroids in the background 
and uses the information to compute the craft's location and adjust 
its course without help from ground controllers, as required by previous 
unmanned probes. Human controllers are fine-tuning the craft's operations 
and rewriting computerized instructions to bypass some problems. A 
sensor that keeps track of star locations so the spacecraft can orient 
itself has failed occasionally, once causing the craft to suspend 
operations and go into a safe mode. Engineers are still diagnosing 
the problem, Rayman said. Engineers determined that a software problem 
caused trouble with another instrument, a sun sensor, that triggered 
a second safe mode condition and they developed a way to fix it, he 
said. ``We see these problems as an opportunity to learn,'' Rayman 
said. ``Everything you learn here applies to the next time this technology 
is used, and that's what this mission is all about.'' 
</TEXT>
</DOC>