<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981130.0421 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
The Church of Scientology pleaded not guilty Monday to criminal charges 
in connection with the 1995 death of a member whose family claimed 
she was held against her will by the church for 17 days. A church 
lawyer delivered the written plea to the clerk's office for Pinellas 
County Circuit Court. A hearing is expected within 30 days. The church's 
Flag Service Organization, its chief operating arm here, was charged 
recently with abuse or neglect of a disabled adult and with practicing 
medicine without a license, both felonies. No individuals were charged. 
Under Florida law, the maximum penalty is a $5,000 fine for conviction 
on each charge, but courts may impose additional penalties, including 
forfeiture of property. The charges were filed by the state attorney 
for Pasco and Pinellas counties, Bernie McCabe, in the death of Lisa 
McPherson, 36, on Dec. 5, 1995. She had spent the 17 days before her 
death under 24-hour watch in a church-owned hotel in downtown Clearwater, 
the spiritual headquarters of Scientology. An autopsy found that Ms. 
McPherson had died of a pulmonary embolism, or blood vessel blockage, 
caused by bed rest and severe dehydration. Dr. Joan Wood, the county 
medical examiner, said Ms. McPherson had gone without fluids for at 
least five to 10 days before her death. Ms. McPherson also appeared 
to have lost more than 40 pounds, authorities said. Church officials 
have maintained that the lengthy investigation and charges in the 
case are the result of a 15-year vendetta by Clearwater police and 
other local officials. The church says that Ms. McPherson was well 
cared for during her stay, but that she became violent and incoherent 
and stopped eating. Church officials and lawyers said Ms. McPherson 
was taken to a hospital after her condition worsened suddenly. They 
said their medical experts would testify that Ms. McPherson's death 
was unrelated to her stay at the hotel. Ms. McPherson had been involved 
in a minor traffic accident in downtown Clearwater. She appeared to 
be uninjured, but took off her clothes and walked down the street 
naked. She was taken to Morton Plant Hospital, where a physician wanted 
to admit her for psychiatric treatment. The Church of Scientology 
adamantly opposes psychiatric care and Ms. McPherson refused the treatment. 
Instead, she signed herself out of the hospital and accompanied a 
group of Scientologists to the church's Fort Harrison Hotel. Church 
records show that she hallucinated, became violent and refused to 
eat at the hotel. She had to be restrained several times, according 
to accounts provided to police by her caretakers at the hotel. Ms. 
McPherson's family has filed a lawsuit against the church that is 
scheduled to go to trial next summer. The family is seeking unspecified 
damages. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>