<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981130.0306 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Common wisdom has it that the Vietnam War was the first television 
war, and that is no doubt true. But a new two-volume Library of America 
collection called ``Reporting Vietnam'' shows that the conflict was 
probably also the last writers' war, at least the last writers' war 
involving American forces in large numbers. The collection contains 
some 1,600 pages of writing on Vietnam from 1959 to 1975, much of 
it of extremely high quality. One reads these handsome volumes with 
many emotions, including those stemming from the tragedy of the war, 
evoked in graphic terms by the firsthand reporting, the eyewitness 
accounts, the profiles, interviews and analyses. But one reads also 
with a kind of nostalgia, a sense of a past unrecapturable. Some of 
the best reporting was done by seasoned veterans: Bernard Fall, Stanley 
Karnow, Robert Shaplen and others. But the evocative photographs in 
each volume also show the war as a journalistic trial by fire for 
a younger generation, born before the baby boomers but after those 
who covered World War II or the Korean War. It was the generation 
of reporters and writers, many well known today, whose careers took 
off in Vietnam, especially when the war turned out to be America's 
most hotly contested. David Halberstam, Seymour Hersh, Neil Sheehan, 
Sydney Schanberg, Peter Arnett, Gloria Emerson, Frances FitzGerald 
and others look very young in their photographs. The conflict ended 
23 years ago, and its chroniclers don't look young anymore. One reads 
their reporting with the feeling that there will never be another 
group of American war correspondents quite like them. This is not 
because they did their jobs well, though they did, but because whatever 
American wars may be fought in the future, they will be brought to 
the public in the fashion of the Persian Gulf War: not by adventurous 
men and women in the field with flak jackets and helmets, but by computer 
specialists putting on screens the electronically guided images provided 
by the Pentagon public affairs office. It seems unlikely, for example, 
that there will ever be another piece of writing quite like ``Quang 
Ngai and Quang Tin: 1967'' by Jonathan Schell, certainly one of the 
youngest journalists to make his reputation in Vietnam. Schell covered 
the war for a few weeks for the Harvard Crimson and later wrote two 
short books after reporting on what he saw as he accompanied American 
troops into combat. His message fed the growing anti-war sentiment 
back home by stressing, as he put it, the ``overriding, fantastic 
fact that we are destroying, seemingly by inadvertence, the very country 
we are supposedly protecting.'' The collection's first entry is a 
brief Time magazine account from 1959 of the first deaths of American 
military advisers in Vietnam. While much fighting is then described, 
the collection also includes Tom Wolfe's report on Ken Kesey's speech 
at an anti-war rally in 1965, Norman Mailer's account of the 1967 
march on the Pentagon and many other descriptions of the home front. 
There is also a gripping, studiously matter-of-fact account in U.S. 
News and World Report by John McCain, now a Republican senator from 
Arizona and possible presidential candidate, on his six years of imprisonment 
in North Vietnam. For those who, like me, came of age during the war 
and followed it closely, the volumes are like a literary recapitulation 
of events, once at the forefront of the collective mind, which have 
faded into obscurity. Here, for example, is Karnow's prescient 1961 
analysis of South Vietnamese president Ngo Dinh Diem and his powerful 
brother Ngo Dinh Nhu. Of Nhu, Karnow writes, ``He has certainly helped 
to curtail freedom, but it is not so sure that he has done much to 
promote progress.'' The terrible events of Vietnam are all here: Harrison 
Salisbury's reports on the bombing of North Vietnam in 1966 (``One 
can see that United States planes are dropping an enormous weight 
of explosives on purely civilian targets''); Hersh's 1969 scoop on 
the massacre of villagers at My Lai the previous year; James Michener's 
account of the killing of student demonstrators at Kent State University 
in 1970; Schanberg's description of the seizure of Phnom Penh by the 
Khmer Rouge five years later. ``No one has been excluded,'' Schanberg 
wrote in The New York Times, giving one of the first indications of 
the Cambodian horror that was to follow, ``even the very old, the 
very young, the sick and the wounded have been forced out onto the 
roads _ and some will clearly not be strong enough to survive.'' Among 
the most gripping of the almost-forgotten incidents was the shooting 
in 1968 of a Vietcong prisoner by Nguyen Ngoc Loan, the South Vietnamese 
national police commander. A profile of Loan by Tom Buckley is reprinted 
from Harper's in ``Reporting Vietnam,'' and it presents the issue 
with a moral complexity that eluded most observers at the time. Buckley 
calls the incident ``the moment when the American public turned against 
the war.'' He describes the prisoner at the moment of his execution: 
``His face is distorted, pushed to one side by the impact of the bullet 
in his brain, his hair stands up, his mouth opens in what might be 
a final cry.'' Buckley cites Loan a month later, curtly arguing that 
moral niceties do not win wars. ``People in the United States do not 
know the things we know here,'' he tells the reporter. In the account 
of his imprisonment, McCain describes the cruelty of the enemy and 
their cynical manipulation of prisoners for propaganda purposes. Prisoners 
were tortured, he writes, to force them to tell visiting humanitarian 
and anti-war delegations that they were being well treated. Loan's 
foolish assassination of a Vietcong prisoner formed one of the most 
famous images of the time, while the treatment of McCain (and the 
assassinations committed by the North Vietnamese side) were hidden. 
And this led to the frequently expressed opinion that the Vietnam 
War was lost on the terrain of public opinion. That may be true, but 
reading the dozens of articles reprinted here suggests a tough professionalism 
by reporters who were interested not in slanting the news (as the 
government complained) but simply in telling the story as it unfolded. 
The impression, in short, is of a job well done, and also of a job 
that very likely nobody will have the opportunity to do again. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>