<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981130.0050 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
More than any other attorney general, Janet Reno has been bedeviled 
by the independent counsel law. In just five years, she has ordered 
the appointment of seven independent prosecutors and turned down requests 
for a number of others, and is now considering two more investigations 
of Clinton administration officials. Her decisions have, in turn, 
infuriated both the White House and its Republican critics, and her 
tenure at the Justice Department has been largely defined by how she 
has used _ or, to some, misused _ the law. But in addition to being 
a constant source of political trouble for Reno, the statute, enacted 
after Watergate to keep politics out of high-level corruption cases, 
has probably helped Reno keep her job, which she might have lost long 
ago. Following President Clinton's re-election in 1996, there was 
a push by administration officials to get rid of her; they felt stung 
by her quickness to appoint independent prosecutors. But in the polarized 
arena of independent counsel politics, each time either the Democrats 
or the Republicans seem ready to take aim at Reno, they draw back, 
fearing a backlash against what could look like attacks on the political 
independence of a popular attorney general. Last week, with White 
House officials barely concealing their relief, Reno took the political 
heat again by refusing to seek an independent prosecutor to examine 
Vice President Al Gore's campaign finance activities. Reno's job once 
again seemed secure. There is no longer any backstairs gossip that 
Clinton wants to dump her. As a result, Republicans had little realistic 
hope of doing anything about their frustration. Sen. Arlen Specter, 
R-Pa., demanded Judiciary Committee hearings into her reluctance to 
pursue investigations of campaign financing, but there seemed little 
desire among his colleagues to summon Reno to Congress. However, the 
dynamics could shift again, and soon. Monday she must decide whether 
an outside prosecutor should investigate whether former White House 
deputy chief of staff Harold M. Ickes lied to Congress about his dealings 
with the Teamsters Union, whose financial support the Democrats were 
seeking in the 1996 campaign. And next week she must decide whether 
to pursue allegations that Clinton and his aides illegally evaded 
federal election laws when they spent millions of dollars of Democratic 
Party funds on political advertising. Justice Department aides insist 
that Reno is unconcerned about the impact of her decisions on her 
own job or political standing. They said she has neutrally exercised 
the law, unmotivated by politics, and has consistently applied an 
unwieldy federal statute. But as her Republican critics, like Sen. 
Orrin Hatch of Utah, the chairman of the Senate Judiciary Committee, 
have pointed out, she has blocked for more than two years any appointment 
of an independent prosecutor to investigate campaign finance cases. 
She has refused to seek an independent counsel even though FBI Director 
Louis Freeh and Charles La Bella, the former head of her campaign 
finance team, strongly recommended that she send the case to an outside 
prosecutor. Should Reno decide to go forward with an independent prosecutor 
in either the Ickes or the Clinton campaign advertising matters, it 
will be the Clinton administration's turn to be upset. During Clinton's 
first term, Reno's apparent eagerness to refer cases to independent 
prosecutors made her a serious irritant to the White House, where 
officials never made a secret of their differences with Reno. They 
routinely dismissed her as a cranky loner. Beneath the complaints, 
however, was a more substantive issue. She had sought a string of 
independent counsel inquiries into former Agriculture Secretary Mike 
Espy, former Housing Secretary Henry Cisneros; Ron Brown, the commerce 
secretary who died in a plane crash in Croatia in 1996, and even a 
little known official, Eli Segal, who headed the AmeriCorps national 
service program. Of course, it was White House officials themselves 
who had asked Reno to bring in an outside prosecutor to investigate 
Whitewater. Reno obediently named a respected New York lawyer, Robert 
Fiske, to conduct the inquiry. The case was later taken over by Kenneth 
Starr. Presidential aides soon expressed exasperation when Reno repeatedly 
expanded the scope of Starr's investigation into matters like the 
mishandling of personnel files at the White House, the abrupt dismissal 
of employees of the White House travel office and the truthfulness 
of statements made at a congressional hearing by Bernard Nussbaum, 
the former White House counsel and ally of Hillary Rodham Clinton. 
As a result, when Clinton won re-election Reno appeared to be in trouble. 
For weeks he left her in limbo about whether he would keep her on 
the job at the Justice Department, passing up opportunities to state 
clearly that she had his support. White House aides said privately 
that Clinton's advisers wanted to ease her out of the Justice Department. 
Eventually, Clinton's aides said they concluded that if the president 
fired a popular attorney general, he would face powerful attacks from 
Republicans in Congress, who delighted in her decisions to open independent 
investigations of Clinton's Cabinet officers. In the end, some of 
Clinton's aides expressed fears that ousting Reno would allow Republicans 
to accuse the president of a Saturday Night Massacre like the one 
that forced Attorney General Elliot Richardson to resign rather than 
carry out President Richard M. Nixon's order to fire Watergate special 
prosecutor Archibald Cox. In a city like Washington, that's job security. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>