<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981130.0357 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
John Dugdale is a photographer who can barely see. In 1993, diseases 
resulting from his infection by the AIDS virus took most of his vision 
and hearing. He thought he had months to live, but he's still here. 
That is why, Dugdale said, he is qualified to talk about the importance 
of a new online gallery of works by artists with AIDS. ``I am here 
to say that having a lasting record of my work would have been so 
important to me when I was suffering five years ago,'' said Dugdale, 
38, whose work is also on display at the Wessel &AMP; O'Connor Gallery 
in Chelsea through Jan. 3. ``I know what it would have been like for 
me to exit with no record.'' The online gallery, the Virtual Collection 
(www.artistswithaids.org) is to have its premiere Tuesday, World AIDS 
Day, with ceremonies in five museums nationwide, including the Museum 
of Modern Art and the Los Angeles County Museum. It has some 3,200 
images of objects made by some 150 artists who are HIV-positive, are 
dying from AIDS or have died. For many of the artists the Virtual 
Collection is a means to show their art to a wider audience and to 
feel that it will live on after them. But the Virtual Collection is 
also meant to be a historical record of the AIDS era. It was founded 
by the Estate Project for Artists With AIDS, an 8-year-old program 
that helps HIV-positive and AIDS-stricken artists. ``This is not an 
art catalog,'' said Randall Bourscheidt, president of the Alliance 
for the Arts, the nonprofit arts advocacy group in Manhattan that 
runs the Virtual Collection and the Estate project. ``Our goal is 
to create something which is a powerful testament to the effect of 
this epidemic.'' In the Virtual Collection each artist gets his own 
page. To the left is a 100- to 300-word biography of the artist. To 
the right are small images of 20 or so examples of the artist's work. 
Each of these images can be expanded by a double click of the mouse 
to larger, high-resolution digital pictures. Each picture is accompanied 
by detailed cataloging, including size, medium and even a contact 
number for the artist or the estate. Users can put together pieces 
by different artists and save them on their own private pages. This 
feature and the contact information are intended to allow teachers, 
curators and collectors to study objects in different combinations 
online and borrow or buy the pieces themselves for exhibition in the 
real world. ``The real gallery doesn't exist,'' said Glenn Lowry, 
director of the Museum of Modern Art. ``These works are spread out; 
this is a way of bringing them together in a context.'' There are 
a number of well-known artists on the Web site, including Keith Haring, 
Robert Mapplethorpe, Bruce Cratsley and David Wojnarowicz, but most 
of the names are obscure. The only requirement for inclusion in the 
Virtual Collection is that the artist be HIV positive or have AIDS 
and submit around 20 slides of his work. If artists cannot make slides, 
the Estate Project will help them. ``Whether these are achieved works 
of art isn't for us to judge,'' Bourscheidt said. ``The result we 
are striving for is to preserve the historical context of the artists' 
community during the AIDS crisis.'' The Estate Project was founded 
in 1991 to address the fact that artists of all stripes, including 
painters, sculptors, writers, poets and choreographers were dying 
of AIDS and their works were being sold off, given away, or even thrown 
away. Among other things, the Estate Project raised money for groups 
in the mid-'90s that were making slide archives of works by artists 
with AIDS. Slides, however, are fragile and inaccessible, so in 1995 
the Estate Project decided to gather the images together and put them 
online. ``This gives incredible access to these works,'' said Barbara 
Hunt, the director of Visual AIDS, an advocacy group in Manhattan 
that was the largest single source of slides along with groups in 
Los Angeles, Boston and San Francisco. ``It brings together archives 
from around the country.'' In New York the Virtual Collection is to 
be celebrated on Tuesday at the Museum of Modern Art with a public 
demonstration of the Web site at 10:45 a.m. The Brooklyn Museum has 
an exhibition of pieces by some artists in the Virtual Collection 
and there is to be a public reception for the artists at 6:30 Tuesday 
evening. And the Studio Museum in Harlem will display on Tuesday only 
a computer with images by African-American artists in the Virtual 
Collection. No one is certain how many artists have HIV and AIDS, 
but most of the advocates for artists with AIDS say there are many 
thousands of them. The director of the Estate Project and the Web 
site, Patrick Moore, said it was likely that the Virtual Collection 
would grow to more than 6,000 images in the next few years. It costs 
around $150 to put one artist's works online, he said, and the Estate 
Project plans to continue raising funds for the effort. Moore said 
he hoped that the Virtual Collection would still be up and running 
long after the artists and many of their works had disappeared. ``The 
reality is that not of all these artworks will survive,'' he said. 
``All we can do is preserve their images electronically.'' 
</TEXT>
</DOC>