<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981130.0325 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Should parents pay a blood bank to store the blood from their newborn 
baby's umbilical cord and placenta, in case that child or another 
family member ever needs it to treat cancer or leukemia? Expectant 
parents are being urged to do so by companies that have sprung up 
during the past few years to sell cord-blood banking as a form of 
``biological insurance'' against such dreaded diseases. The pitch 
is based on reports in medical journals, such as a major study published 
last week in the New England Journal of Medicine, showing that cord 
blood can sometimes be used in place of a bone marrow transplant. 
Like bone marrow, cord blood is rich in stem cells, which can churn 
out many different types of cells to rebuild a patient's blood supply 
and immune system after high doses of radiation and chemotherapy. 
A patient's own cord blood, or that from a relative, is more likely 
than cord blood from an unrelated donor to be a good tissue match 
and to be accepted by the recipient's body. Some experts in bone-marrow 
transplantation and blood banking frown on the cord-blood business, 
arguing that people are being frightened into wasting money on a service 
they will probably never need. Moreover, private companies are growing 
in tandem with public banks, and some scientists worry that private 
banking will limit public access to cord blood. They are concerned 
because the cord blood in private banks remains the property of the 
donor family and is not available to patients seeking a compatible 
donor. But the companies say that however remote the possibility that 
the blood will be needed, people who choose to bank their own cord 
blood have a right to do so. In most cases their cord blood would 
be thrown away in the delivery room if they did not pay to bank it. 
There are only a few cord-blood banks in the United States, and most 
hospitals do not have specially trained staff members to collect the 
blood. Like bone marrow, cord blood must be matched to the recipient 
by tests for six inherited traits that determine an individual's tissue 
type. Cord blood does not have to be as precisely matched as bone 
marrow, but still, the closer the match, the better the odds of success. 
The weaker the match, the more likely it is that the recipient's body 
will reject the transplant, or the transplant will attack the recipient's 
tissues, in a life-threatening reaction called graft vs. host disease. 
The companies that freeze cord blood and bank it point out that a 
person's own cord blood is a perfect match, and a sibling's cord blood 
a more likely match than a specimen from a stranger. Promotional literature 
for one company, Cord Blood Registry, in San Bruno, Calif., emphasizes 
that people with cancer in the family may have a special interest 
in cord-blood banking, along with those who have the hardest time 
finding matches. Those include members of racial minorities, especially 
families in which the parents are of different races. A spokeswoman, 
Scoti Kaesshaefer, said the company reaches parents-to-be by promoting 
itself to doctors, nurses and childbirth educators, and by leaving 
information at hospitals. For example, the company is distributing 
copies of newspaper articles suggesting that cancer among children 
is on the rise. The company also has a Web site and an 800 number. 
Cord Blood Registry describes itself as the largest private cord-blood 
banking firm in the country. It has stored 10,000 samples during the 
past three years: 1,500 in 1995, 3,000 in 1996 and 6,000 in 1997. 
The company charges an initial fee of $1,200 to collect a sample and 
freeze it, and then $95 a year to keep it stored in liquid nitrogen 
at the blood bank at the University of Arizona. Customers include 
people with perfectly healthy children, who just want extra peace 
of mind, as well as some families who have lost a child to leukemia 
or another disease and fear for the health of their other children. 
In its three years of operation, eight customers have retrieved their 
cord blood for use in medical treatment, said Ms. Kaesshaefer. All 
eight samples were used for siblings or relatives, she said. The largest 
public-access bank of cord blood, at the New York Blood Center in 
Manhattan, has collected 8,686 specimens in six years. Nearly 800 
of those samples have been used to treat patients, many of them children, 
in the United States and overseas. Dr. Pablo Rubinstein, who directs 
the cord-blood program at the New York Blood Center, said there is 
a compelling medical argument against using a patient's own cord blood 
in some cases. In some young children with leukemia, he said, malignant 
cells are present at birth in the cord blood, and transfusing those 
cells back into the child later might contribute to a relapse. In 
addition, he said, bone marrow from a donor could help destroy diseased 
cells, an effect known as graft vs. leukemia. A person's own cord 
blood might not have that effect, and in some cases even a sibling's 
might not. Dr. John Wagner, associate director of bone marrow transplantation 
at the University of Minnesota in Minneapolis, said that for a child 
being treated recently, he deliberately rejected cord blood from a 
sibling in favor of a well-matched unit from an unrelated donor, hoping 
to take advantage of its antileukemic effect. Dr. Robertson Parkman, 
director of bone marrow transplantation at Children's Hospital in 
Los Angeles, said he saw no point in banking cord blood for most families. 
``It's motivated by fear,'' he said. But in families with an ill child 
who might need a bone-marrow transplant, he said, it makes sense to 
save cord blood from any siblings born later. Medical centers with 
transplant programs will often perform that service, he said. So will 
some of the private companies, without a fee. When a bone-marrow donor 
could not be found for 4-year-old Joshua Kelton, who was suffering 
from leukemia, his parents, stationed at a military base in Honolulu, 
conceived another child in the hope that the baby's tissues would 
match Joshua's. They did, and Cord Blood Registry collected the cord 
blood at birth, stored it in Arizona for a month, and then, when Joshua 
was ready for the procedure, transported it to a medical center at 
Stanford University. Joshua was treated with his infant brother's 
cord blood in August, and has been declared free of leukemia. ``Right 
now, he's 100 percent,'' his father said in a telephone interview, 
``a normal child, the way he was before this happened.'' But the Keltons' 
experience is hardly representative. That the family was certain it 
would need the cord blood sets it apart from most families that store 
the blood. Wagner is wary of the hard sell of some of the cord-blood 
companies. ``My concern is that it be presented fairly to expectant 
mothers, who are already fairly vulnerable,'' he said. ``I have a 
lot of obstetricians and parents calling me and complaining it's too 
late, they missed the opportunity. Others call saying, `Should I do 
this?' It's hard to answer. I don't want to bias them.'' 
</TEXT>
</DOC>