<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981130.0521 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Republicans on the House Judiciary Committee took renewed interest 
Monday in President Clinton's 1996 campaign finances and planned to 
subpoena the director of the FBI and the Justice Department's former 
senior prosecutor for campaign finance abuses. With the impeachment 
inquiry into Clinton moving into its final, critical stages, Republican 
aides said the committee would vote on the subpoenas on Tuesday after 
a full-day hearing intended to underscore the seriousness of perjury 
charges like those leveled against Clinton by Kenneth Starr in his 
report to Congress. But moving beyond the Lewinsky matter in yet another 
effort to broaden the impeachment inquiry, the committee could take 
depositions from the FBI director, Louis Freeh, and the senior prosecutor, 
Charles La Bella, as early as the end of this week. Both Freeh and 
La Bella have unsuccessfully urged Attorney General Janet Reno to 
seek an independent counsel to scrutinize the president's 1996 campaign 
finance practices. The committee Republicans also plan to issue subpoenas 
demanding that Clinton and Reno provide the full, unedited memorandums 
that Freeh and La Bella wrote to Reno to support their arguments. 
And looking for any new evidence of obstruction of justice by the 
president, another of the allegations in the Starr report, the Republicans 
said they would also seek Justice Department documents concerning 
an array of figures under scrutiny in the inquiry into Democratic 
fund-raising: John Huang, Johnny Chung, Charlie Trie and Mark Middleton. 
The Republicans' move came on the same day that the White House rebuffed 
a committee invitation for Clinton to appear before the panel, saying 
it would serve no purpose. The White House left open the possibility 
that his lawyers would appear. With new issues before the committee, 
Republicans in the full House appeared divided over how they want 
to proceed against Clinton. Some Republicans were starting to call 
for their leadership to take a stronger hand in developing a strategy 
for how the issue will be dealt with on the floor in December and 
whether an impeachment vote would be followed by one on censure. ``This 
will be the most important vote any member of Congress will ever take 
and yet there appears to be no strategy,'' said Rep. Peter King, R-N.Y., 
who is opposed to impeachment. ``We have seven-year plans for a balanced 
budget and five-year plans for a balanced budget, but there doesn't 
seem to be a three-week plan for impeachment.'' The Judiciary Committee 
is expected to approve on a party-line vote one article of impeachment 
and possibly up to three by the end of next week. Republicans were 
said to be drafting three articles, one on perjury, one on obstruction 
of justice and witness tampering, and one on abuse of power. Committee 
aides said the examination of campaign finance questions would not 
alter the plans of the committee chairman, Rep. Henry Hyde, R-Ill., 
to send the committee's recommendations on impeachment to the full 
House in December. One official said the committee wanted to see if 
inquiries into campaign finance had uncovered accusations of wrongdoing 
by the president and whether there was information that could contribute 
to a case of obstruction of justice. ``We want to make sure that we've 
covered the area,'' the official said. ``It would be dereliction of 
duty not to do it.'' Democrats denounced the new move and were expected 
to vote against the subpoenas. ``So we're going to dive into campaign 
finance now?'' said Rep. Rick Boucher, D-Va., a member of the committee. 
``The process gets stranger and stranger.'' The Republicans had previously 
sought the memorandums of Freeh and La Bella, but a federal court 
had told the Justice Department that it had not shown sufficient reason 
to hand over the full documents, which contain grand jury information, 
lawyers familiar with the issue said. The Republicans are hoping that 
the court would consider a subpoena from Congress to be more serious. 
Several law-enforcement officials who spoke on the condition of anonymity 
insisted Monday night that the Freeh and La Bella memorandums did 
not contain information that would amount to evidence of impeachable 
offenses. The maneuvering over campaign finance questions came as 
positions appeared to be hardening in the House, in the wake of Clinton's 
legalistic answers to 81 question from the committee, making any compromise 
short of impeachment ever harder to work out. Further complicating 
the situation, House members say, is that they are scattered across 
the country, and the Republican leadership is still in disarray as 
the new speaker, Robert Livingston, tries to assemble a staff and 
an agenda. ``It's difficult to manage the process of coming to rational 
decisions when you have chaos around you,'' said one Republican House 
member, who spoke on the condition of anonymity. Hyde Monday denounced 
Clinton's responses to the 81 questions about the scandal surrounding 
his relationship with Monica Lewinsky. ``Instead of shedding new light 
on the key facts, the president chose to evade them,'' Hyde said in 
a two-page statement. ``He has made it very clear he is going to stick 
with his reliance on bizarre technical definitions and legalistic 
defenses.'' Hyde said the president ``did not challenge the truthfulness 
of the evidence. Rather, his responses revealed a selective ability 
to recall information.'' He warned that Clinton would soon have his 
last chance to contest any aspect of the impeachment case built by 
Starr, the independent counsel. While the White House left the door 
open Monday to an appearance by Clinton's lawyers before the Judiciary 
Committee, it ruled out an appearance by the president. ``It won't 
add any new information and can be put in the category of a stunt,'' 
Joe Lockhart, the White House press secretary said, Monday. Hyde's 
irritation appeared widely shared by Republicans, even moderates who 
might be expected to be skittish about impeachment. ``I think the 
presi/dent did a disservice to his case by the deceptive nature of 
his responses,'' said Rep. Rick Lazio, R-N.Y., who has said he would 
not say how he would vote until the House Judiciary Committee completed 
its inquiry. Although the public has made clear that it opposes the 
impeachment of Clinton, House Republicans now seem to be split. The 
Republicans on the Judiciary Committee, one of the most ideologically 
polarized committees in the House, are pushing steadily ahead for 
an impeachment vote. Conservatives, too, favor an impeachment vote, 
most vocal among them Rep. Tom DeLay of Texas, the House majority 
whip. Republicans in this faction argue that their party will suffer 
few political consequences whether they narrowly fail to impeach the 
president on a perjury count, or narrowly succeed. If they fail, said 
one House Republican strategist, they will be able to tell core conservative 
voters that they made their best effort against the president. If 
they succeed, the strategist said, they do so knowing that the Senate 
will never muster the votes to remove Clinton from office. But other 
Republicans fear that their party will suffer a backlash from voters 
if they push through a near-party-line impeachment vote and that their 
ability to work with Democrats on issues of concern to voters will 
be impaired. Some would like to see their leaders join with Democrats 
to work out an agreement to censure Clinton as an alternative to impeachment, 
or as an option for a second vote should an impeachment vote fail. 
``The idea that you either give him the death penalty or set him free 
is kind of ridiculous,'' said Ken Johnson, a spokesman for Rep. W.J. 
Tauzin, R-La. ``If we don't have a strategy and we go ahead with an 
impeachment vote and lose and Congress censures the president,'' said 
King, ``that will be looked at as a Democratic initiative and a Democratic 
victory. We should be on the forefront on censure.'' But so far neither 
Livingston nor Newt Gingrich, who is speaker until the 106th Congress 
convenes in January, has taken an active role in planning strategy, 
Republicans say. Livingston has said he would consider impeachment 
a vote of conscience and would not be putting pressure on members. 
He has also said he believed the Senate, not the House, would be the 
proper forum for any censure agreement. But he has also left the door 
open for a censure option to come to the House floor through the Rules 
Committee. Mark Corallo, a spokesman for Livingston, said Monday that 
until the Judiciary Committee takes its final action, ``the question 
of who's in charge is irrelevant.'' Also Monday, a prominent Democratic 
fund-raiser, Nathan Landow, invoked his Fifth Amendment right against 
self-incrimination when the Judiciary Committee staff sought to depose 
him. Landow had invoked the same right when called before the federal 
grand jury by Starr. Republicans wanted to question Landow about whether 
he tried to influence the testimony of Kathleen Willey, a former White 
House volunteer who has said Clinton groped her outside the Oval Office. 
Last week, Ms. Willey's lawyer, Daniel Gecker, gave committee lawyers 
a sworn statement, but aides said Gecker's answers did not break any 
new ground. Republican committee aides said Monday that they would 
most likely cancel a deposition scheduled for Thursday with Robert 
Bennett, Clinton's personal lawyer in the Paula Corbin Jones sexual-misconduct 
case. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>