<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981130.0446 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
And the winner is ... the only nonwinner in the race. The Texas Rangers 
have won two division championships in the past three seasons, the 
Anaheim Angels just missed finishing first this year and have since 
added Mo Vaughn, and the Los Angeles Dodgers are looking to turn Rupert 
Murdoch's money into a championship. But Randy Johnson, who could 
have signed with any of those teams, opted Monday to join the Arizona 
Diamondbacks, the only team among the four with a losing record this 
year. Johnson, the most dominant left-handed pitcher in baseball, 
agreed to a four-year contract, with an option for a fifth year, for 
$52.4 million. Another 1998 losing team, the Baltimore Orioles, planned 
to announce the signing of another free agent, Albert Belle, Tuesday. 
Belle, who leaves the Chicago White Sox after two years of a five-year, 
$55 million contract, will receive about $65 million for five years 
from the Orioles. The Diamondbacks' losing status was not surprising 
considering this was their first year, but Johnson is gambling that 
Jerry Colangelo, the team's managing partner, will quickly create 
a contender. Johnson, who in two months in Houston this past season 
showed what a dominant pitcher can do in a pennant race, wasn't available 
for comment, but one of his agents, Barry Meister, said, ``We became 
convinced of Arizona's determination to make the team a winner and 
the fact that they have the resources to do it.'' All four teams were 
close in their offers, Meister said, but Johnson, with significant 
input from his wife, Lisa, accepted his hometown team's deal that 
calls for him to receive $12.35 million a year and a guaranteed buyout 
of $3 million for the option year, which would have a salary of $12 
million to $15 million depending on where he finishes in the Cy Young 
Award voting the year before. The contract, which makes Johnson the 
second-highest-paid player at $13.1 million a year behind Vaughn's 
$13,333,333, also includes $600,000 worth of perks, including use 
of a skybox at Bank One Ballpark. Johnson recently built a palatial 
home in the Phoenix suburb of Paradise Valley, and he had always said 
that what his family wanted was important. He and his wife have three 
children under the age of 4. But Johnson also wanted to play for a 
contender, even if it was a contender-to-be. ``Arizona had started 
out with the most difficult row to hoe in terms of their ability to 
compete,'' Meister said. ``But Arizona made some impressive moves, 
and we felt the competitive issue was starting to resolve itself. 
It's a city he's comfortable with, they've got a world-class manager 
in Buck Showalter and Jerry Colangelo is a guy who's convinced he's 
going to get this done.'' The moves Meister referred to were the signing 
of four free agents, pitchers Todd Stottlemyre, Armando Reynoso and 
Greg Swindell and first baseman Greg Colbrunn. How impressive those 
moves are remains to be seen, but for the most part, they seem to 
be signings that could help improve a team that had a 65-97 record 
its rookie season, if not catapult it into first-place or even wild-card 
status. Had the Dodgers signed Johnson, on the other hand, they would 
very likely have been the favorites in the Diamondbacks' division, 
the National League West. The same would have been true in the American 
League West for the Rangers and the Angels, who had been viewed as 
the Diamondbacks' primary competition. That is not to say the Diamondbacks 
will not take future steps on the level of a Johnson signing to gain 
contending status. They were interested in Bernie Williams, but not 
at the price the Boston Red Sox offered and the Yankees matched. A 
year ago the expansion team signed shortstop Jay Bell for five years 
and $34 million, then traded for Matt Williams and gave him a five-year 
extension for $42.5 million. The first step the Diamondbacks want 
to take is to trade a starting pitcher, either Brian Anderson or Omar 
Daal, for a good outfielder. Among the available outfielders are Jim 
Edmonds or Garret Anderson of Anaheim, Albert Martin of Pittsburgh, 
Reggie Sanders of Cincinnati and Willie Greene of Baltimore. Colangelo 
said the Diamondbacks received three trade offers within a few hours 
after they announced Johnson's signing. ``I felt we had a legitimate 
chance because no one qualified as having a home-field advantage like 
we did,'' Colangelo said by telephone from Phoenix. ``We met 29 days 
ago. One of his big concerns was how quickly we could become competitive. 
Competing now was important to him.'' Colangelo said he told Johnson 
to watch what the team would be doing in the next few weeks, and in 
the space of two weeks, they signed the four free agents. ``I felt 
with the moves we made we had improved ourselves considerably,'' the 
owner said. ``With the addition of Randy himself, we felt we could 
compete much sooner than later. The quickest way to compete is to 
concentrate on pitching so we'd have a shot every night.'' Johnson, 
35, joins a rotation of Stottlemyre, Andy Benes, Reynoso and Anderson 
or Daal. He assumes the No. 1 role after a season in which he led 
the major leagues in strikeouts with 329 in 2441/3 innings, or a ratio 
of 12.1 every 9 innings. His season was played in two parts. From 
the start of the season through the end of July, he was a disgruntled 
pitcher for the Seattle Mariners, who had decided last winter they 
weren't going to sign him to a new contract but didn't accede to his 
wish for a trade. Johnson had a 9-10 record and a 4.33 earned run 
average for the Mariners in 23 starts. But after the Mariners traded 
him to the Astros on July 31, he ecstatically went about his business, 
winning 10 of 11 starts and compiling a 1.28 e.r.a. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>