<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981130.0441 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Republicans on the House Judiciary Committee took renewed interest 
on Monday in President Clinton's 1996 campaign finances and planned 
to subpoena the director of the FBI and the Justice Department's former 
senior prosecutor for campaign finance abuses. With the impeachment 
inquiry into Clinton moving into its final, critical stages, Republican 
aides said the committee would vote on the subpoenas on Tuesday after 
a full-day hearing intended to underscore the seriousness of perjury. 
The committee, moving beyond the Lewinsky matter in yet another effort 
to broaden the impeachment inquiry, could take depositions as early 
as the end of this week from the FBI director, Louis Freeh, and the 
senior prosecutor, Charles La Bella, both of whom had urged Attorney 
General Janet Reno to seek an independent counsel to scrutinize the 
president's campaign finance practices in the 1996 election. The committee 
Republicans also plan to issue subpoenas demanding that Clinton and 
Reno provide the full, unedited memos that Freeh and La Bella wrote 
to Reno to support their arguments. And looking for any new evidence 
of obstruction of justice by the president, another issue in the impeachment 
inquiry, the Republicans said they would also seek Justice Department 
documents concerning an array of figures under scrutiny in the inquiry 
into Democratic fund raising: John Huang, Johnny Chung, Charlie Trie 
and Mark Middleton. The committee signaled its interest in campaign 
finance questions as Republicans in the full House appeared divided 
over how to proceed against Clinton. Some Republicans were starting 
to call for their leadership to take a stronger hand in developing 
a strategy for how the issue will be dealt with on the floor in December 
and whether any impeachment vote would be followed by a vote on censure. 
``This will be the most important vote any member of Congress will 
ever take and yet there appears to be no strategy,'' said Rep. Peter 
King, R-N.Y., who is opposed to impeachment. ``We have seven-year 
plans for a balanced budget and five-year plans for a balanced budget, 
but there doesn't seem to be a three-week plan for impeachment.'' 
The Judiciary Committee is expected to approve on a party-line vote 
at least one article of impeachment against Clinton and possibly as 
many as three by the end of next week. Republicans were said to be 
drafting three articles, one on perjury, one on obstruction of justice 
and witness tampering, and one on abuse of power. Committee aides 
said the examination of campaign finance questions would not alter 
the plans of the committee chairman, Rep. Henry Hyde, to send the 
committee's recommendations on impeachment to the full House in mid-December. 
One official said the committee wanted to see if the past investigations 
into campaign finance had uncovered allegations of wrongdoing by the 
President and whether there was information that could contribute 
to a case of obstruction of justice. ``We want to make sure that we've 
covered the area,'' the official said. ``It would be dereliction of 
duty not to do it.'' Democrats denounced the new move and were expected 
to vote against the subpoenas. ``So we're going to dive into campaign 
finance now?'' asked Rep. Rick Boucher, a Virginia Democrat on the 
committee. ``The process gets stranger and stranger.'' The Republicans 
had previously sought the memorandums of Freeh and La Bella, but a 
federal court told the Justice Department that it had not shown sufficient 
reason to hand over the full documents, which contain grand jury information, 
Republican and Democratic aides said. The Republicans are hoping that 
the court will consider a subpoena from Congress to be more serious. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>