<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981130.0518 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Steven Romer stole more money from clients _ $7 million _ than any 
lawyer in the nation. He has already spent seven years in Sing Sing 
state prison paying for the crime. He and his family feel it is time 
for him to get out. And, increasingly, they are getting politicians 
and parole experts to agree. Romer likes to compare his seven years 
behind bars to the two years that Michael Milken served in a low-security 
work camp, after making billions from security fraud. And the Rev. 
Jim Bakker served only five years for bilking his supporters out of 
$158 million. Romer and his family repeat these and other similar 
facts to anyone willing to listen. They took out an advertisement 
in The Albany Times Union to plead his case of unfair treatment. An 
untiring letter-writing campaign on his behalf has been mounted by 
Romer; his wife, Rita; his brother, Ted; and his two sons. But unlike 
scores of his fellow inmates who are also claiming that they are wrongly 
imprisoned, Romer has managed to get elected officials and sentencing 
experts to agree with him. So far, four elected officials, including 
Assemblymen Richard Gottfried of New York City and Martin Luster of 
Ithaca, have written to state officials to urge a review of Romer's 
case. But the people who lost their life savings are as angry with 
Romer as they were when he was sent to the Sing Sing Correctional 
Facility in 1992. They say that until Romer gives up his unbending 
protestations of innocence and convinces the authorities that he has 
no stolen money left, the Romer family's tenacious campaign to drum 
up public sympathy for Inmate 92A0519 will cut no mustard with them. 
``I don't see why anyone would have any sympathy for him _ he didn't 
have any for his victims,'' said Gabrielle Votano, a New York art-gallery 
staff member. Ms. Votano was 17 when her father died _ she lost her 
mother at 13 _ and Romer, who was a family friend and family lawyer, 
spoke at the funeral. Later that day he persuaded her to place her 
$750,000 inheritance in his hands. ``He said, `Well honey, don't worry, 
your dad and I were good friends, and all I want to do is take care 
of you, and I wouldn't dream of having you pay for my services,''' 
Ms. Votano recalled in an interview. He took all her money. On New 
Year's Eve 1990, Romer disappeared. Nearly two months later, he turned 
himself in to the Manhattan district attorney's office, claiming that 
he had escaped from a kidnapping by General Motors. Shortly after 
he vanished from his office in Manhattan, Ms. Votano and the other 
defrauded clients received a letter from him saying that he was dying 
from a brain tumor but that he had a $23 million life-insurance policy 
to pay them back for their money, which, he wrote, he had used ``to 
feed some hungry and poverty-stricken people.'' ``If you make a fuss, 
or contact the authorities, the Insurance Company will use it as an 
excuse to claim fraud and avoid paying the Face of the Policy,'' the 
letter said. In all, Romer was convicted on multiple counts of theft, 
fraud and forgery and sentenced to 7{ years to 22{ years in prison. 
The state Supreme Court jury found that in addition to Ms. Votano's 
money, Romer had stolen $4.1 million from Joseph Marion (the proceeds 
of the sale of a business entrusted to Romer), $1.2 million from Judith 
Ripps, also a lawyer, and $1 million from Ira Saferstein, an investor. 
``This was not just someone who got in over his head,'' said Roslynn 
Mauskopf, who prosecuted Romer in state court and who is now the state 
inspector general. ``This was a man who calculated what he wanted 
to do and systematically over a period of time stole more money than 
any lawyer in the history of the country in order to feed his grand 
scheme. And in the process, he devastated the lives of people who 
had trusted him.'' Ms. Mauskopf said the investigation disclosed that 
Romer had deposited the stolen money in various business ventures 
that he owned, including a gold mine and an electric-car company, 
but prosecutors were not able to trace the money after that. This 
led them to believe that Romer had laundered the money and still had 
it hidden somewhere. In a settlement with Chemical Bank, where the 
original accounts were held, Ms. Votano got back about a quarter of 
what she had lost, she said. His other victims could not be located 
for this article. At the trial, Romer acted in his own defense and 
clung to his assertion that his clients' money had been stolen through 
sophisticated computer manipulation by ``X Corporation,'' which he 
later said was General Motors. He has never recanted that story. ``I 
never stole a dime,'' he said in a recent interview in the Sing Sing 
visitors' room. ``I was kidnapped, my head was split. I was set up. 
I was framed.'' Romer invites skeptics to feel the groove behind his 
right ear, where, he said, his kidnappers struck him. But none of 
his kidnapping and X Corporation conspiracy defense was allowed to 
be entered at his trial. He and his wife had two daughters and a son 
and then adopted eight more children. They say their family fortune 
has been destroyed by the case. Mrs. Romer says she gets by as a teacher 
at a halfway house. One daughter, Yael, is a rabbi, and the other 
children, all grown, are in business. They and his brother have all 
contributed to his campaign to gain his freedom. Romer's manner in 
the prison visiting room was friendly and solicitous. When a visitor 
told him that his conspiracy story was too far-fetched to be believed, 
he gave no sign of taking offense. He compiled an exemplary disciplinary 
record in Sing Sing while waiting for his first chance to apply for 
work release and, last June, for parole. But the state would not hear 
of it. ``I can tell you in one sentence why he did not get work release, 
and that is `Show me the money,''' said James Flateau, a spokesman 
for the New York State Department of Correctional Services. ``Romer 
can talk all he wants about people in for this crime or for that crime 
who got out eventually, but that is totally immaterial. Every inmate 
does his time based on his particular crime. Romer was convicted for 
stealing, and the prosecutors have stated that he has millions stashed 
away for the day he is released and can live on the fruits of other 
people's labor.'' In prison parlance, Romer is a ``CMC,'' a centrally 
monitored case, and his appeal for parole was handled in Albany instead 
of by a downstate parole board, nearer this Westchester County prison. 
On June 22 the state Division of Parole wrote to Romer: ``The multiplicity 
of the offenses involving numerous victims occurring over an extended 
period of years which demonstrated a high degree of sophistication 
in you taking advantage of victims who were particularly vulnerable 
indicated to this panel that your parole now would be inappropriate, 
as well as incompatible with the public welfare. We note your exemplary 
institutional programming and model disciplinary record. You are urged 
to continue.'' The parole board set June 2000 as the earliest that 
Romer can apply again. None of Romer's supporters necessarily buy 
his X Corporation story or condone what he did. All crimes are heinous 
in their own way, they contend, but that should not prevent the parole 
system from working. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>