<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981130.0436 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
After months of deliberations, Attorney General Janet Reno on Monday 
put off a decision on whether to ask an independent counsel to investigate 
the statements of Harold Ickes, a former top presidential aide, about 
his efforts on behalf of the Teamsters union. Wavering on the final 
day of an inquiry limited by statute to 90 days, Reno invoked a provision 
of the independent prosecutor law that allows her a one-time 60-day 
extension that could delay a decision until late January. At issue 
is whether Ickes, a former White House deputy chief of staff, lied 
on Sept. 22, 1997 in a deposition to the Senate Governmental Affairs 
Committee. The committee complained in its final report earlier this 
year that Ickes had misled its investigators about his actions on 
behalf of the International Brotherhood of Teamsters. Until Monday, 
Reno had seemed to be edging closer toward seeking an independent 
prosecutor. The delay brought expressions of quiet relief from White 
House aides, who reasoned that any decision not explicitly adverse 
to Ickes was favorable. Ickes' lawyer, Robert Bennett, would not comment. 
Republicans who have attacked Reno over her repeated refusal to seek 
independent counsels in campaign finance cases kept up their criticism 
on Monday. ``It should not take her half a year to figure out the 
obvious,'' said Rep. Dan Burton, R-Ind., who as chairman of the House 
Government Reform and Oversight Committee is one of the president's 
fiercest critics. ``It has been clear for over two years to everyone 
across the political spectrum that an independent counsel is needed 
for the entire campaign finance investigation.'' Of the options open 
to Reno, an extension had seemed the least likely. In a legal brief 
filed with the panel of appellate court judges that supervises independent 
counsel matters, Reno explained why she wanted more time. But the 
panel placed that filing under seal. Her decision followed a meeting 
on Monday with senior advisers who expressed discordant views on the 
issue, said law enforcement officials who spoke on condition of anonymity. 
They said Reno concluded that no decision could be reached without 
further investigation, although it was unclear what specific factual 
issues remained open. Some officials within the Justice Department 
expressed dismay over Reno's indecision. They said that the Justice 
Department has had evidence relating to the case for nearly two years. 
And, they noted, Reno has had four months to weigh the issue, beginning 
with a one-month initial review period, then followed by the three-month 
preliminary investigation that was to have ended on Monday. Moreover, 
they said, the legal issues were familiar. Reno has decided similar 
issues in two of the seven cases she has referred to independent counsels. 
Those investigations center on whether Henry Cisneros, the former 
housing secretary, lied to the FBI about the extent of his payments 
to his former mistress and whether Bruce Babbitt, the interior secretary, 
lied about a departmental decision to deny an Indian casino permit. 
Just last week, Reno found insufficient evidence for seeking an independent 
counsel to investigate whether Vice President Al Gore had lied to 
investigators about his 1996 fund-raising activities. With a decision 
on Ickes postponed for up to two months, Reno has one other independent 
counsel issue to decide before year's end. That case concerns whether 
Clinton and his aides violated federal election law by directing a 
massive advertising campaign financed with Democratic Party funds 
intended for generic party activities. Election auditors have questioned 
whether the advertisements should have been financed directly by the 
Clinton-Gore campaign. Reno's decision about Ickes hinges on his answer 
to a single question asked during three days in which he was questioned 
under oath. Ickes was asked, ``What did the administration do regarding 
the Diamond Walnut strike?'' Ickes replied: ``Nothing that I know 
of.'' That statement appeared to be contradicted by witnesses and 
documents. The Teamsters union had been frustrated in efforts to end 
the labor dispute at a Diamond Walnut processing plant in Stockton, 
Calif., and had discussed the issue with Ickes. White House documents 
indicated that Ickes had sought help from Mickey Kantor, then the 
U.S. trade representative, whom he wanted to intervene with the company. 
At Ickes' request, Kantor phoned Diamond Walnut's president. Kantor 
testified to a congressional panel earlier this year that he phoned 
Diamond Walnut, but knowing almost nothing of the facts, simply asked 
for a ``benign'' status report on the likelihood of a settlement. 
Kantor said he did not pressure the company. Diamond Walnut's president 
said at the same of the hearing that he had had not felt threatened, 
but that he did regard the call as part of a Teamster effort ``to 
bring us to our knees.'' 
</TEXT>
</DOC>