<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981130.0516 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
The New York Times said in an editorial Tuesday, Dec. 1: With greater 
speed than anyone could have hoped a few weeks ago, negotiations that 
might lead to congressional censure of President Clinton are moving 
forward. The White House is now openly shopping for a deal. Rep. Paul 
McHale's proposed language condemning Clinton for ``deceitful and 
dishonest conduct that was grossly inconsistent with his constitutional 
obligation and sacred duty'' catches the spirit that should be reflected 
in censure proposals being quietly drafted by Republicans and Democrats 
alike. Meanwhile, the specious contention that the Constitution does 
not allow the House to consider censure as an alternative to impeachment 
is fading away. But there are still formidable obstacles to censure, 
and a continuing need for leadership on Capitol Hill if the country 
is to arrive at the most politically healthy outcome attainable under 
the circumstances of a flawed and dishonorable presidency. Such an 
outcome has to meet several standards. It should allow the nation 
to move on to other business. It should write into the historical 
record a permanent condemnation of Clinton for lying to the American 
people and failing in his duty to the rule of law. It should also 
require a fuller admission by this president that he knowingly and 
with calculation lied under oath and allowed others to testify falsely 
in his behalf. A primary obstacle is, of course, Clinton's claim that 
he did not testify falsely, which is an insult to the public's intelligence. 
That contention is also a red flag for Republicans like Rep. Lindsey 
Graham, who are clearly open to punishment short of impeachment but 
understandably refuse to endorse a manifest public lie. Yet as long 
as Kenneth Starr, the independent counsel, continues his open-ended 
threats of indictments Clinton cannot abandon this intellectually 
untenable but legally necessary position. So what needs to happen 
to get Congress out of its current box? First, Starr has to quit playing 
two hands at once. When he sent his referral to the House of Representatives, 
he turned Clinton's case over to Congress rather than the courts. 
Barring the emergence of dramatic new evidence of the sort Starr does 
not seem to have, Congress is where the issue ought to be resolved. 
Starr needs to affirm that publicly. The idea of prosecution after 
the end of the president's term is particularly erosive of constitutional 
process and the orderly transition of power. We have supported Starr's 
mandate as independent counsel. But we remind him now _ as his fellow 
Republicans and his federal court supervisors should be reminding 
him _ that in addition to his statutory duty he has a civic obligation 
to facilitate a timely and proportional resolution of the case against 
the president. Events in Congress, of course, are outside Starr's 
control, and on that front, the House majority whip, Tom DeLay, is 
playing a devious game. DeLay is addicted to the thuggish tactics 
of the Gingrich era, and the speaker-designate, Robert Livingston, 
seems afraid to confront him in public. Consider, for example, Delay's 
blustering misrepresentation of censure on CNN. ``It means nothing,'' 
DeLay said. ``It's a piece of paper that said the president did something 
wrong.'' That is pure hogwash. A suitable censure resolution would 
state that this president has earned lasting opprobrium for failing 
in his constitutional duty. It would pass with wide public support 
provided the right conditions develop during this period of negotiation. 
Those conditions include leadership from Livingston, reasonable movement 
toward closure from Starr and an abandonment by Clinton of the strategy 
of lying about his lies. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>