<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981130.0429 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
The Clinton administration declared Monday that its investigations 
into Swiss banks and Nazi gold are essentially closed, as it opened 
a 44-nation conference here to examine a host of related issues, from 
repatriating stolen art, land and buildings to resolving billions 
of dollars in insurance claims on Holocaust victims. The opening of 
the three-day conference at the U.S. Holocaust Memorial Museum here 
Monday night, which began with a silent procession of death-camp survivors, 
is intended to put an end to the diplomatic and legal strife with 
Switzerland and find ways to solve the problems surrounding the investigations. 
This year the Swiss banks reached a $1.25 billion settlement with 
Holocaust survivors and Jewish groups. But new suits were filed, against 
Italian and German insurance companies, Ford Motor Co. and the German 
banking giant Deutsche Bank, which Monday formally announced its $9.7 
billion takeover of Bankers Trust. It is unclear whether Deutsche 
Bank will be under pressure to settle the suit as the merger wends 
its way through the regulatory process. The historical disputes that 
periodically resurface surrounding Ford and the Opel division of General 
Motors Corp. _ the use of slave labor by corporate subsidiaries that 
were nationalized by Nazi Germany _ are not on the agenda of the conference. 
However, European officials say the new German government is quietly 
negotiating with German industry over some kind of compensation plan 
similar to the one negotiated with Swiss banks. ``Our goal is to have 
a framework for settling all these issues by Dec. 31, 1999,'' Stuart 
Eizenstat, the undersecretary of state for business affairs and the 
leader of the American investigations into World War II assets, said 
in an interview Monday. ``We want to accomplish the maximum economic 
restitution possible after the passage of 50 years, but equally important 
the moral accountability that will help us enter the new millennium 
and learn the lessons of the greatest travesty of the 20th century.'' 
Investigators reported, however, that they had run into a blind alley 
in their major effort to determine how much gold the Nazis deposited 
in the ``Melmer Account,'' the code name for the German Reichsbank 
account that held gold looted from the homes, pockets and dental work 
of Holocaust victims. Much of that gold, the United States argues, 
was later smelted into ``monetary gold'' that had been stolen from 
central banks around Europe. The United States and Switzerland still 
differ on the amount of ``victim gold'' that ultimately flowed through 
Swiss accounts. ``It is one of our biggest disappointments,'' Eizenstat 
said. Although it was never determined how much personal gold was 
mingled with monetary gold, Britain and the United States persuaded 
more than a dozen other nations to give up their claims on six tons 
of monetary gold still sitting in the basement of the Federal Reserve 
Bank of New York. Now the proceeds from the sale of the gold will 
be used to support Holocaust-related programs, from education for 
schoolchildren to the care of destitute World War II survivors. With 
the settlement with the Swiss banks completed in August, the scholars, 
art dealers, insurance executives, government officials, Jewish leaders 
and others at this week's conference are turning their attention to 
other Nazi-looted assets, especially insurance, real estate and art. 
An international commission is looking into the complex insurance 
question and will most likely take years to determine what the insurers 
owe. Meanwhile, California, Florida and New York have threatened sanctions 
against insurance companies, mostly European, that do not fully cooperate. 
Schools, community centers and other real estate properties confiscated 
from Jews, many in Eastern Europe, are now being used on an everyday 
basis, and governments are reluctant to turn them over to their original 
owners. Investigators point to difficult cases such as the building 
in a small Polish town that was seized from a Jewish family and is 
now used as a school for disabled children. The most prominent cases, 
however, involve art. Although many confiscated works were returned 
after the war, some were sold and others were incorporated into various 
European museums, including the Hermitage in St. Petersburg. No one 
knows how many works are involved, or their value. Jonathan Petropolis, 
a historian at Loyola University in Baltimore, estimates in paper 
to be delivered at the conference that 10,000 to 100,000 objects are 
still missing, even though a far larger number were returned shortly 
after the war, mainly by the Allied armies. ``One of the things we 
hope to do with the conference is begin to crystallize that,'' Eizenstat 
said last week. Beyond that, conference organizers expect to reach 
a consensus to return works to their owners or their survivors. However, 
an early draft of proposed guidelines for governments, art institutions, 
auction houses and art dealers appears vague. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>