<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981130.0537 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
NEW YORK _ WQEW, New York City's only round-the-clock radio outpost 
of swing, Sinatra, Broadway and big bands, is about to trade in its 
format of American popular standards for all-day children's programming 
from the Walt Disney Co. as part of a proposed marketing deal, executives 
close to the negotiations said. They said that The New York Times 
Co., which owns the station, and ABC Inc., which is owned by the Walt 
Disney Co., were close to a deal that would pave the way for the formatting 
change. In effect, it would add WQEW, at 1560 on the AM band, to Disney's 
national children's radio network, called Radio Disney, which features 
music, games and stories for the under-12 set. One executive said 
the target date for the agreement was Dec. 10. The price and terms 
of the deal _ most likely a so-called local marketing agreement between 
the companies that would not involve a sale _ have not been announced, 
and officials at ABC and The New York Times Co. declined to discuss 
them. Employees at WQEW said they had not been told of any coming 
change, although one said Monday that a meeting with Times Co. management 
had been called for Tuesday morning at the station's headquarters 
at 122 Fifth Avenue. The station has a staff of about 20, divided 
among various unions, including the American Federation of Television 
and Radio Artists. Questions about their future have not yet been 
publicly answered. Rumors of a possible sale or business deal have 
been circulating for weeks, and The Daily News reported Thursday that 
talks were under way. In a marketing agreement, the owner of a radio 
or television station leases a block of time _ sometimes all its broadcast 
time _ to another operator. The buyer of the time then arranges the 
programming and, depending on the agreement, reaps all or part of 
the advertising revenues. The last Arbitron ratings gave WQEW a weekly 
cumulative listenership of 649,000, or 2 percent of the radio audience, 
a ``very respectable'' share, said Thom Mocarsky, an Arbitron spokesman. 
He said this ranked 20th out of about 70 stations in the metropolitan 
area. Half the station's listeners are over 65; the prime age group 
for radio audiences is considered 25 to 54, but older listeners may 
have special appeal for some advertisers, like retirement funds. Stan 
Martin, the station manager and music host, said the figures had been 
``trending upward.'' Mocarsky said that Arbitron counted 391 stations 
devoted to popular standards as against 38 featuring children's programming, 
out of the 12,840 stations in the country. In addition to WQEW, there 
are four stations in the metropolitan area that emphasize popular 
standards, all operating outside New York City with signals that can 
be heard only intermittently in small parts of the city itself. If 
the WQEW deal goes through, it will be the second time in less than 
seven years that New York City's lone American standards format has 
lost its home. That type of music reigned on WNEW-AM for many years 
until 1992, when the station was sold to Michael Bloomberg L.P., which 
switched to financial news. The format was then adopted by WQXR-AM, 
which switched from classical music. The Times Co., with FCC approval, 
changed the call letters to WQEW. The company continues a classical 
music format on its other station, WQXR-FM (96.3), which is not involved 
in the negotiations, executives said. Where, when and whether show 
tunes and big bands might find another all-day home on the radio is 
not clear. Nathan Leventhal, the president of Lincoln Center for the 
Performing Arts, said he had heard reports of the possible changeover 
and had already been talking to parties who might be interested in 
relocating the format, although he would not say whether they controlled 
radio stations. ``As just someone who lives this music,'' he said, 
``it would be a tragedy if there's not an outlet for it.'' He said 
that he was not taking a position on any format change at WQEW and 
was speaking personally, and not an official of Lincoln Center. As 
it happens, Lincoln Center is about to inaugurate a new series called 
``American Popular Standards'' under the artistic direction of Jonathan 
Schwartz, the author and disk jockey who is host of a weekend Frank 
Sinatra show on WQEW. Asked last week about the reported changeover 
at the station, Schwartz said he could not comment. If the deal goes 
through, WQEW will become Radio Disney's 36th broadcasting outlet 
in the nation and its first in New York City. Radio Disney entered 
the field aggressively in 1996, after a contentious relationship with 
a partner, Children's Broadcasting Corporation, a company based in 
Minnesota that operated 25 stations as Radio AAHS. Children's Broadcasting 
later successfully sued Disney and ABC Radio Networks, claiming that 
in violation of their agreement Disney and ABC set up their own competing 
network, Radio Disney. Children's Broadcasting later sold its stations 
and left the radio business. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>