<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981130.0348 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
The Clinton administration initially opposed it, and the Colombian 
government was taken by surprise. But a recent congressional initiative, 
spurred by direct appeals to conservative Republicans by the Colombian 
national police, has more than doubled drug-fighting money to Colombia 
and made the country a top recipient of United States foreign aid. 
The increase brings the assistance to $289 million for 1999, compared 
with $80 million in 1997 and $88.6 million this year. It is mostly 
in the form of weapons, helicopters and surveillance planes and will 
sharply increase the American-supplied firepower to the Colombian 
police. Congressional Republicans are calling it the first installment 
of a three-year campaign to reduce substantially the flow of illicit 
drugs into the United States. But critics fear that the huge jump 
in aid and the heightened U.S. interest in attacking the drug trade 
at its source will lure Washington into supporting the seemingly endless 
war by Colombia's armed forces against leftist guerrillas, which has 
slowly bled Colombia of tens of thousands of lives and untold resources 
for more than 30 years. While the money has been designated for use 
against drug crop growers and drug traffickers, much of the equipment 
could easily be used against the guerrillas. The equipment will require 
substantial American training of pilots, maintenance workers and support 
staff. In the appeal for aid by the Colombian police, and in the congressional 
response, the distinction between drug traffickers and guerrillas 
usually insisted on by officials of the State Department and other 
American agencies has become blurred. Some guerrilla groups are involved 
in protecting coca crops and landing strips in southern Colombia and 
skim a commission from the drug trade. A report last year by the Colombian 
drug police estimated that 3,155 of the country's 15,000 guerrillas 
were active in the drug trade. Some lawmakers like Rep. Benjamin Gilman, 
R-N.Y., have adopted the label applied to the rebels by the Colombian 
police and military _ narcoterrorists _ lumping the insurgency and 
drug traffickers into a single threat to United States interests. 
The Colombian drug police have at times dropped the distinction altogether. 
For instance, they recently highlighted an army defeat at the hands 
of rebels to press the case for acquiring American-made Blackhawk 
helicopters, even though the combat had nothing to do with drugs. 
Most of the increase in aid will come as part of a $690 million package 
of supplemental appropriations for drug interdiction throughout the 
hemisphere. The congressional aid for the national police includes 
the following: _$96 million for six Blackhawk helicopters. _$40 million 
for upgrading and arming 34 Huey helicopter gunships, which can fire 
high-powered machine guns over long distances. _$6 million for beefing 
up a crop fumigation air wing, in part with machine guns. Administration-sponsored 
aid for Colombia also approved by Congress includes the following: 
_$70 million for aerial fumigation of drug crops. _$20 million in 
helicopters, transport and surveillance planes, weapons and other 
equipment for the Colombian National Police. _$20 million in patrol 
boats, weapons, ammunition and other supplies for the Colombian military. 
The $165 million in supplemental aid from Congress is in addition 
to $124 million already appropriated for Colombia, and represents 
a tenfold increase in counter-narcotics funding over five year period. 
Roughly 80 percent of the cocaine in the United States originates 
in Colombia. ``It was a decision that surprised everybody,'' Colombia's 
defense minister, Rodrigo Lloreda, said in an interview. He added 
that the Clinton administration had previously supported drug-fighting 
efforts in Colombia, ``but they kept a certain balance between Colombia, 
Peru and other countries.'' Both administration and congressional 
officials described the appropriation as a kind of ``wish list,'' 
that they were surprised to see pass virtually in its entirety. Administration 
officials like Barry McCaffrey, the retired general who is in charge 
of anti-drug efforts, initially complained that the congressional 
authorization _ which at first specified that $1.2 million should 
go for concertina wire around a Bogota prison _ ``micromanaged'' drug 
policy. Other administration officials said the initial spending plan 
overextended the American commitment to Colombia, and was too costly. 
But in the end, the plan won White House backing because it was more 
attuned to overall strategy, and won their support. Though Congress 
took the lead, the increased spending matches a growing closeness 
between Washington and Bogota since Andres Pasrtrana was elected president 
last summer. Pastrana, who has visited Washington three times in the 
last four months. The momentum for the increase came from a group 
of conservative Republicans who have embraced the Colombian national 
police and who are determined to increase anti-drug efforts and lend 
a show of force as Pastrana sets the stage for peace talks with leftist 
rebels. With government forces having temporarily evacuated an area 
of Colombia as big as Switzerland, congressional Republicans describe 
the infusion as a signal of American interest in the outcome of peace 
talks. It will also shore up Colombian security forces, which have 
been humiliated by the rebels in a series of clashes over the last 
two years, they say. Until now, a de facto division of labor has had 
the Colombian military leading the fight against rebels, while the 
police tackled drug trafficking. ``I look at this as giving Colombia 
the support it needs to do what it wants to do,'' Sen. Mike DeWine, 
R-Ohio, said. ``It will put the government in a better bargaining 
position.'' The major share of Washington's anti-drug aid is trained 
on stepping up aerial eradication in zones under rebel control and 
intercepting boats and planes transporting drugs. Officials say the 
Blackhawk and upgraded Huey helicopters are better for reaching high 
altitudes, where opium poppies are grown. The Blackhawks, armored 
and able to transport up to 15 troops, would also represent greater 
firepower and maneuverability in Colombia's continuing war against 
leftist rebels. In a bid to perhaps appease Washington and the Colombian 
government, the rebels have said they would eliminate the drug trade 
in areas they control as part of an eventual peace agreement. Respected 
political analysts in Colombia, including Alejandro Reyes, a professor 
at the National University in Bogota, contend that the guerrillas 
are the only authority with enough credibility among peasants to eliminate 
the trade. In recent years the insurgents' fighting strategy has grown 
from hit-and-run ambushes of soldiers to more conventional assaults 
on military and police bases, in which the rebels have repeatedly 
outnumbered and overrun government security forces. The most recent 
of these occurred last month in an attack against the police base 
at Mitu, where Lloreda said 45 policemen and civilians were known 
to have been killed and 48 people were abducted. He said 82 others 
had disappeared. While the Mitu attack bolstered Colombia's case for 
the Blackhawks, the police had earlier cited military defeats _ unconnected 
to the drug trade _ in appealing for the more sophisticated helicopters. 
In a letter last March to Rep. Dan Burton, R.-Ind., Col. Jose Leonardo 
Gallego reiterated an appeal for Blackhawk helicopters he made in 
testimony before Congress only a month earlier. In requesting the 
helicopters for drug-fighting missions he cited the deaths of hundreds 
of government troops in rebel attacks. Most of those deaths, however, 
occurred early this year after rebels ambushed the Colombian army's 
third brigade at a canyon in El Billar. The operation was unrelated 
to any fumigation or anti-drug operation. Though the State Department 
had initially opposed sending Blackhawks to Colombia, largely because 
of the higher expense and maintenance costs involved, Colombia's national 
police chief, Gen. Rosso Jose Serrano, has set up direct lines of 
contact with the congressional committees controlling the pursestrings. 
He has acted as host to most of the key figures in the congressional 
debate on their visits to Colombia, making his case for increased 
firepower. Serrano has also been adopted by conservative policy advocates 
influential with congressional Republicans. One of these is F. Andy 
Messing Jr., executive director of the National Defense Council Foundation, 
a conservative think tank whose chairman is congressman Burton. Messing, 
a retired Special Forces major, has been a frequent visitor to Colombia 
and was honored with an anti-narcotics award from the Colombian police 
last year. He predicts that as the situation stands now, the rebels 
will take control of the Bogota government in one year, regardless 
of the outcome of peace talks. During the years of alienation between 
Washington and Colombia during the presidency of Ernesto Samper, who 
was accused of accepting $6 million from drug traffickers, Serrano 
became the face of the Colombian government on Capitol Hill, as relations 
between the United States and Colombia narrowed down to the drug issue. 
In congressional hearings, Serrano has been hailed as ``a cop's cop.'' 
``He was someone during that administration who Congress felt comfortable 
with,'' said Senator DeWine. In the atmosphere of violence that dominates 
Colombia, the rebels and the government forces have continued to wage 
war while talking peace. ``You can't negotiate unless you have strength,'' 
LLoreda, the defense minister, said. ``We would all like peace to 
come spontaneously out of good will, but it doesn't always work that 
way.'' 
</TEXT>
</DOC>