<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981130.0367 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Commercial farmers in Zimbabwe, under a constant threat of having 
their land seized, have been thrown into confusion again by notices 
in which the government says it owns 841 of their farms. President 
Robert Mugabe's government is under pressure to show progress on improving 
the distribution of farmland, which is mostly in whites' hands, as 
it faces strikes and riots over rising food and gasoline prices and 
the involvement of 6,000 Zimbabwean troops in the war in nearby Congo. 
The notices have added to a sense of crisis in Zimbabwe, where unions 
have shut down the country twice in the last two weeks. The currency, 
the Zimbabwe dollar, has fallen to less than 3 U.S. cents from 12 
cents in 1995. Last week the International Monetary Fund said it was 
suspending $55 million in aid because the farm seizures violated agreements 
between the fund and the government. The farmers say they see an even 
greater threat in the hundreds of squatters who are forcing their 
way onto many farms. In contrast to groups that invaded a few farms 
in June but stayed on distant corners and were careful about the property, 
many in the new wave are armed and led by angry veterans of the 1970s 
liberation war. Some are trampling crops and threatening farmers and 
their workers. The police have generally refused to stop or evict 
them. Since the notices were mailed two weeks ago Mugabe and the lands 
and agriculture minister, Kumbirai Kangai, have begun long trips abroad. 
That leaves junior officials to fumble to explain the policy. According 
to the notices, the farms, one-fourth of the export-producing farmland, 
are government property. The notices do not specify when the owners 
have to leave, whether they will be paid or what will happen to the 
tens of thousands of workers who live there. But there is a catch 
that may mean no farms will be taken. The government has 60 days to 
have a court confirm each notice. Local journalists say that is administratively 
impossible. So there is some suspicion that Mugabe only wants to be 
able to tell his party's annual congress next month that he has seized 
vast tracts for the poor, a program that he has been promising since 
independence in 1980. Then in January the lands would revert to the 
farmers. Whites, fewer than 2 percent of the population, own 70 percent 
of the land. Millions of rural blacks are crowded onto ``communal 
areas'' of stony depleted soil. Last year the government identified 
1,503 farms that it intended to seize. An outcry ensued, and the government 
was accused of eyeing the best sites not for the poor but for wealthy 
party officials. The seizures were delayed. About 500 farms were removed 
from the list when their owners showed that they did not meet the 
legal conditions for seizure. An additional 120 were offered for sale, 
and at a conference in September with donor nations the government 
agreed to limit its interest to those. In fact the government lacks 
the money to buy the farms or resettle peasant farmers on them. The 
841 are in addition to those. Many people, even in his own party, 
have called in the last year for Mugabe's resignation. The Congress 
of Trade Unions has held general strikes each Wednesday for two weeks, 
demanding wage increases, price cuts, the return of money stolen from 
the government, a new constitution and an end to intervention in Congo 
without Parliament's consent. The war in Congo is estimated to cost 
Zimbabwe $1 million a day. It is widely assumed that Zimbabwean troops, 
who kept the Congo capital, Kinshasa, from falling to the rebels, 
were sent to protect mining concessions and lucrative contracts awarded 
to Zimbabwean officials. The government is accused of lying about 
how many men have been killed or captured. An independent newspaper 
reported last week that 1,500 military police officers were being 
sent to Congo to prevent a troop mutiny. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>