<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981130.0426 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Seeking to counter recent reports that an ambitious economic reform 
plan is losing steam, Chinese officials Monday strongly reiterated 
their intention to overhaul debt-ridden state-owned industries by 
the end of 2000. The plan, announced in September 1997, calls for 
major changes in the ownership and operation of the state industries: 
streamlining larger companies and generally allowing smaller ones 
to be sold to private owners or to go bankrupt. Sheng Huaren, minister 
of the State Economic and Trade Commission, acknowledged at a news 
conference that the task had proved more difficult than anticipated, 
in part because of the Asian financial crisis. But he said the country 
has made significant progress toward the goal of establishing a more 
``modern corporate system.'' ``The goal of lifting the great majority 
of state-owned enterprises out of difficulty in three years is absolutely 
achievable,'' Sheng said. It remained unclear, though, whether the 
plan remains realistic. Many Chinese are already suffering economically 
from the severe floods of last summer, from the huge slump in the 
rest of Asia and from China's growing unemployment problem. But Sheng's 
highly publicized news conference at least sent a clear signal that 
the government remains firmly committed to try Prime Minister Zhu 
Rongji's bitter-pill brand of economic overhaul. Sheng also insisted 
that a previously announced policy of ``de-linking'' the Communist 
Party, government ministries, the army and the police from their business 
interests would be effectively accomplished by the end of this year. 
Business experts have long maintained that China's government organizations 
should shed their businesses to curb corruption. But it is highly 
unlikely that these agencies can truly divest themselves of the thousands 
of hotels, stores and restaurants they own in four weeks. Significantly, 
Sheng's remarks came just three days after Zhu re-emerged from a few 
months in the shadows, taking center stage with a public tour of Liaoning 
Province, a center of large inefficient state-owned factories. Zhu's 
relative silence on economic matters this fall had been taken by many 
foreign experts as a sign that the central leadership had put on hold 
his ``get tough'' economic reforms, which have resulted in substantial 
unemployment and labor unrest, even as they have improved business 
efficiency. But last week the voluble Zhu again came on strong, praising 
state-owned enterprises in Liaoning that had turned a profit for the 
first time, generally through greater efficiency and by firing employees. 
``If Liaoning, one of the major industrial bases in China, can realize 
the objective of reform of state-owned enterprises, the rest of the 
country can surely achieve this goal,'' he said. He added that the 
central government would allocate close to $1 billion this year to 
help laid-off workers. The strong statements by both Zhu and Sheng 
were surprising, since economists both in and outside of China recently 
observed that the government had slowed the restructuring of state 
industries, instead pumping money into them to stimulate economic 
growth. But Sheng said the government plans to stay its course, since 
there are signs the economy is improving and some of the most bloated 
state industries have been effectively pruned down. He said the textile 
industry had already laid off 450,000 workers, reducing industrywide 
losses by close to $200 million. After mergers and reorganizations, 
the status of some steel and petrochemical companies has also greatly 
improved, Sheng added. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>