<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981130.0506 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Secretary of Defense William Cohen and Colombia's new president, Andres 
Pastrana, announced steps Monday to intensify military cooperation 
in the war on drug trafficking, including a pledge to increase Pentagon 
training of Colombia's armed forces and to share more aerial and satellite 
intelligence data. The United States and Colombia have worked closely 
together to stanch the flow of drugs for decades, but the new steps 
underscored the deepening of American diplomatic and military engagement 
after the election of Pastrana, a reformist who replaced Ernesto Samper. 
On Tuesday, Cohen and Colombia's defense minister, Rodrigo Lloreda, 
are scheduled to sign an agreement setting up a formal working group 
that will bring officials from both countries together for regular 
consultations. The United States has similar relationships with Argentina, 
Chile and Mexico. The agreements come on the heels of a sharp increase 
in aid and equipment, including six Black Hawk helicopters that Congress 
approved for Colombia's fight against narcotics as part of last month's 
increase in spending on defense and intelligence. The aid will total 
$289 million, nearly triple the recent annual American contributions 
to Colombia's anti-drug efforts. Much of the discussion during Cohen's 
meetings with Pastrana and other Colombian leaders here focused on 
how the United States can help Colombia's police and military to make 
the best use of the unexpected windfall, which was driven by Republicans 
in Congress. ``Clearly we are being treated completely differently 
than was the case during the previous four years,'' Pastrana said 
Monday, referring to the Clinton administration's isolation of his 
predecessor, Samper, because of evidence indicating he accepted campaign 
funds from drug traffickers. Appearing with Pastrana after a breakfast 
meeting at the president's guest house along the bay near this Caribbean 
port, Cohen praised the new Colombian government and said the American 
military was prepared to help restructure Colombia's armed forces 
into a modern professional force. ``Our military background and expertise 
could be shared with the Colombian forces to deal with this particular 
and very serious problem,'' Cohen said. Cohen is in Cartagena to attend 
a three-day conference of defense ministers from all countries in 
the Western Hemisphere except Cuba. The conference, the third since 
1995, is meant to increase cooperation in the fight against drugs 
and terrorism and to cement the transition many Latin American countries 
have begun in establishing civilian control over their militaries. 
That the conference even took place here in Colombia has been seen 
as an improvement in Colombia's international standing; last year's 
conference, also planned for Cartagena, was canceled because of tensions 
over Samper. Since he was elected four months ago, Pastrana has, by 
contrast, gone to Washington twice for meetings with President Clinton. 
Cohen's current visit is the highest-level visit to Colombia by a 
U.S. official during Clinton's tenure. Cohen's aides emphasized that 
any new help to Colombia's police and military would only involve 
the fight against drug traffickers and not against the leftist insurgents 
who have battled the central government here for years. But the increasing 
aid and cooperation has blurred the line between the two wars Colombia 
is fighting, raising concerns among some human rights advocates that 
the United States is involving itself in Colombia's civil war. The 
Americans agreed, for example, to provide additional aerial and satellite 
photographs of a large swath of rebel territory that Pastrana's government 
unilaterally evacuated on Nov. 7 as a way to spur peace talks with 
the rebels. A senior American official said Monday that the Colombians 
wanted the added intelligence to make sure drug traffickers did not 
use the withdrawal to expand operations in the area, but the information 
could be used to observe rebel movements as well. Lloreda, Colombia's 
defense minister, who expressed pessimism that his president's gesture 
would produce a peace accord, said in an interview that Colombia needed 
to strengthen the military to defeat the rebels and that American 
aid, even if ostensibly devoted to narcotics, helped that effort. 
``The counternarcotics aid will help liberate troops,'' he said, ``so 
they can fill other roles.'' 
</TEXT>
</DOC>