<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981130.0308 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Two weeks before he died, Dr. Carl Sagan dropped by to see Daniel 
Goldin, the NASA administrator. Sagan was deathly ill. His blue jeans 
hung limp. He had no hair. His losing battle against the bone-marrow 
disease myelodysplasia had taken a heavy toll. But his mind was ablaze. 
For an hour or two in Goldin's office at the Washington headquarters 
of NASA, Sagan, the astronomer, laid out a series of visions about 
the future of space exploration. So lively was the discussion that 
the two men continued it over dinner in nearby Georgetown. ``He was 
talking with intensity,'' Goldin marveled. ``A man on his deathbed. 
This is the Carl Sagan I love, a man so full of hope and optimism 
that he never gave up. He never gave up.'' That meeting was the last 
of dozens between Sagan and Goldin, who credits the astronomer with 
major NASA initiatives for this century and the next. When Sagan died 
two years ago this month at age 62, most eulogies focused on his career 
in popularizing science and conveying the wonders of the universe 
to millions of people. But in addition to his celebrity, or perhaps 
even despite it, Sagan was a serious and gifted researcher who pushed 
back the frontiers of planetary science, molded a number of gifted 
students and wielded great influence behind the scenes in Washington. 
Time and again he came to the rescue of the politically beleaguered 
search for intelligent life in the universe. So today his legacy lives 
on, most especially in the actual doing of science and space exploration, 
areas where his elan was mostly unknown to people who read his books 
and watched his television shows. Most centrally, his legacy is addressing 
one of Sagan's most durable curiosities _ the riddle of whether life 
exists beyond Earth. As NASA prepares to mount thorough explorations 
of the two most likely sites in the solar system, Mars and Europa, 
it is Sagan's proteges who are in charge. Indeed, his greatest student 
may be one who never took a class, Goldin, the commander of this star 
fleet. Of those who did take courses, one of the top students was 
Steven Squyres, 42. Now a Cornell University professor, Squyres chairs 
a 15-person NASA advisory committee on exploration of the solar system. 
He also heads a 20-member NASA team designing a Martian rover meant 
to land on the planet in 2003, probe its terrain, drill into hard 
volcanic rock and fire samples back to Earth. From the rocky samples, 
scientists hope to extract Martian microbes, either fossil or extant, 
proving the reality of aliens. Squyres said his scientific skills 
owe much to Sagan, including a knack for knowing what to ignore and 
what to watch. ``In light of his marvelous communication skills, lots 
of people lose sight of how he was also a hell of a physicist,'' Squyres 
said. ``His work could be brilliant,'' and brilliantly presented. 
``Carl was able to show you how to cut to the heart of the matter. 
That was the most important thing he ever taught me,'' Squyres said. 
Another top student is Christopher Chyba, 39. For NASA, he is probing 
even farther into the hinterlands. He chairs a 12-person panel drafting 
plans for a spacecraft that the agency in 2003 wants to fire toward 
Europa, a large moon of Jupiter whose icy, cracked surface hints strongly 
of an interior ocean. NASA and many scientists want to know if the 
sea exists and if alien life thrives in its inky depths. Chyba said 
one of most important lessons Sagan taught him was the value of raw 
curiosity. ``He had a willingness to address a broad sweep of issues, 
even if you couldn't always get answers,'' he said. Brash and brilliant, 
a poor kid aiming high, Sagan entered the University of Chicago in 
1951 at age 16, got a bachelor's degree in liberal arts in 1954 and 
one in physics in 1955, a master's in physics in 1956 and a Ph.D. 
in astronomy and astrophysics in 1960, ready to shake up his field. 
Astronomy at the time was in love with stars and suspicious of planets, 
whose study had produced an embarrassment of false claims early in 
the century about dying civilizations on Mars. But Sagan was deeply 
curious about extraterrestrial life and pursued the topic with vigor, 
prodding others to do the same. He was rigorous, despite his enthusiasm. 
One of his credos, often repeated by experts, was ``extraordinary 
claims require extraordinary evidence.'' As a 27-year-old astronomer, 
he found his avocation in 1961 when he attended a small meeting with 
diverse experts to figure out whether a radio search for alien civilizations 
was worthwhile. The group decided it was, and that Earth's own galaxy, 
the Milky Way, in theory held up to 100,000 advanced civilizations, 
many with powerful transmitters and other technologies that might 
be detected from afar. Thus was planted an important seed. A polymath, 
Sagan wrote his first scientific paper on the origin of the gene, 
the basic unit of heredity, in 1957. In 1962, he wrote a paper with 
Joshua Lederberg, a Nobel laureate in biology, on possible Martian 
life. In 1962 and 1963, he won an appointment at Stanford University's 
medical school to explore that topic. ``He knew more about biology 
than any astronomer I'd ever met,'' recalled Frank Drake, an astronomer 
and a pioneer of the extraterrestrial hunt. Despite Sagan's devotion 
to aliens, his early achievements helped show that they were less 
likely in some places than scientists had previously thought. While 
in his 20s, he deduced that mysterious radio emissions from Venus 
were caused by surface temperatures around 900 degrees, far too hot 
for life. By 1967, Sagan took aim at Mars from a post at Harvard. 
Some scientists said the planet's seasonal color variations were caused 
by plant life. But he and a graduate student, James Pollack, proposed 
that the variations were instead caused by wind storms and blowing 
Martian dust, which turned out to be right. Sagan went to Cornell 
in 1968 and stayed there until he died. His influence grew as he edited 
a leading journal and helped found the American Astronomical Society's 
Division for Planetary Sciences, raising his field's status. Division 
membership soared from 100 or so in 1970 to about 1,400 today. As 
an explorer, Sagan played important roles in helping NASA loft the 
world's first wave of interplanetary probes, including ones to Venus, 
Mars, Jupiter, Saturn, Uranus and Neptune. He was on the team that 
set two landers on Mars in 1976. The craft, to his dismay, found no 
hint of life. Far from giving up the extraterrestrial hunt, he increasingly 
looked toward the stars. In 1975 and 1976, Sagan and Drake searched 
for alien civilizations with the huge dish antenna at Arecibo, Puerto 
Rico. The radio telescope, the world's largest, had never before been 
so used. In 1982, Sagan rushed to the defense of such work after Sen. 
William Proxmire tried to get it cut from the federal budget as a 
waste of money. First, after a tete-a-tete, he got the senator to 
end his criticism. Then, he won public backing for such hunts from 
70 of the world's top scientists, including seven Nobel laureates. 
``We urge the organization of a coordinated, worldwide, and systematic 
search for extraterrestrial intelligence,'' Sagan's group wrote in 
Science, the nation's foremost scientific journal. Part of his growing 
influence came from the great popularity of his books, most of which 
were best sellers. ``The Dragons of Eden'' (Random House, 1977) won 
a Pulitzer Prize. Others included ``Broca's Brain'' (Random House, 
1979) and ``Cosmos'' (Random House, 1980). ``Contact'' (Simon &AMP; 
Schuster, 1985), his only fictional work, told of a radio-telescope 
hunt that stumbled on an alien civilization. Sagan became increasingly 
political in the 1980s. In books, talks and protests, he faulted nuclear-arms 
testing, the Reagan administration's Star Wars anti-missile plan and, 
inspired by a dust storm on Mars, warned that nuclear war could result 
in a smoke-shrouded, deeply frozen Earth that he and colleagues called 
``nuclear winter.'' His leap from the ivory tower to television studios 
and executive suites annoyed some peers. Science magazine in 1982 
looked askance at The Cosmos Store, a venture Sagan set up to make 
cosmic books and calendars. The National Academy of Sciences, the 
nation's premier scientific club, landed a heavy blow in 1992 by rejecting 
him for membership. ``Carl was so superb at public relations that 
this engendered some jealousy among colleagues who weren't,'' said 
Elliott Levinthal, a Stanford professor who worked with Sagan for 
many years. Despite the academy rebuff, he grew even more powerful. 
Starting in 1992, Goldin, the newly installed NASA administrator, 
a former aerospace engineer and executive, consulted Sagan for advice 
and developed a respect for his energy and views during dozens of 
meetings. The bond was strengthened by personal history. Both had 
grown up in New York and gone to its public schools, Goldin in the 
Bronx and Sagan in Brooklyn. ``Carl didn't come up with solutions,'' 
Goldin recalled in an interview. ``He posed questions.'' The most 
influential questions, Goldin said, had to do with the puzzle of extraterrestrial 
life and how best to address it. Sagan, he said, especially bore in 
on how to probe Mars, whose greater warmth and wetness in its early 
days were seen as possibly having given rise to microbes or other 
forms of life. Historically, NASA had taken a Cadillac approach to 
space exploration, launching costly probes rarely. The more costly 
the probes got, the rarer and more complex they became. In 1992, only 
one spacecraft was scheduled to fly to Mars, a $1 billion orbiter 
known as Observer, the nation's first mission to the red planet in 
17 years. ``His argument was that this is not a program, it's a single 
event, it's the last ship out of port,'' Goldin recalled. ``Although 
I had a lot of my own thoughts, and had talked to a lot of people, 
Carl convinced me I had to develop a vision and a strategy for Mars.'' 
By early 1993, Goldin said, a new plan was set. It featured low-cost 
orbiters and landers to be flown every two years as Mars and Earth 
came into alignment. The merit of the new approach was driven home 
in August 1993 when the costly Observer craft, as it neared the red 
planet, failed mysteriously. The new series began last year when Mars 
Pathfinder landed and created a sensation with its miniature rover. 
Others are to follow in 1999, 2001, 2003, 2005, 2007 and so on. More 
generally, Goldin said, Sagan played a vital role in getting the agency 
to deepen its biological roots. In 1994 and 1995, he said, he met 
often with Sagan and other advisers to discuss how to sharpen NASA's 
overall skills in examining Mars and more distant worlds for signs 
of alien life. In response to the ferment, NASA planned an Astrobiology 
Institute, a consortium of academic and agency experts in various 
sciences, to address the riddle of life in the universe. Established 
this year, the institute is run by NASA's Ames Research Center in 
California and has 11 institutional members, including teams at Harvard, 
the University of Colorado and the Marine Biological Laboratory in 
Woods Hole, Mass. Its budget, now $9 million, is expected to grow 
to $100 million annually. Sagan saw little of what he helped create 
late in life. He died Dec. 20, 1996, at the Fred Hutchinson Cancer 
Research Center in Seattle, before the Mars Pathfinder landed with 
its Sojourner rover and the Astrobiology Institute took off. But his 
students are leading the new hunt for extraterrestrial life, with 
Squyres focusing on Mars, and Chyba on Europa. On May 18, Chyba wrote 
NASA as chairman of the panel drawing up plans for a Europa orbiter. 
That project, he said, was in the agency's ``greatest traditions'' 
of exploration, presenting large challenges as well as enormous potential 
payoffs. ``Should the 2003 orbiter demonstrate the existence of an 
ocean,'' he wrote, Europa will rapidly become ``a primary focus'' 
in the next century's hunt for extraterrestrial life. ``The whole 
program,'' Chyba said, ``is carrying Carl's torch.'' 
</TEXT>
</DOC>