<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981130.0439 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
In a day of prickly, detailed cross-examination at Microsoft's antitrust 
trial, Frederick Warren-Boulton, an economist, summed up the government's 
case of how the software giant wields its market power. ``Microsoft 
cannot point a gun to people's heads,'' Warren-Boulton said in response 
to a question from Microsoft's lawyer, ``but they can make them an 
offer they can't refuse.'' It is precisely this broad portrayal of 
Microsoft as a bullying monopolist that is the main target of Microsoft's 
defense as it tries to attack every fact, theory and assumption underlying 
the government's case. The cross-examination of Warren-Boulton, the 
government's seventh witness, has illuminated the company's defense 
strategy. ``We're seeing the slow but steady process of cleaning off 
the mud that has been thrown at Microsoft,'' said Mark Murray, a Microsoft 
spokesman. ``The facts do not fit the government's generalizations.'' 
Warren-Boulton spent his fourth day on the stand Monday, undergoing 
cross-examination on his long written testimony. As an economist, 
he has offered arguments on many issues in the case, unlike industry 
witnesses whose testimony focused more narrowly on their areas of 
expertise. Much of the questioning centered on Microsoft's contracts 
with personal computer makers, Internet service suppliers and companies 
that create programming on the World Wide Web. The government contends 
that Microsoft illegally used its market power to persuade these companies 
to enter exclusionary deals to curb competition in the market for 
Web browser software. Michael Lacovara, a Microsoft lawyer, tried 
to get Warren-Boulton to concede that Microsoft's deals with Internet 
service suppliers, from America Online to small local companies, did 
not prevent them from distributing other browsers, including the Netscape 
Communications' Navigator. Warren-Boulton acknowledged the narrow 
point but noted that most of the contracts called for the Internet 
access companies to guarantee that 75 percent or more of their customers 
use Microsoft's browser. Lacovara countered by asking whether such 
exclusive, cross-promotional deals were standard in many industries. 
``Absent monopoly power,'' Warren-Boulton replied in a pointed return 
to his theme that the antitrust rules are different for monopolies, 
``exclusive-dealing arrangements can be assumed to be benign.'' Lacovara 
offered evidence that several large computer manufacturers, including 
Hewlett-Packard, now ship their personal computers with their own 
hybrid Web browser installed. Was that not an indication, Lacovara 
asked, that Microsoft was not restricting manufacturers nearly as 
much as the government have contended? Not really, Warren-Boulton 
responded. The Hewlett-Packard browser, like others, is really just 
a ``shell'' _ a custom-made user interface behind which lies the code 
for Microsoft's browser, Internet Explorer, he said. ``This works 
for Microsoft,'' Warren-Boulton said, ``because it increases the installed 
base for Internet Explorer'' and prompts developers to write complementary 
software. After a couple of years of enforcing contracts that limited 
the freedom of computer makers to offer Internet software from rivals, 
Microsoft loosened the contracts this year, mostly with the introduction 
in June of Windows 98, an upgrade of its operating system. Similarly, 
Microsoft relaxed some contract restrictions on Internet service suppliers 
early this year. By then, Warren-Boulton said, ``the game was over'' 
because key channels of software distribution had already been tipped 
in Microsoft's favor. The easing of contract restrictions also came 
after the Justice Department's high-profile investigation of Microsoft 
was well under way and the company faced Senate hearings and a government 
challenge in a separate case. While scoring a few points against Warren-Boulton, 
Microsoft has been unable to counter a powerful part of his testimony, 
which attempts to demonstrate that Microsoft does have monopoly power. 
One definition of a monopolist, Warren-Boulton noted, is that he can 
raise prices for his product with no fear that the price increase 
will give power to his competitors and cost him market share. Warren-Boulton 
said the price Microsoft charges computer makers for Windows has more 
than doubled in the last seven years, while the overall price of a 
personal computer has dropped precipitously. Meanwhile, Microsoft's 
share of the operating system market has steadily increased; Windows 
is now installed on 95 percent of computers sold. Microsoft replies 
that over the years it has vastly improved Windows so that when adjusted 
for performance the price of Windows remains low. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>