<DOC>
<DOCNO> PRI19981130.2000.2026 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Chile is asking several countries, possibly including the United States, 
to pressure Britain into releasing former dictator Augusto Pinochet. 
Meanwhile, Chile's foreign minister, Jose Miguel Insulsa, is appealing 
directly to the British to release the 83-year-old general who faces 
genocide and torture charges in Spain if he is extradited. Today, 
Insulsa pleaded Chile's case with the British defense secretary, but 
it is Britain's Home Secretary Jack Straw who must decide on the extradition. 
The case continues to divide Chilean society. Senator Evelyn Matay, 
who is an independent senator in Chile, is in Santiago right now. 
Christina Navarate, who was tortured during the Pinochet years lives 
in London. And Christina, I'd like to begin with you. What do you 
make of the pledge by Chile's foreign minister that if Britain does 
return Augusto Pinochet, he will face criminal proceedings in the 
Chilean courts? In fact, 14 cases have already been filed by people 
like you, people who say they are victims of his dictatorship. I find 
it a very surprising development in the attitude of the Chilean government, 
because Chilean victims of the Pinochet regime have been trying for 
years and years to try to bring their cases to justice. And by the 
constitutional system that exists today in Chile set up by General 
Pinochet, it is impossible constitutionally and legally that he can 
be tried. Let me get Senator Matay to respond to that. Senator, it 
hasn't happened until now. What kind of guarantees can you give that 
justice will be done in the cases against General Pinochet will be 
pursued in Chile? I would like to say one thing. Everywhere in the 
world, there have been profound differences, and this has caused much 
pain and much deaths, and this has been so in the Middle East, this 
has been so in Northern Ireland. This has been so also behind the 
iron curtain. So all this what makes me think is that European countries 
only want to judge people from small, far away, insignificant countries. 
I must say that Mrs. Christina Navarate lives in England, so what 
happens in Chile doesn't really affect her personal life. But many 
Chileans here are poor people who need a job, who need a future, who 
need to be able to educate the children, who need access to health, 
and that is all being brought down now by this gross intervention 
in our internal affairs. Could you explain, Senator, how that's happening? 
I mean, we have heard that argument that by this issue surrounding 
General Pinochet, it's helping to destabilize the country. And I wonder 
if you can tell us what the evidence is of that, that Chile is being 
destabilized, because certainly from the outside, it doesn't appear 
to be on the verge of descending into any kind of chaos. In fact, 
it appears to be opening up a political discussion that hasn't happened 
in the past. Let me just say that the Asian crisis is hitting us very 
hard. Enterprises are closing down, people are being laid off, people 
are having wage cuts. This will man a lot of social unrest. We will 
have also presidential elections by the end of next year, and that 
will mean also more tensions. And this is now going to happen in a 
way where everybody is recriminating each other. If you're waiting 
for the country to burn in fire, of course, that's not going to happen. 
But I can assure you that there's not the unity anymore to really 
face the serious crisis, economic crisis we are facing in the way 
we have done for the last eight years. Christina Navarate in London, 
you have been in exile for some time now. I wonder at this point what 
it would take for you to go back to Chile. I find it very difficult 
to go back to Chile. And I have been back to Chile many occasions, 
and I had found a country where every time you wanted to discuss the 
issue of the disappeared or when there was any attempt even from my 
part to try to initiate some sort of procedures, there was absolute 
complete closed doors. And I haven't got any hatred in me either. 
I'm even saying he can then - He can be tried, convicted, and he will 
never go to jail. I don't want him to go to jail. He will never be 
able to pay for the crimes, the suffering that he has done. He can 
go home, look after his children. So can do all the rest of the militaries 
and all the secret police that was involved in all this. That's not 
what we want. I do not want revenge. Let's put that clear. I just 
want justice to be done amongst other things because when we can discuss 
this issue in Chile, when justice can be done, then I'm sure Mrs. 
Matay, most Chileans will be happy to continue to develop the country 
that they want to live in. Senator, what do you think the best way 
is for Chile to reconcile itself to the past and to the suffering 
of people including people Christina and people who are still in Chile? 
May I say that I don't really think reconciliation is really possible. 
I lived in Alabama, in Montgomery for one year in 1965, and there, 
the people still sang the "Dixie" and still put the flag of the southern 
confederation hundred years after the civil war. And I don't think 
people in Israel will start loving Palestinian people from one moment 
to the other. What happens is that you have to try to build a country 
where the killings won't happen anymore, where you can build a future 
for the future generations, because we owe that to them. Evelyn Matay 
is a member of the Chilean Senate. We also spoke with Christina Navarate, 
a human rights activist now living in London. Today, the United States 
weighed into the controversy over Pinochet. A State Department spokesman 
said Chile's opposition to the general's extradition deserves respect. 
The United States strongly condemned the abuses of the Pinochet regime, 
James Rubin said. At the same time he added we should give respect 
to Chile as it decides how to deal with its past. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>