<DOC>
<DOCNO> PRI19981130.2000.0898 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Meet the new boss, same as the old boss. Today, Cambodians are feeling 
a sense of deja vu with a dash of resignation and a pinch of cynicism. 
Four months after his narrow disputed election victory, Hun Sen was 
sworn in today as prime minister of the Southeast Asian nation. His 
partner in a coalition government is Prince Norodom Rohnarid. The 
two men previously shared power as co-premieres, but that arrangement 
ended last year when Hun Sen deposed the prince in a bloody coup. 
What that the current government will be more effective or even more 
stable than its predecessor is the question THE WORLD's Caroline Gluck 
raises in this report from Phnom Penh. Cambodia's recently elected 
M.P.'s formally take up their seats in the first working session of 
the new look parliament. After four months of political deadlock, 
the acrimonious disputes have been satisfied, and former foes from 
the two main political parties have agreed once again to work together 
in a coalition arrangement. At a news conference, Prime Minister Hun 
Sen said the differences of the past have to be satisfied. In this 
interests of the nation, we must be together for we as a country. 
Under that pact, Prince Rohnarid will be president of the National 
Assembly. Hun Sen becomes the country's sole prime minister, and ministry 
jobs have been shared between the two main parties. Although the new 
coalition looks strikingly similar to the old one, which ended in 
a de facto coup, Prince Rohnarid is confident that there would now 
be political stability. We have learned the lessons from the past 
before forming the person between the two parties. Those two agreements 
represent real foundation for a stable government in this country. 
Violence erupted once again in the Cambodian capital just weeks after 
the July general election declared free and fair by many international 
observers. The authorities had decided to forcibly end weeks of unprecedented 
public protests outside parliament by opposition supporters who claim 
the poll had been rigged. With several of their supporters killed, 
opposition leaders were forced to change tactics. The FUNCINPEC, that 
meant finally returning to the negotiating table. Most Cambodians 
weary of seeing political disagreement spill into violence on the 
streets regard the present coalition as inevitable. But not all are 
hopeful. Any party who has chance to set up the gomen, I think personal 
capacity to render the country. This coalition government may have 
to come together so the Cambodian program together and end the suffering 
of Cambodia because they fight, fight, fight so many years already, 
we are almost behind the world. As the National Assembly begins its 
work and key posts are assigned, Sang Ramzee, leader of the smallest 
party represented and his colleagues find themselves out of government. 
But Mr. Ramzee believes that the party's 15 M.P.s can play an important 
role. I think this is a new blood bringing new ideas, new approach, 
making this parliament less rubber stamp parliament or at least introducing 
more debate. Publicly, the new government has declared a reformist 
platform tackling the country's ailing economy, fighting poverty, 
corruption, illegal logging, and strengthening human rights. And Cambodians 
will be hoping that this time, these pledges will be translated into 
actions. For THE WORLD, this is Caroline Gluck in Phnom Penh. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>