<DOC>
<DOCNO> PRI19981130.2000.2433 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
The future of Quebec's independence movement could be on the line 
today. Voters in the Canadian province are choosing between the ruling 
party, Quebecua, which has pledged to hold a referendum on succession 
and the anti-separatist Quebec Liberal Party. Most Americans find 
it hard to comprehend the passions that divide Quebec from the rest 
of Canada, and Quebecers from each other. But as THE WORLD's Boris 
Maksimov reports, those passions are real. Exasperated English Canadians 
that are regularly throwing their hands in the air and ask, "What 
does Quebec want?" Twice in the last 18 years, Quebecers voted against 
independence. But Quebec is also not too happy with its present status 
in Canada as just another province. Almost everyone you meet in Montreal 
is a constitutional expert. Over dinner, in shops, on the streets, 
people talk knowledgeably about such esoteric things as voting systems, 
transfer payments, the balance of power, sovereignty, et cetera. Everyone 
agrees that both referendums did not resolve anything and that the 
future is wide open. Everything and anything is possible. The national 
questions always been part of what Quebecers, French speaking Quebecers 
that is, are. And we will have another referendum. There is a majority 
of those people who would like to have a country. Daniel Salay, Geela 
Chapell, and Marsel Benni, three Quebecers, three political scientists. 
All three work in an English language university called Concordaire. 
They spend their entire professional lives observing the constitutional 
developments in their province. So why is the national question such 
a perennial theme in Quebec politics? Daniel Salay, the head of the 
School of Community and Public Affairs at Concordaire. That question 
has never been fully resolved because it's not clear how to resolve 
it. We can feel truly nationalist or truly Quebecers within the Canadian 
framework, or do we really need a totally separate country to feel 
truly Quebecers? Geela Chapell does not concern himself with those 
feelings, but rather with their relations within Quebec and the rest 
of Canada. Canada was perceived as two nations, and this is what the 
Constitution was saying. And now in the recent year, there's a kind 
of creation of a one Canada ideal which seems to exclude part of Quebecers, 
I would say whole identity, and in some way, I will say even their 
contribution to the creation of Canada. Quebecers feel that they have 
contributed a lot and they need a special recognition. Whatever it 
means in terms of constitutional term, I think that's a kind of very 
deep sentiment among and sovereignists. Marsel Benni points out the 
question of identity of Quebecers. Quebecers, or French speaking Quebecers 
are a minority in North America. They have a unique legal system. 
They're very attached, still attached to the Catholic religion. They 
speak a different language. And when you put those three things together, 
it makes for what we can describe as a people. And a people often 
toys with the idea of having a country. And when not toying with these 
thoughts, pondering the issue of how to make it clear to everyone 
that we are different from them. So what next? Can Quebecers and other 
Canadians continue debating this issue, the problem of accommodating 
or not accommodating several national identities in one country. Geela 
Chapell sees the end to it all. Well, I think ten years from now Quebec 
will probably be an independent country. There will be some animosities 
at the beginning which is normal in all transition periods, but I 
think after that, I think that will be for the best of everybody, 
and I think everybody will respect each other maybe a little bit more. 
Marsel Benni, who himself spent ten years in politics dealing directly 
with the Quebec question assumes that of the separatist party will 
win the elections, and then: I would predict to you that we will have 
a referendum in June 2000, and unfortunately, I cannot predict, I 
don't know how this will end. But there are also hopeful people like 
Canada is - It's a political construct that was established in 1867 
for essentially constructing a market, a North American market that 
will be different from the American market, OK. And here, because 
of the kind of fictional nature of Canada, OK, it can be, it can be 
anything to anyone. It's open ended in many ways. Canada is open ended 
in many ways. And I think it's not an unpleasant feature of this country. 
I mean, it allows us to adapt. However, and this is when we have to 
be careful, if Canada, the Canadian state is not capable to find in 
itself ways of accommodating claims like the ones made by Quebecers, 
OK, then we might go back to square one. Well, crystal ball gazing 
is a dangerous thing. Three specialists deeply involved in everything 
that goes on in the Quebec political scene and no clear answers from 
anyone, counts today's elections as just another chapter in the endless 
debate. For THE WORLD, this is Boris Maksimov. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>