<DOC>
<DOCNO> PRI19981130.2000.0626 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Adam Garfinkel is executive editor of the "National Interest," a quarterly 
magazine on foreign policy. He joins us now from his office in Washington. 
Mr. Garfinkel, the question is: Do the American dollars and in fact 
the foreign money that we're talking about today help foster peace 
in regions such as the Middle East? Do you believe that the promise 
of this new aid to the Palestinians from the Clinton administration, 
an additional $400 million, as well as other business investments, 
will help further the peace process. Yeah, I think probably it will. 
Ordinarily, I would say that money usually doesn't do as much as people 
think it will, but this case is an exception, and there are two reasons 
why it's an exception. One, all along from the very beginning, from 
1993, the improvement of a lot of Palestinians has been a major goal 
of the peace process, but the nature of the accords themselves and 
the failure donor nations to fulfill their pledges have left most 
Palestinians worse off economically today than they were in 1993 when 
all this started. So because it's played such a prominent role in 
expectations and in the subsequent frustration of those expectations, 
money actually might help. The other reason why it might help is because 
there are places in Gaza, for example, that aren't just poor but that 
are desperate poor, and that really do provide a kind of fertile ground 
for fanaticism and suicidal explosions. So anything that can be done 
to reduce the pool of people who might do such things is to be welcomed. 
And in terms of the money the United States has provided in the past 
to Palestinian territories, where has that gone? That's a good question. 
I mean, we don't really know where it's gone exactly. A lot of its 
gone to pay salaries for what you can euphemistically call the public 
sector in that area, which means the overpopulated police force that 
the Palestinians have created, a series of infrastructural products, 
including the new airport. What the money has not been used for and 
which is quite unfortunate is that the money hasn't been used to prime 
any sort of entrepreneurial development. And if the Palestinian economy 
is to really strike roots, it's going to have to do so on the basis 
of private entrepreneurship just like any other economy in the world. 
Does Israel stand to gain from an increasingly strong Palestinian 
economy? I think so. I mean, right now, the Palestinians are caught 
in a kind of terrible contradiction. On the one hand, they say that 
they want political institutions that are separate and free from Israel. 
But on the other hand, they demand economic relations with Israel 
even though the Palestinian side, the economic side is much weaker. 
Now it seems to me irrational or illogical anyway just to say, "I 
want to be free politically but I want to buy myself economically 
even though I'm the weaker party." I mean, ultimately, in order for 
Israelis and Palestinians ever to be reasonable if not good neighbors, 
Palestinian economic institutions have to be free standing, too. And 
ultimately, I think that's good for Israel. And I think most Israelis, 
many Israelis anyway realize that. And can you then transfer this 
kind of logic to other places in terms of the Middle East where creating 
a stronger economy can help bring about some sort of peace? Well, 
unfortunately, metaphors don't travel as well in the real world as 
they do on pieces of paper. I'll give you an example. There are some 
people in the United States who are saying that by using sanctions 
on Iran, for example, or for that matter for using sanctions on Iraq, 
that either one of these governments will suddenly change the way 
that they think about the world and the way that they act in it. And 
that's just an illusion. It's almost ridiculous to think that if we 
allow some oil companies to back to Iran assuming the Iranians will 
have them, that Iranian attitudes toward terrorism or Iranian attitudes 
toward Salmon Rushdi are going to be dramatically changed overnight. 
We had a chief of staff during the Reagan administration who once 
characterized the Iranians as a bunch of rug merchants. Well, they're 
not a bunch of rug merchants. If they are, they're very good ones, 
because they certainly snookered us many times. And they're not about 
to be bought off their principle values by a couple of pipelines or 
a couple of American companies. So if I were to ask you the bottom 
line on this... Case by case is the bottom line. Case by case, you've 
got to look at these circumstances one case at a time. Money can matter 
but only in the context of a broader strategy. Well, you know what 
you want and you have other pieces. A lot of times, however, when 
we don't what we want to do in this country, we use economic incentives 
or economic sanctions as a substitute for a strategy, and that almost 
never works. Adam Garfinkel is executive editor of the quarterly magazine 
"National Interest" speaking to us from Washington, D.C. Mr. Garfinkel 
thank you. My pleasure. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>