<DOC>
<DOCNO> PRI19981130.2000.2999 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
The largest recipient of slaves in the western hemisphere was Brazil. 
During three centuries of slave trading, 3-1/2 million Africans were 
forcibly brought to work on Brazilian plantations. But even before 
the South American nation abolished slavery in 1888, some of the slaves 
had either escaped or been granted their freedom. They formed communities 
called Kelombos, where they tried to preserve their African culture. 
Some of these communities survive to this day. THE WORLD's Paula Goby 
went to one of the Kelombos of Kafundo in the state of Sao Paulo. 
Kafundo looks like a rural village similar to many poor rural communities 
in Brazil lost in time. The name Kafundo is quite appropriate, meaning 
remote, the end of the world in Bantu. This village of about 80 people 
spread out in 14 small houses is considered a national cultural patrimony 
of Brazil because it has maintained strong links with its African 
heritage. Sedahors Adelmada is Kafundo's leader. She proudly displays 
the diploma she's just received from the Plamares organization, a 
federal foundation that promotes black consciousness. It's a reminder 
of our history. I'll put it together with a slave receipt I have saved 
on how slaves used to be sold. These things will be preserved for 
my children and great grandchildren. When I am no longer around, they 
will remember who I was. Dona Seda is 53 years old and the granddaughter 
of slaves. Her grandmother, Efagenya, was one of Kafundo's founders. 
She was granted emancipation and the land from her former master shortly 
before the abolition of slavery in 1888. Today, Dona Seda is keeping 
her ancestor's memory by preserving Kupopia, a language spoken in 
Kafundo. The Kupopia language gives the Kelombo a sense of identity, 
according to Carlos Vogt, a linguistic professor who studied the community 
for over ten years and wrote a book on it. Most of the words are from 
Gimbundo and other languages of the same Bantu family. This lead us 
to believe that the language spoken in Kafundo is a fusion of different 
African languages with Portuguese. The predominance of Gimbundo is 
due to the fact that the majority of the slaves brought to this region 
of Brazil came from Angola, where Gimbundo was widely spoken. Kupopia, 
the name given to the mixture of Portuguese and African languages 
was preserved as a secret language by the residents of Kafundo. It 
was used to alert the community about outside threat, and there have 
been many of those. The abolition of slavery did not mean peace for 
African descendants. Land disputes have wiped out two nearby Kelombos. 
Dona Seda says it's a life and death struggle to defend the land. 
My brother was killed. I don't understand how justice works. He was 
killed but he murderers got the land. He had a legal right to that 
land, but he died accused of being a squatter. She says that the love 
for the land has kept the community united, but they are poor and 
suffer from the greed and hostility of their neighbors. Kafundo is 
entirely surrounded by encroaching farm land. The original 600 acres 
have been reduced to just 45. Land rights are not easily determined 
in Brazil. Titles are sometimes forged, nonexistent, or overlapping. 
But fortunately for Kafundo, the state of Sao Paulos justice secretary 
has taken up their cause before it's too late. Recognizing the Kelombos 
ancestrals claim, the state agency is negotiating with local ranch 
owners to recover at least part of the lost property. Dan Andrade 
is the agency's coordinator. Kafundo has very little land, and it's 
suffering enormous real estate pressure to move out. Sometimes we 
are amazed at how they have held on, and it is their absolute determination 
that preserves the community. We need to help them urgently. If we 
don't, they will not be able to exist much longer. Dona Seda says 
it isn't only the state that is helping them recover their land, but 
also the African saints that protect them. She is a priestess of Kantomblay, 
a Afro-Brazilian religion actively practiced in Kafundo. I have faith 
in God and the African saints that we shall win. Sometimes we almost 
give up, but then I know we must win. Brazil's 1988 Constitution seeks 
to compensate the Kelombos for past injustice. It says the state should 
recognize the Kelombos land rights and issue them respective titles. 
Thanks to this clause, as many as a thousand communities like the 
one in Kafundo may eventually recover their land, insuring the survival 
of this peace of Brazil's African heritage. For THE WORLD, this is 
Paula Goby in Sao Paulo. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>