<DOC>
<DOCNO> PRI19981130.2000.1259 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Boris Yeltsin remains hospitalized with pneumonia. The Russian president 
was taken to a Moscow hospital eight days ago after suffering the 
latest in a string of illnesses. A spokesman said today that Yeltsin 
is getting better but Russian officials have been known to sugar coat 
medical reports about their ailing rulers since Joseph Stalin's day. 
Preskovia Marshansilva knows all about that. THE WORLD's Andrew Harding 
visited Dr. Marshansilva in her apartment in Moscow. When it comes 
to sick presidents, Preskovia Marshansilva has seen it all. Thumbing 
through her photograph album, the 85-year-old Muscovite remembers 
the day some 50 years ago when she was first summoned to the Kremlin 
as a young doctor. A KGB guard took her to a room and pointed towards 
a bed. All I could see was a foot. It was sticking to a sort of curtain. 
I was told not to ask any questions but to treat the toe, which was 
infected. It was only two years later that Preskovia found out that 
the toe belonged to Stalin. It was the start of a long, strange, secretive 
career during which she would treat a succession of increasingly sick 
Kremlin leaders, each determined to maintain the illusion of good 
health. Leonid Brezhnev, sometimes needed weeks of therapy before 
appearing in public. He could barely walk or talk, but with the right 
medicines and encouragement, I could sort him out so he could make 
his speech. I can do the same for anyone. If Preskovia has any moral 
qualms about her job, she knew better than to complain. I said to 
him, "You should spend more time resting." That was about as far as 
I could go. I couldn't really go up to the leader of an enormous country 
and tell him he should resign. We were just small people. Eventually, 
Brezhnev died, then it was blood transfusions for Andropov, and more 
drugs for Chernenko. Years later, and although Preskovia is now retired, 
precious little seems to have changed in the Kremlin. Today, it's 
Boris Yeltsin's turn to be wheeled out for the cameras then whisked 
back into his luxury private hospital for another round of treatments. 
He's a sick man just like Brezhnev, but in the end, he didn't know 
what was going on around him either. Yeltsin's entourage is to blame. 
They are just afraid of losing their jobs. Nonsense, says Mr. Yeltsin, 
but few people believe the official line anymore, least of all Preskovia 
Mashansilva, an elderly woman who knows all too well how the Kremlin 
likes to doctor the truth. For THE WORLD, I'm Andrew Harding reporting 
from Moscow. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>