<DOC>
<DOCNO> PRI19981130.2000.0374 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
In Washington today Palestinian leader Yasir Arafat talked tough about 
Israel and talked nice to potential donors. Arafat accused the Jewish 
state of undermining the Palestinian economy and repeated his intention 
to establish an independent state. But he told an international conference 
that financial support is vital to advancing the peace process and 
developing the Palestinian economy. President Clinton responded with 
a pledge of $400 million in new aid over and above the $500 million 
Washington had already promised. THE WORLD's Jeb Sharpe reports. President 
Clinton timed his announcement to coincide with a one-day conference 
on economic development in the West Bank and Gaza attended by 40-donor 
nations. U.S. officials hope other countries will add their own aid 
packages to the American one. Mr. Clinton say the Palestinian people 
need economic development. Palestinians have a right to the same thing 
all people aspire to: to be part of a normal, even happy society, 
where children receive a decent education, where there are jobs to 
go around, and decent health care, where people's memories are reconciled 
with their hopes for the future, and there is no fear. Last month's 
Wye agreement and last week's opening of a new international airport 
on the Gaza Strip have renewed optimism about economic development 
in Palestinian areas. But investment in the West Bank and Gaza won't 
come easily because business conditions there are far from optimal. 
Rashid Hollidee, the director of the Center for International Studies 
at the University of Chicago says it's difficult to move people let 
alone goods in and out of Palestinian territories. Essentially, the 
Israelis have a whole series of restrictions, some of them security, 
some of them just bureaucratic red tape, which make it very difficult 
to import time sensitive materials or to export time sensitive materials 
from either the West Bank or the Gaza Strip. Secondly, it's difficult 
for Palestinians to get in and out. And that means that a businessman 
who's trying to say - to visit with his sales reps in Hebron from 
Gaza almost has to plan it weeks in advance. Israeli security restrictions 
aren't the only obstacle to economic development. Professor Hollidee 
says the Palestinian authority has yet to create basic laws for doing 
business. The thusfar of the authority to produce laws governing investment 
and regulating a variety of things or freeing a variety of things 
which investors need to know about before they're going to go in in 
any big way. Now this has not stopped Palestinian investors, particularly 
people who have knowledge of local conditions, particularly people 
who are interested in real estate development, which is booming in 
some parts of the West Bank in Gaza. But it has stopped international 
investors, particularly American investors. Even so, many international 
business experts are hopeful about Palestinian opportunities. Dick 
Holmes, president of the National U.S. Arab Chamber of Commerce says 
there's no reason Palestinians can't flourish economically given the 
chance. They have a long tradition and a long historical memory for 
entrepreneurial activity. And once given a little capital and a little 
education, they're extremely successful. And that's certainly been 
proven by the Palestinians that left and became business successes 
in Europe and the United States, and there's lots of them. President 
Clinton also sounded an optimistic note today when he compared the 
possibilities on the West Bank and Gaza with the reality in Northern 
Ireland. Through a courageous decision and a steady tied of investment, 
the people there are seeing peace grow from wish to fulfillment. Prosperity 
there, too, is the key to making it happen. A breakthrough occurred 
at the Wye summit because the parties decided to look forward not 
backward, to focus on the need for security and on tangible economic 
benefits. The aid package announced today will go a long way toward 
encouraging outside investment by making basic improvements to Palestinian 
infrastructure. For THE WORLD, I'm Jeb Sharpe. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>