<DOC>
<DOCNO> VOA19981130.0500.0361 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
A lawyer defending former Malaysian Deputy Prime Minister Anwar Ibrahim 
has been sentenced to three months in jail for accusing prosecutors 
of fabricating evidence. However the late break in this story, a Malaysian 
appeals court temporarily suspended that jail term. Judge Augustine 
Paul initially handed down the contempt sentence after defense lawyer 
Zayno Zacharia refused orders to apologize. On Saturday Mr. Anwar's 
defense filed an affidavit accusing prosecutors of trying to obtain 
false testimony from an associate of the former Deputy Prime Minister. 
Reporter Lynn Shu Ling in Kuala Lumpur says the charge of fabricating 
evidence is key to Mr. Anwar's defense. Yes is actually, the defense 
has said that one of their main lines of defense is that there is 
a conspiracy theory, conspiracy against Mr. Anwar. Now Mr. Anwar always 
said that right from the beginning he was innocent. And that all the 
charges against him were part of a high level political conspiracy 
to remove him from office. So, yes this is very much in line with 
what the defense has been trying to argue throughout the trial. And 
you say that there was surprise at the Judge's decision? I believe 
there was, the court was certainly taken aback by the fact that the 
judge was determined to get through this matter this morning very 
quickly. And the fact that he sentenced him to three months in jail 
on the spot, I believe, we're not quite sure if this is unprecedented. 
We asked the defense lawyers if it was unprecedented and they said 
they are not sure. But there was certainly quite a bit of surprise. 
What happens now to Mr. Anwar's case? Mr. Anwar's case will go on. 
It will continue tomorrow. We have one of the key prosecution witnesses 
on the stand, and his cross-examination will continue. And the defense 
team has said that they will also go on with the case, and they will 
not be too much effected by what has happened. Although they will 
lodge an appeal with the Court of Appeal to look at Mr. Zayno's case, 
the lawyer who has been charged with Contempt of Court. Shu Ling, 
there have been a number of legal cases in America that have gripped 
the nation. One that comes to mind most recently was the OJ Simpson 
Trial in Las Angeles. How big a trial is this, and how is it being 
followed by the Malaysian people? I should say, in fact this is the 
trial of the decade, if not of post-independence Malaysia, because 
we have a very sensational trial on our hands. And your comparison 
with OJ Simpson is quite correct, the OJ Simpson case is quite appropriate. 
This is a very big case involving a lot of personalities very high 
up in society, very powerful personalities. And involving charges 
which are very, very sensational. Is it possible to indicate what 
would happen if the government loses this case? If the government 
loses this case? Well, in that possibility, we would have Mr. Anwar 
vindicated, and that would strengthen his movement to get back perhaps 
into power, into politics. Would the government possibly be harmed 
politically by a loss? Probably, yes, I think it would be quite right 
to say that the government would certainly suffer a lot of, perhaps, 
credibility. And would even, possibly suffer a loss of support. Reporter 
Lyn Shu Ling in Kuala Lumpur, speaking with VOA's Victor Beatty. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>