<DOC>
<DOCNO> VOA19981130.1600.3181 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Well, most of us have concerns about money and how to make the most 
of it. Well, that's the subject of a new book by Shell Horowitz. It's 
called "The Penny Pinching Hedonist, How to Live Like Royalty on a 
Peasant's Pocketbook." The book describes thousands of ways to have 
fun without going broke and how to find holiday bargains. VOA's Martin 
Secrist spoke to the author. I wrote the book because I see over and 
over again people complaining that it takes all the running they can 
do to stay in the same place so they never get to have any fun. And 
there are just so many ways to enjoy yourself with really little or 
no monetary expenditure anywhere in the world that I wrote the book. 
In what ways are people usually most eager to realize savings in their 
entertainment lives? Well, I would say travel is probably the biggest 
area. If you can take a vacation that might have cost you $3-, $4,000 
and bring it down to a few hundred, it definitely makes it a lot more 
doable. Well, what are the ways people can do that? Well, one of the 
things I'm really strongly in favor of is joining a home stay organization. 
Actually I'm a member of one since 1983, and I have stayed in private 
homes all around the world for free as a result of this wonderful 
organization. And the way it works is that if I'm traveling to a particular 
location, I get a directory from the organization of people who have 
agreed to open up their homes in that area, and then I'll contact 
the person ahead of time and say, "Would you like to have us as guests 
for such and such day?," and they'll either say yes or no. And if 
they say yes, then we have a place to stay with no money changing 
hands, and we also get a much, much better travel experience because 
we're learning the culture and the place that we're in from people 
who live there. Let's talk about eating out. Is it really possible 
to go out and spend $10 on a good meal? Ten gives me a nice margin 
of error. I can often do it for $5 to $8 a person. A lot of different 
things you can do. Those of your listeners who are in Spanish speaking 
countries, for example, can take advantage of the incredible all-you-can-eat 
lunches that they often do where they just pile on the food and they're 
very, very cheap. Eating even outside of Spanish speaking countries 
eating out is often cheaper at lunch. That's one of the best tips. 
You get basically the same food and your bill is going to be 30 to 
50 percent less. With the holidays upon us here in America, many people 
will be eager to hear about your ways to save during the celebrations 
and gift giving and whatnot. OK, well, one strategy is to start your 
gift shopping early. You kind of keep an idea of who the people are 
you have to buy for and as you go through yard sales in the summer, 
you may find the perfect present or craft fairs long before the holiday 
buying frenzy really starts. As far as decorations and things, the 
best time to buy those would be the week after the holiday. Of course, 
kids have long known the art of the skin flint gift. Yep. You know, 
sometimes the best gifts have a lot of thought and not much money 
behind them. We do a lot of exchanging of coupons in this house. I 
might give my wife a coupon for an hour massage, and then at some 
point down the road, she's going to redeem that coupon, and I'm going 
to give her an hour massage. Or my kids might give us coupons for 
extra chores that they would be willing to do as a holiday present. 
Finally, on the topic careers, you have a chapter called "Racing Away 
From the Rats." I get a kick -- This is where you discuss ways to 
live well without having to fight your way up the job ladder. I do 
believe that people should find a job that's meaningful and satisfying 
to them and doing something they love. There are so many ways that 
you can make a living creatively just - I know a lot of people who 
have gotten jobs in the travel industry because that enables them 
to travel for free. I know other people in the entertainment industry 
who get to see zillions of free concerts because they're working in 
security or they're working on sound and light, or whatever it is, 
and they're actually getting paid to be there. And I want to remind 
listeners that the name of the book is called "The Penny Pinching 
Hedonist, How to Live Like Royalty on a Peasant's Pocketbook." The 
author is Shell Horowitz. Thanks for joining us today, Shell. Thank 
you, Martin. If you'd like to learn more about this book, we suggest 
you go to its Website. Here's the address: www.frugalfun.com. Frugal 
fun is one word, and I'll spell it for you. F-r-u-g-a-l-f-u-n. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>