<DOC>
<DOCNO> VOA19981130.1600.0806 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Sub Saharan Africa is the area of the world hardest hit by the disease, 
AIDS. Seven out of ten people infected this year with HIV live on 
that continent, and over 80 percent of all AIDS deaths so far have 
been Sub Saharan Africa. VOA Johannesburg correspondent Alex Belida 
reports that on the eve of World AIDS Day, health officials are voicing 
concern about the particularly alarming spread of the disease in Southern 
African. The executive director of the United Nations AIDS Program, 
Dr. Peter Peyat says the countries most affected by the AIDS epidemic 
are now located in Southern Africa. They include Botswana, Namibia, 
Swaziland, and Zimbabwe, where between 20 and 26 percent of all adults 
are now estimated to be living with HIV and AIDS. Dr. Peyat says South 
Africa is catching up rapidly. So we're facing here a crisis that 
is unprecedented, be it a may manmade catastrophe such as apartheid, 
colonialism, or natural disasters such as the drought. None of them 
will claim so many victims. Speaking at a news conference in Johannesburg, 
the U.N. AIDS officials says the rapid spread of the disease is dealing 
a severe setback to health gains made on the African continent in 
recent years. He says the impact of the epidemic is being increasingly 
felt on the economic level. Of course the first line here is the household. 
Households, particularly households that are just above the threshold 
of poverty are being pushed into poverty because of AIDS, because 
of the skyrocketing medical costs, because of the lack of income. 
But also, the profits of companies are now being decreased of because 
of AIDS. Dr. Peyat says there is what he calls a desperate need for 
a vaccine to combat HIV AIDS. But in the meantime, he says Africa 
is not powerless to fight the epidemic. He says that it is possible 
to mobilize communities to curb the spread of the disease with information 
and education. The U.N. official says it is a essential not only to 
fight the virus, but the fear, the shame, and the discrimination associated 
with AIDS. Joining Dr. Peyat at the news conference was South Africa's 
minister for welfare, population, and development, Geraldine Frasier 
Malaketi. She says a new study confirms AIDS is growing rapidly in 
South Africa, especially among young people with dire consequences 
for the years ahead. In South Africa, the population growth will slow 
dramatically and it could even be negative after 2008. Average life 
expectancy will fall from around 60 in 1998 to 40 by 2008. She says 
all South Africans must confront what she calls the reality of the 
HIV AIDS epidemic if progress is to be made in both prevention and 
care activities. Alex Belida, VOA News, Johannesburg. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>