<DOC>
<DOCNO> VOA19981130.1600.1334 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Thirty years ago this month, Richard Nixon came back from political 
obscurity to win the presidency, reviving a Republican Party which 
had suffered epic losses only four years before. In the final installment 
of his year-long series on the events of 1968, VOA national correspondent 
Jim Malone looks back at the Nixon victory and the political resurgence 
of the Republican Party. In November of 1968, Richard Nixon defeated 
Democrat Hubert Humphrey in one of the closest presidential elections 
in U.S. history. The Nixon victory capped an incredible personal political 
comeback, and the new president elect set out to try to heal the wounds 
of a country torn apart by an unpopular war in Southeast Asia. A teenager 
held up a sign, "Bring us together." And that will be the great objective 
of this administration at the outset to bring the American people 
together. In many ways, Mr. Nixon's victory in 1968 was a result of 
the chaos and upheaval in American society over the war in Vietnam, 
the struggle for civil rights, and the assassinations of two political 
leaders, Senator Robert Kennedy and Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr. Noted 
author, David Halberstan covered both the Vietnam War and the civil 
rights movement for the "New York Times." The country has jarred nerves, 
first civil rights, and then the war, and the idea that again and 
again, the old authority, the old values seem to be assaulted by the 
new. For many in America's vast middle class, the prospect of the 
country being torn apart by an unpopular war abroad and social change 
at home was unsettling. And Richard Nixon supplied the reassurance 
they sought. Conservative commentator M. Stanton Evans says the anti-war 
and civil rights movements bitterly divided the Democratic Party in 
1968 which gave Mr. Nixon and the Republicans an opening to campaign 
as the candidate and party of stability. I mean, this was the ship 
wreck of the Democratic Party and the rise of the Republican Party. 
And really, the dominant effect of all that violence and all of this 
conflict was to elect Richard Nixon. In winning the presidency, Richard 
Nixon drew support from blue collar workers and Catholic voters who'd 
been loyal to the Democratic Party since the time of President Franklin 
Roosevelt in the 1930s. With the Nixon victory, Republicans effectively 
seized the crucial middle ground of American politics, setting the 
stage for the rise of Ronald Reagan in the 1980s. Former presidential 
candidate Pat Buchanan worked as a speech writer for Presidents Nixon 
and Reagan. Richard Nixon's been written up obviously because of Watergate 
as a failed president. And certainly in his second term, it was a 
total failure. But Richard Nixon politically was the architect of 
the new majority and the Reagan coalition. He was the first leader 
to understand it and pull it all together. For Democrats, 1968 ended 
as a bitter disappointment. Young anti-war activists celebrated President 
Lyndon Johnson's decision not to seek another term, but they mourn 
the deaths of Robert Kennedy and Martin Luther King. Journalist Jules 
Whitcover has written a book about this period called "1968, The Year 
the Dream Died." That dream, according to Jules Whitcover, was the 
liberal dream of ending the conflict in Vietnam and winning the war 
against poverty and racism at home. They were trying to make the system 
work one more time, and it failed them. Many of them were driven out 
of politics, never came back. Some did stay in, including a moderate 
protester named Bill Clinton. But by and large, it was a real downer 
for millions of young people who still thought they could make the 
process work. The Democratic Party was never the same after 1968. 
Party leaders found it increasingly difficult to hold together a frayed 
coalition of northern liberals and southern conservatives. And journalist 
Jules Whitcover says Republicans became very effective in turning 
liberalism into a dirty word. I think one of the impacts of '68 was 
the demonization of liberalism. You don't hear any Democrats call 
themselves liberals anymore. The most they may do is call themselves 
progressives. And the reason is that Nixon very effectively hammered 
at liberalism and blamed all the excesses of 1968 on liberalism. And 
you don't - And they continue to do that very effectively. The Republican 
post-1968 comeback reached its zenith in 1994, when the party gained 
control of both Houses of Congress for the first time in 40 years. 
But the Republican failure to make expected gains in this year's congressional 
elections has caused some within the party to urge a moderation of 
the party's strongly conservative tone. It's a lesson the Democrats 
know well. They ended 12 years of Republican control of the White 
House in 1992 only after nominating a self-described new Democratic 
moderate, Bill Clinton. Jim Malone, VOA News, Washington. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>