<DOC>
<DOCNO> VOA19981130.1600.2697 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Acupuncture, homeopathy, ayurveda, herbal medicine, chiropractic, 
and other therapies are considered alternative medicine here in the 
United States, but they are the primary treatments for at least 70 
percent of the world. Now, more and more Americans seem to be looking 
outside modern western medicine for answers to unsolved medical problems. 
And as Ladatsa Hoke reports, there is an increased interest in alternative 
therapies and natural remedies. One a day on there, and one twice 
a day on this. The apothecary is a small privately owned pharmacy 
in the Bethesda, Maryland. It is popular mainly thanks to its vast 
selection of vitamins, food supplements, herbal medicine, and other 
natural remedies. Its friendly owner Mickey Weinstein is always available 
for consultations. St. John's Wort has been around for a long time 
and in fact it's been very useful to help boost the immune system. 
But more recently, it's been getting a lot of publicity for its use 
as an anti-depressant, and it's very popular in Germany. From what 
I understand, it out sells prozac in Germany about 20 to one, and 
it works very much like prozac works as an anti-depressant, the same 
mechanism of action but with no side effects to speak of. On the other 
hand, prozac, which is now one of the most frequently prescribed anti-depressants 
in the United States has numerous possible side effects, including 
drowsiness, heartburn, anxiety, and even change in sex desire. It 
can also be addictive, so more and more people are trying to avoid 
it. Alternative therapies have always complimented conventional medicine 
in many countries. In Germany, for example, medical school students 
are obliged to take some courses in herbalism. In China, students 
of modern western medicine have to take courses in ancient Chinese 
medicine. Until 1910, the situation was similar in the United States 
but then a report on medical schools by a man named Abraham Flexner 
changed American medicine. The report supported schools that promoted 
technology, pharmacology, and research, and Abraham Flexner was associated 
with the General Education Board which provided financial assistance 
to schools. So as a result of his report, nearly all the American 
homeopathic and naturopathic colleges closed, and the use of herbs 
also fell out of favor. James Gordon, clinical professor of psychiatry 
at Georgetown University says since then, Americans have made great 
advances in what we call western medicine, but they tended to ignore 
developments in other countries. Other culturals have developed very 
kind of wonderful ways of looking at the world and of understanding 
the world and of treating illness, and we've kind of dismissed those 
simply as folk beliefs. And it's really only been in the last 25 years 
when we've begun to see that our treatments, although immensely powerful, 
for example, surgical interventions or treatment of overwhelming infection, 
of treatment of some congenital problems like when there are holes 
in the hearts of babies, we're brilliant at doing those things, but 
in the last 25 years, it's become clear that we're not so good at 
treating chronic illnesses. So we've begun to open ourselves up. James 
Gordon says Americans who have suffered the most have shown the most 
interest in alternative therapies. They were followed by medical professionals 
who really wanted to help their patient. The National Institutes of 
Health in Bethesda, Maryland is now sponsoring research in acupuncture, 
Chinese herbal medicine, massage therapy, macrobiotic diet, yoga, 
and many other alternative therapies. So it seems that alternative 
medicine in the United States is making slow but steady progress towards 
its incorporation into mainstream medicine. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>