<DOC>
<DOCNO> VOA19981130.0500.0639 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
The Chinese leadership has a new diplomatic problem to resolve. The 
Philippine Navy has arrested 20 Chinese fisherman near the Spratly 
Islands. China, the Philippines, and other nations in the region all 
have competing territorial claims to these islands in the South China 
Sea. From our Beijing Bureau, Correspondent Stephanie Ho says the 
government has so far not responded to the arrests. But Chinese officials 
are likely to be disturbed about the incident. I imagine there will 
be a statement today, in French or so, probably on Shing Wa which 
is the official Chinese news agency. But the Chinese Government Foreign 
Ministry has a briefing every Tuesday and Thursday, and so a verbal 
statement probably will not come out until Tuesday Afternoon. Now 
about this Spratley, Stephanie, where exactly can you locate them 
for our audience? And why would these arrests be such a provocative 
issue.? Well the Spratleys, the Spratley issue especially between 
the Philippines and China has been a bit of an issue lately. The Spratleys 
themselves are located in the South China Sea, actually closer to 
Vietnam, Malaysia, and the Philippines, and off of Brunei I think. 
And those are four countries that have overlapping claims to the Spratley 
Islands. China and also Taiwan are also claiming the islands. Most 
recently there was a dispute between the Philippines and China. And 
there was a portion of the Spratley Island chain called Mischief Reef 
where the Chinese were building structures, or repairing structures 
that were on the island. And the Philippines were criticizing the 
Chinese and accusing them of attempting to stake their claim and force 
their claim or strengthen their claim through these structures. So, 
there is a lot of sensitivity in Southeast Asia about the Spratley 
Islands, and about the overlapping claims and who legitimately has 
jurisdiction over them. The Spratley Islands themselves are almost 
nothing. I mean they are rocks and atolls and just really tiny little 
islands. And so different countries, I think have different claims 
over different portions of the islands. They say it's about 200 reefs 
and rocky outcrops or so. So, I think different countries have different 
claims. I think, for example, though, China is claiming the whole 
thing. China is claiming that the Spratley Islands are all belonging 
to China. Now, why would these poor countries be concerned about them. 
I mean, what's important about them? The Spratley Islands are important 
because there is a belief that they are sitting on top of huge oil 
deposits or so. And so, all the countries would like to have claim 
to that, so they can get the oil from that area. Also the Spratley 
Islands are sitting over important shipping areas or so. And so who 
ever, whichever country would have jurisdiction over the island could 
control the shipping in that area. From our bureau in Beijing, VOA's 
Stephanie Ho spoke to Les Carpenter. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>