<DOC>
<DOCNO> VOA19981130.1600.2314 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
In Argentina, it is women who are taking steps against the human rights 
abuses of the country's former military rulers. The leaders of the 
movement are mostly grandmothers whose frail appearance masks their 
iron resolve, as we hear in this report from VOA correspondent Greg 
Frakus in Buenos Aires. Buenos Aires is a lively city known for its 
tango music, its fine restaurants, and its sophistication. Lingering 
in the atmosphere, however, are the vestiges of a dark past that many 
people here would like to forget. There are others, though, who can 
never forget. Every week, a group of old women gathers in the Plasa 
Demijo in front of the presidential palace known as the Casa Rosada 
in an attempt to drive Argentina's secrets out of the shadows. They 
call themselves Los Madres De la Plasa Demijo, the mothers of the 
Plasa Demijo. Another group is called Lasa Buelos De la Plasa Demijo, 
the grandmothers of the Plasa Demijo. They work together with the 
assistance of lawyers and human rights organizations to seek information 
about family members who were abducted during the years of the military 
dictatorship. They know that they were brutally tortured and then 
killed under the military regime that held power here in Argentina 
from 1976 to 1983. Mark Decampo Devasquez lost her daughter, son-in-law, 
and grandson in the Argentine military's so-called dirty war. She 
says she's certain that her grandson is still alive, having been raised 
by another family. She says if she could meet him today, she would 
only want to tell him the truth about his true parents, who they were, 
and the good they tried to accomplish. She says she would then leave 
it up to him to decide what to do next. In most cases, the Abuellos 
say these lost children accept the truth and rejoin the families they 
never knew. For another grandmother, Carmen Ramirez, there is also 
the matter of justice. She says she lost her husband and oldest son 
in the military crackdown. She believes the ones who committed these 
crimes should be punished. She says that the effort to extradite former 
Chilean military ruler Augusto Pinochet to Spain to stand trial for 
human rights violations provides hope that one day some of Argentina's 
human rights offenders will also face justice. The once mighty military 
leaders who terrorized their opponents here in Argentina between 1976 
and 1983 now face a powerful foe in the form of old ladies who have 
joined together to seek justice. They are the grandmothers of the 
disappeared children who will never forgive and never forget. VOA 
correspondent Greg Flakus reporting from Buenos Aires, Argentina. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>