<DOC>
<DOCNO> VOA19981130.0500.2406 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Organizations mark AIDS Day around the world tomorrow. It's an attempt 
to draw global attention to the massive problems the AIDS infection 
can bring. In India public health officials say 5 million people are 
infected with the HIV virus, which causes AIDS. That amounts to an 
epidemic that will be difficult to contain even if bold steps are 
taken. New Delhi Correspondent Douglas Bachshon spoke with Indian 
health professionals. That amounts to an epidemic that will be difficult 
to contain even if the bold steps are taken, they tell him. He tells 
us where he found out in their conversation. AIDS and the HIV virus 
that causes it are a sensitive topic in India, but with the spread 
of the crisis, health professionals are beginning to speak more openly. 
At the All India Institute of Medical Sciences in New Delhi, the nation's 
top federal hospital, a number of doctors are involved in tracking 
or studying the crisis. Dr. Beer Singh head of the facility's AIDS 
education and training program says the threat is clear. India is 
facing the kind of academic far as positivity and AIDS scenario is 
concerned. We will have millions of these patients who are HIV positive, 
and millions of these patients will be full-blown aids cases. Social 
attitudes and ignorance remain a big obstacle in dealing with AIDS 
and the HIV virus. Dr. Singh says prejudice continues to be wide spread 
in the medical community as well as in the public. Doctors don't want 
to touch patients with HIV, nurses run away when they see HIV positive 
patients. They refuse to take her. Okay, public, in general the moment 
you say that somebody is HIV positive, they will simply run away thinking 
this is a contagious disease, just keep off. So that social ostracism 
is still rampant. Where the larger medical community has failed, private 
non-profit organizations are stepping in. Luke Sampson of the Sahara 
Group, which cares for patients that hospitals reject, says misunderstanding 
and fear are strong forces. There is a lot of fear and stigma with 
HIV. We're looking at many, many people who are sick, who are dying. 
Doctors are not sensitized or trained to provide care for them. The 
reality is, you know, families do love their children. They want to 
provide care for them. But societal influences and fear and phobia 
are also very strong forces. Even though the work of groups like Sahara 
is small, given the vast scope of the AIDS problem in India, it is 
having an impact. According to Mr. Sampson, many people with the AIDS 
virus have made strong recoveries after treatment at Sahara. He says 
such examples are prompting the organized medical community to take 
action. We believe that if somebody is out there to set the example, 
the nursing staff respond, the doctors respond, the families respond, 
because the reality is, you know, if somebody can show that it's not 
so bad after all. You can get somebody and care for them and clean 
their wounds if you take basic precautions. Then people are happy 
to follow. Many people question how India allowed itself to get into 
a crisis situation. The first AIDS case in India was reported more 
than a decade ago but there has been little official action until 
the past few years. And AIDS specialist at the All India Institute 
of Medical Sciences, Dr. Pardeep Saith says early denial by the medical 
community and political leaders allowed the epidemic to develop. Many 
doctors initially felt that AIDS was not a disease of India, it was 
a foreign disease. Initially there was no political will in the government 
to control this infection. There was a lot of denial. According to 
Dr. Saith, and other leading physicians attitudes are changing in 
India, but too slowly in the face of the looming epidemic. They say 
there are large numbers of infections and the disease will be difficult 
to contain. The head of the government's national aids control organization, 
Prasad Raul, says mass action can check the spread of the disease. 
The window of opportunity in India is still available, that is the 
method I would like to do. The window of opportunity is available 
and the state, the community, the people, everybody has to take notice 
of it right now, and use this window of opportunity before it is too 
late. Observers say tackling any problem in India, a nation of one 
billion people is an overwhelming task. They warn that unless extensive 
measures are taken immediately, the AIDS epidemic will devastate Indian 
society. Douglas Backshon VOA News, New Delhi. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>