<DOC>
<DOCNO> VOA19981130.0500.2694 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Alaska's sea bird rookeries are often located on remote wind swept 
islands. Getting to them isn't easy. But a museum in Homer, Alaska 
has figured out how to bring the sea birds and an educational experience 
to its visitors. Details from Doug Schneider. Gull Island rises from 
the choppy waters of Catchamack Bay, eight miles from downtown Homer, 
Alaska. Appropriately named, the islands steep cliffs are the nesting 
sight for gulls, mewers puffins and cattiwaites. Hundreds of sea birds 
are already here with more arriving every day. For people though, 
getting to the island isn't always easy. It's often raining and the 
water is sometimes rough. But thanks to cameras remotely controlled 
at Homer's Pratte Museum, visitors can enjoy the island sea birds 
without getting wet or seasick. Betsy Webb is the museum's curator. 
There are two cameras that are up on top of Gull Island, and Camera 
one is one that is just a regular lens, and it pans and tilts and 
zooms. And then the second on is a wide-angle lens, and it also pans. 
And it doesn't zoom though, since it's a wide-angle. The cameras are 
part of a new project called, "Catchamack Bay Discovery". The highly 
interactive exhibit is intended to teach people about sea birds and 
the regions marine ecosystem. At the base of the cliff is yet another 
camera strategically positioned to watch the tide roll in and out. 
Occasionally, the camera even catches a curious sea otter. The third 
camera is under water some of the time. It is at tide line so you 
an see the tide coming in and covering over the camera. And then the 
camera gets really deep in the water. And then it is exposed way above 
tides later on. I really think that one is fantastic. A small transmitter 
set up on Gull Island beams the camera images directly to a receiving 
antennae eight miles away on the Pratte Museum's roof. Inside a specially 
equipped room, project manager Michael O'Meira moves the joystick 
that controls the cameras. It's a great experience. First of all when 
you walk into the Marine Room, we have our video monitors mounted 
high. There is good light but it is subdued light so the video images 
are striking. It's very much as if all of a sudden you are really 
there, you are out on the island. And we have good audio as well. 
So the sound of the sea birds are there, they surround you. Most people 
are immediately drawn to that, of course. And when they realize that 
they can actually move the cameras and select between the cameras, 
oh utterly fascinated. And I have to say that it fascinates me too. 
Move the joy stick side to side, and the camera pans left or right, 
push a button on the top of the joy stick and you zoom in for a closer 
look. Rain obstructing your view, Betsy Webb says that's no problem. 
There's a wiper if it is raining or snowing, and you can push W on 
the computer for wiper and it wipes clean the camera, like a little 
windshield wiper. And it also has a squirter too. The public can do 
the wiper but not the squirter. Watching sea birds come and go from 
the islands would probably be enough for most people but when things 
seem dull on the surface, visitors can switch on a camera hidden deep 
inside a tufted puffin nest. We have a camera buried in a borough, 
and it's an infrared camera. So, we are hoping that borough will be 
occupied this year as it has been in the past. For Arctic Science 
Journeys, this is Doug Schneider. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>