<DOC>
<DOCNO> VOA19981130.1600.2521 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Winning the right to vote is often the first step in empowering women, 
and Nigeria, it's only one of many countries where politicians are 
realizing the importance of wooing women voters. When it comes to 
politics, resources are measured in registered voters, and right now, 
the majority of those voters appear to be women. Titalaio Ajanaku 
is a founder of the National Congress of Nigerian Women Politicians 
and a leading voice in a national effort to get more women involved 
in politics both as voters and as candidates. Mrs. Ajananku says politicians 
who ignore Nigeria's women today are simply blind to the country's 
social, political, and demographic realities. Walk into any bank today. 
You have a lot of women executives. Walk into any company. Walk into 
the hospitals. You have female doctors, you have nurses, you have 
them everywhere, because the government has paid as much money on 
women as much as they paying on men. And that is why we said you can't 
keep us behind because it separate office. Nigeria's military governments 
may have started spending more money on women's education, but the 
fact remains that for all of Nigeria's 38 years of independence, the 
country's political leadership has been an exclusive all-male club. 
Layla Doganyaro is the secretary general of the Northern Women's Association, 
a lobbying group based in the northern city of Kaduna. She says women 
who enter politics face a daunting number of challenges, including 
a lack of money to run campaigns and male-dominated political parties 
which traditionally have not shown much faith in women's abilities 
to lead. Maybe they are afraid of women's capability. They are afraid 
of women's straightforwardness. You know, once people understand that 
women are good managers and good leaders, they may forget, you know, 
giving them leadership. But most of all, I think it's the way they 
have been brought up to think like a woman's place is in the kitchen. 
Mrs. Doganyaro says cultural beliefs about acceptable roles for women 
are perhaps the most difficult challenges to overcome. Mrs. Ajanaku 
says her goal is to see women receive 40 percent of the country's 
leadership posts. That's a goal even some of her female colleagues 
find a bit unrealistic, but even the critics say an effort must be 
made now to make the Nigerian government look more like the population 
it serves. VOA correspondent John Pittman in Abuja, Nigeria. The emerging 
power of women was the topic of today's Dateline. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>