<DOC>
<DOCNO> VOA19981130.0500.1344 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
The creative team that brought you "Toy Story", the first computer 
animated feature film is out with its newest family entertainment. 
This time instead of toys, it's bugs, insects that have the adventure. 
Allen Silverman has a look at the new release from Pixar and Walt 
Disney Pictures, it's "A Bugs Life". A teaming ant colony is the setting 
for "A Bugs Life" and a rough life it is. The ants live in fear of 
marauding grasshoppers. When he accidentally spills the yearly tribute 
of seeds and berries collected for the voracious winged creatures, 
a resourceful ant named Flick come up with a radical idea. We can 
find bigger bugs to come here and fight. Now why didn't I think of 
that? Because it's suicide. Undaunted, Flick sets out from the colony 
to battle the grasshoppers. In the big city, which is actually a trash 
heap outside a rundown mobile home, he finds a group he thinks are 
warrior bugs. Much to Flick's chagrin they turn out to be a broken 
down troop of clowns from of all things a flea circus. What's the 
point of going out there, they'll only laugh at me. That's because 
you're a clown. But the clowns come through and so does Flick to save 
the ant colony, despite narrow escapes from bug eating birds, rain 
and other forces of nature. Dave Folley, a star of the TV show "Newsradio" 
stars as the voice of Flick. It was fun, it was kind of weird to see 
sort of the combination of little bits of my personality and the way 
I move incorporated into the character, and then stuff that is clearly 
created by the animators, that is separate from me. Which of his own 
characteristics does Folley see in the computer-animated ant? My lovely 
blue eyes, my stammer, I saw a lot of my facial expressions that reminded 
me of me. And of course my exoskeleton. The voice cast of "A Bugs 
Life" also includes Kevin Spacey as Hopper, the menacing master of 
the grasshopper hoard. The heroic circus bugs include David Hyde Pierce 
of Frasure fame, Dennis Leary, Bonnie Hunt, and John Ratzenberger. 
Julia Louise Dreyfuss plays the ant colony princess, and as the voice 
of her mother, comic Phyllis Diller is the queen. My dear, I can't 
think of any job I'd rather have than to be queen. It's wonderful, 
and if you've seen the movie, you know that the queen is a cute little 
thing with a cute crown,. Oh it will be fine. It's the same year after 
year. They come, they eat, they leave. That's our lot in life. It's 
not a lot but it's our life. The first Pixar Disney release, "Toy 
Story" featured break through computer animation. With "A Bugs Life" 
the animators take advantage of even newer technologies to give the 
insects and their world a remarkable realism. John Lassitor, the films 
co-director and a co-founder of Pixar insists the story is more important 
than the technology. But Lassiter says the result reflects a philosophy 
that art drives the technology which in turn inspires the art. The 
story drives everything at Pixar, every bit of technical development. 
What does the story require? We come up with ideas. Inevitably we 
always come up with story ideas that is something we can't do. Like 
in "A Bugs Life" the crowds of ants, the rain, the vast complexity 
of the environment. These are things we knew we needed for "A Bugs 
Life" but we didn't know how to do. So, we set out in different R&D 
projects to figure this out. A long the way we see things - like I 
see things that I have never seen before in my life. And it is so 
exciting. Because then these images, and sometimes they are mistakes, 
inspire us in another whole idea, we would have never thought of, 
if we hadn't see that. Technology inspires the art. Randy Newman does 
the music for "A Bugs Life" which is co-directed by John Lassiter 
and Andrew Stanton. Allen Silverman for the Voice of America in Hollywood 
. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>