<DOC>
<DOCNO> APW19981018.0840 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Dismissing Chile's protest over the arrest in London of Gen. Augusto 
Pinochet, a Cabinet minister said Sunday most Britons would find it 
``gut-wrenching'' to give diplomatic immunity to the Chilean former 
dictator. Chanting demonstrators, delighted at the move, gathered 
outside the private clinic in London where the 82-year-old Pinochet 
is presumed still to be a patient. He has been under police guard 
since his arrest Friday _ in response to a Spanish extradition request 
_ for questioning about allegations of murder in the first decade 
after he seized power in 1973. Pinochet has been a regular visitor 
to Britain, generally without publicity. His arrest this time appeared 
partly to reflect a tougher attitude toward right-wing dictators by 
Prime Minister Tony Blair's Labor Party government which replaced 
a Conservative Party administration 18 months ago. ``The idea that 
such a brutal dictator as Pinochet should be claiming diplomatic immunity 
I think for most people in this country would be pretty gut-wrenching 
stuff,'' Trade Secretary Peter Mandelson said in a British Broadcasting 
Corp. television interview. However, Michael Howard, a Conservative 
Party spokesman and former Cabinet minister, said he was concerned 
that Pinochet was arrested because of pressure from Labor lawmakers 
and lobby groups. Cuban President Fidel Castro, attending a meeting 
in Oporto, Portugal, described the arrest as ``universal meddling.'' 
In London, police mounted guard outside a hospital called the London 
Clinic. Pinochet's spokesman in Chile, Fernando Martinez, said Pinochet 
was in hospital when police came to arrest him. He underwent surgery 
Oct. 9 for a spinal disorder. ``Gen. Pinochet has committed crimes 
humanity _ many atrocities, torture, murder,'' Vincete Allegria, an 
exile who fled Pinochet's regime, told reporters outside the clinic. 
Under extradition laws, Spain has 40 days from last Friday to lodge 
a formal request for extradition. The final decision lies with Home 
Secretary Jack Straw. There was no immediate word on when Pinochet 
would be questioned. But police sources, speaking on condition of 
anonymity, said questioning was not expected for a week or two. Relations 
between Britain and Chile immediately soured, with Chile maintaining 
that Britain has violated Pinochet's diplomatic immunity. Home Office 
Minister Alun Michael acknowledged Sunday that Pinochet had entered 
Britain on a diplomatic passport, but added, ``That does no necessarily 
convey diplomatic immunity.'' ``He would have provided evidence of 
coming for medical treatment, and there's no reason for the immigration 
authorities to stop him at that stage,'' Michael said in a BBC radio 
interview. The Foreign Office said only government officials visiting 
on official business and accredited diplomats have diplomatic immunity. 
Chile on Sunday sent an expert on international law to London to argue 
for Pinochet's release. But Chilean Foreign Minister Jose Miguel Insulza 
said the envoy, Santiago Benadava, will advise Pinochet in whatever 
may be necessary, but only with ``diplomatic, not judicial means.'' 
If the British government refuses to honor Chilean claims that Pinochet 
has immunity, then a legal defense may be needed, and that would be 
up to Pinochet's family, Insulza said. Pinochet's son, Augusto, said 
the family would hire ``the best legal team available in London'' 
to secure his father's release. Pinochet, who ruled for 17 years, 
has been widely accused of running a ruthless regime marked by disappearances 
and deaths of political opponents. His arrest was prompted by applications 
last week to question him by two Spanish judges investigating human 
rights violations. One of them, Baltasar Garzon, also wants to question 
Pinochet about the disappearances of Chilean dissidents in Argentina. 
The arrest warrant, however, referred only to questioning about allegations 
that he murdered Spaniards in Chile between 1973 and 1983. In Chile, 
seven Spaniards have been identified as missing or dead under the 
Pinochet regime, including two Catholic priests and a U.N. official. 
According to a Chilean government report, a total of 4,299 political 
opponents died or disappeared during Pinochet's term. Pinochet, commander-in-chief 
of the Chilean army until March, has immunity from prosecution in 
Chile as a senator-for-life, and also under an amnesty covering crimes 
committed before 1978 _ when most of the human rights abuses took 
place. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>