<DOC>
<DOCNO> APW19981018.0237 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
PRISTINA, Yugoslavia (AP) _ NATO spy planes flew over Kosovo and an 
advance team for a 2,000-strong monitoring force arrived, but Serbs 
and ethnic Albanian rebels also blamed each other in new shooting 
attacks. The conflicting events Saturday represented progress and 
setback for last week's agreement that was intended to peacefully 
resolve the conflict in the secessionist province in southern Serbia, 
the dominant republic of Yugoslavia. A NATO attack plan remains on 
standby if Yugoslav President Slobodan Milosevic fails to comply fully 
with the agreement, which calls for him to reduce military forces 
in Kosovo to the levels that existed before his crackdown on ethnic 
Albanian separatists in February. He also must give full access to 
the 2,000 ``compliance verifiers'' and relief agencies trying to help 
scores of thousands of Albanian refugees return to their homes before 
winter sets in. U.S. and NATO officials have reported significant 
pullbacks by Yugoslav forces in recent days but say the number remaining 
exceeds the level required by the agreement reached by Milosevic and 
U.S. envoy Richard Holbrooke. But just a day after NATO gave Milosevic 
10 more days to fulfill his peace pledge, new attacks reported throughout 
the province put new urgency into implementing the agreement. In the 
worst attack, three Serb policemen were found killed after what their 
colleagues said was a grenade attack by the Kosovo Liberation Army 
on the house they occupied along a main Kosovo road in Orlate, 20 
miles (30 kilometers) southwest of the provincial capital of Pristina. 
Two other police officers were seriously wounded, they said. The Serbs' 
bloodied bodies could be seen on the second floor. The Serb Media 
Center in Pristina claimed earlier that KLA ``extremists'' had staged 
more than a dozen attacks on Serb forces since late Friday. The center 
said machine-gun fire, mortars and grenades were used to target Serb 
police and at least two Serbs were reported wounded. Veljko Odalovic, 
the head of Kosovo's regional government, said Sunday, ``These latest 
attacks show that the Albanian terrorists are trying by all possible 
means to prevent the realization of the Milosevic-Holbrooke agreement. 
'' This confirms what the international community has never wanted 
to admit, that these bands of terrorists are not in favor of a peaceful 
solution to the problem and are trying to take advantage of the withdrawal 
of the police and military forces from Kosovo,'' he added. The ethnic 
Albanians blamed the Serbs for at least two of the incidents, saying 
police in the Pristina suburb of Vranjevac had opened fire, hitting 
several Albanian houses and a car. The conflicting claims could not 
be independently confirmed. Many refugees have been afraid to return 
to their homes because of the continuing presence of Serb police forces. 
But aid workers and U.S. officials have reported a steady return in 
the last few days. NATO began an aerial surveillance mission Saturday 
by sending U-2 planes high over Kosovo on a clear, sunny day in the 
southern Balkans. Yugoslavia formally consented to the flights Thursday 
as part the peace agreements. Hundreds of people on both sides have 
been killed during seven months of clashes between Serb forces and 
the KLA. More than 300,000 people, mostly ethnic Albanians, have been 
displaced from their homes. After the first planes had returned, a 
White House official said they found ``clear indications'' Milosevic 
was pulling back at least two of seven force battalions as demanded 
by NATO commander Wesley Clark on Thursday. They also showed improved 
access for humanitarian and relief workers. NATO had given Milosevic 
until Saturday morning to fully comply with international demands, 
but hours before the deadline was to expire, NATO extended it until 
Oct. 27. Clark was to return to Belgrade on Monday to reinforce to 
Yugoslav officials that the threat of attack ``remains alive,'' said 
the White House official, who spoke in Washington on condition of 
anonymity. Eight members of an advance team of specialists arrived 
in the Kosovo capital Pristina Saturday night and 17 more were expected 
later Sunday. American diplomat William Graham Walker was appointed 
Saturday to head the new mission by the Organization for Security 
and Cooperation in Europe. A sizable number of monitors were expected 
to be in place in two weeks. Peter Erben, chief of staff of the OSCE 
mission in Bosnia, who led the first group here said, ``Our only job 
is to set up and prepare for the main group arriving today.'' The 
group will contain various experts in technical matters, security, 
communications and administration. Meanwhile, members of a so-called 
Kosovo Diplomatic Observer Mission were scouting for accommodation 
in the towns of Pec and Prizren to find accommodation for the 2,000 
verification inspectors. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>