<DOC>
<DOCNO> APW19981018.0430 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
JERUSALEM (AP) _ U.S. President Bill Clinton aims to put pressure 
on Israel by threatening to recognize a Palestinian state this spring 
if the two sides don't reach a swift agreement, Israel's army radio 
reported Sunday. The report, citing an unidentified American official, 
said Clinton would use the tactic to try to propel Israel to accept 
a long-sought after deal with the Palestinians, under which Israel 
would withdraw from 13 percent of the West Bank in exchange for security 
guarantees. Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu denied any such pressure 
had been applied so far during the U.S.-hosted talks at a retreat 
on Maryland's Eastern Shore. ``The reports are baseless and that option 
was never discussed in conversations with the prime minister and his 
delegation at Wye Plantation,'' Netanyahu's office said in a statement 
issued in Jerusalem. Diplomatic sources said Sunday that only a partial 
West Bank agreement is likely to emerge from the talks, and completion 
of a full accord would probably take several weeks. Palestinian leader 
Yasser Arafat has said he would declare a Palestinian state unilaterally 
in May 1999, when the interim peace talks between the sides are set 
to expire. Netanyahu has threatened unspecified unilateral steps in 
response that could include annexing chunks of the West Bank. Talks 
at the Maryland retreat of Wye Plantation, in their third day, were 
moving into high gear Sunday with the arrival of Israel's Foreign 
Minister Ariel Sharon and Defense Minister Yitzhak Mordechai. Upon 
their arrival, Netanyahu was convening a special session of his inner 
security cabinet on the grounds of the retreat, Israel radio reported. 
Israel radio also reported that an announcement would be made Sunday 
night by the Americans on whether an agreement has been reached or 
if the summit would be extended until one has been struck. Although 
a press blackout remains in effect, details about the talks continued 
to leak out. Several Israeli press reports painted a picture of a 
frustrated Clinton who told both sides categorically that he intended 
to push an agreement through. ``I've been working on this deal for 
17 months and I'm not prepared to defer it any longer,'' Clinton was 
quoted by the Israeli daily Maariv as having told both Netanyahu and 
Arafat. Wide gaps still remain on security issues, Israeli media have 
reported. The CIA has been helping broker talks between the sides 
on security issues, Maariv said. In addition, Israel radio reported 
that the Palestinians said Israeli negotiators have refused to take 
up three issues: the scope of later West Bank troop withdrawals, the 
release of Palestinian prisoners in Israeli jails, and a commitment 
to halt house demolitions and confiscation of Palestinian property. 
In the Gaza Strip, meanwhile, some 300 relatives of Palestinian prisoners 
being held by Israel held a protest Sunday, chanting slogans and holding 
up pictures of imprisoned family members. They demanded that the release 
of the prisoners be put on the summit agenda. Also Sunday, Salah Taamari, 
a minister without portfolio in the Palestinian Authority said that 
Israel has plans to build four new Jewish settlements in the West 
Bank, army radio said. It said settlers neither confirmed nor denied 
the report. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>