<DOC>
<DOCNO> NBC19981018.1830.0922 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> CAPTION </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
In "focus" this evening, how simple it is for a city to cook the books 
while computing its' crime rate. NBC's Fred Francis reports on Philadelphia's 
decision to face the facts. Americans have applauded a six-year decline 
in crime, but in some cities those numbers may be part crime fiction. 
Owning up to the scam, Philadelphia's top cop says that poor training, 
laziness and sometimes outright dishonesty are behind chronic undereporting 
and the downgrading of crimes. The problem was so bad that the city 
withdrew its crime stats from the FBI files for the last three years. 
Listen, nobody has ever checked this stuff. So it is sloppiness built 
over years and years, and by the way my sense is most police departments 
are like that. In fact, New York, Atlanta and Boca raton, Florida, 
have all been accused of falsifying crime statistics to some degree. 
In Boca raton, one ex-captain downgraded 385 felonies to misdemeanors, 
creating an apparent drop of almost 11% last year. Veteran cop Victor 
deblasis is assigned to set the record straight in philadelphia. We 
took an audit of the entire city for the police commissioner. What 
we did was look at one week in each police station and what we found 
out was an alarming 8% error rate. We found 160 serious crimes not 
reported for one week. That meant that in a year, Philadelphia was 
not reporting over 8,000 serious crimes. Robberies were coded as thefts. 
Burglaries were coded as thefts. Thefts were coded as lost properties, 
missing properties. Even rapes were filed as assaults and assaults 
as simply hospital cases. In fact, using that method, one commander 
reported an 80% drop in serious crime in his area, an astounding work 
until an internal investigation showed he was cooking the books. Philadelphia's 
new police commissioner, John timoney, one of the men crediting with 
revitalizing New York City's police department, ordered a Review on 
every police report filed in the first six months of this year. I'm 
absolutely dead serious because before we can ever begin to address 
crime in a serious fashion, I have to know where it is happening, 
how much is happening, time of day, location, day in the week. You 
got 150 arrests for the month and only reporting 109. So shortchanging 
yourself there. It's a Mammoth job with careers in jeopardy and the 
city's reputation on the line. Philly's crimes stats will likely soar. 
And guess what? I don't care. I know I'll have accurate data that 
I can work with that can help us in our deployment. Positioning cops, 
he says, to prevent crime rather than just react to it. That he promises 
in three to five years will help make Philadelphia the safest city 
in the country, but until then its new stats may make it look like 
one of the most crime ridden. Fred Francis, NBC news, Philadelphia. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>