<DOC>
<DOCNO> NBC19981018.1830.0061 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> CAPTION </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Good evening. We begin tonight in Texas, where heavy rainstorms have 
triggered deadly floods over a 200-mile area from San Antonio to Houston. 
At least ten people are dead. Thousands have been forced from their 
homes. National guard troops are helping with rescues. And forecasters 
tracking the storm say this saturated area will get still more rain. 
The latest now from NBC's Jim Cummins. It is the worst flood in San 
Antonio history -- more than a foot of rain in 36 hours, two feet 
in some places -- turned small creeks into raging rivers, knocking 
out telephone service for 55,000 customers and electricity in 36,000 
homes. Hundreds of people have been rescued from their homes, including 
this woman. My husband's on the roof. Your husband's on the roof? 
They're gonna go back and get him. At least five people were killed 
by the floods in the metropolitan area, most of the victims trapped 
in their cars. James conger escaped from his truck. My truck was covered 
with water. I held it to the floor, kept my foot on the brake, kept 
it revved up. Was doing about two miles per hour down the whole time. 
And water was over my hood the whole time. At one point, the city's 
911 emergency system was knocked out by the high water at a time when 
there were too many emergencies. Throughout the night, families were 
ripped apart by the raging water. Daddy! Daddy! Most were reunited. 
These people in a wedding party had to be rescued from the rehearsal 
dinner at a local church. I'm supposed to get married today at 6:00. 
Many of San Antonio's roads and highways are closed by the flooding. 
Some motorists were caught by surprise. I was coming around the corner, 
and the water caught me right there. In new Braunfels, along the guadalupe 
river, homes and business have been destroyed. And in nearby lavernia, 
Texas, population 500, many people were driven from their homes. All 
the old-timers said it's the worst it's ever been. It's continued 
to rain off and on throughout the day. And already, some people have 
returned home to assess the damage, including ivan romjue, who found 
that the first floor of his home is knee-deep in water. I never thought 
anything like this could be this bad. Romjue is among thousands of 
flood victims in south Texas tonight. We'll make it through. We'll 
be rebuilding. We'll start over. This is just a temporary setback. 
That's all it is. But all the water that fell here yesterday is moving 
down the rivers toward the gulf of Mexico, threatening homes and forcing 
evacuations all the way to Houston, 200 miles away. Jim Cummins, NBC 
news, San Antonio. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>