<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981018.0262 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
In the opening game of the World Series, the San Diego Padres' relief 
corps failed them. In the second game on Sunday night, everything 
else went _ starting pitching, hitting and fielding. But when all 
else fails, a team's defense, especially the defense of a team in 
the World Series, should hold together. That made the Yankees' 9-3 
victory so much more painful for the Padres. The Yankees scored six 
of those runs in the first two innings, three in each, but it was 
entirely possible, the fallacy of the predestined plays aside, that 
the Padres could have survived those innings with no runs having scored 
had their fielders made the plays that were there to make. Under the 
law of predestined plays, as promulgated by Ken Nigro, a former Baltimore 
baseball reporter who is now a consultant to the Padres (though not 
on their defense), a hit or any other kind of play that follows another 
would not necessarily have occurred had the previous play turned out 
differently. For example, if a runner at first base is out trying 
to steal second and the batter then hits a home run, it cannot be 
assumed that had the runner not tried to steal, it would have been 
a two-run home run or that the batter would even have hit a home run. 
So there is no way of knowing if the plays that followed the Padres' 
poor defensive plays would have happened if the poor plays had actually 
been good plays. But the Padres can daydream about the possibility, 
and right now all they can do is dream _ of a World Series championship 
they hardly seem to have a chance of winning. In contrast to the Padres' 
poor defensive play, the Yankees averted an unpleasant beginning for 
Orlando Hernandez because of Paul O'Neill's outstanding defensive 
play. With two runners on and two out in the first inning, O'Neill 
made a running, leaping catch of Wally Joyner's threatening fly ball 
against the right-field fence. Joyner was also the victim of the second-best 
defensive play of the night. In the fourth inning, Chuck Knoblauch, 
the Yankees' second baseman, made a diving stop of Joyner's grounder 
on the grass and threw him out. The Padres, who committed only one 
error in defeating Atlanta in the six-game National League Championship 
Series, provided evidence of the dreadful things that were to come 
for them with the very first batter in the Yankees' lineup. That was 
Knoblauch, and he lofted a foul pop behind home plate. Greg Myers, 
starting as the San Diego catcher for the first time since Sept. 17, 
made a valiant effort, trying to snare the ball as he slid on his 
knees toward and near the stands. Myers' timing was perfect because 
his glove and the ball arrived at the same spot precisely at the same 
time. His ball-hand coordination wasn't perfect, however, because 
the ball popped out of his glove. Nice play, poor execution. Andy 
Ashby, the San Diego starter, proceeded to walk Knoblauch, who then 
stole second before Derek Jeter grounded out. O'Neill followed with 
a grounder to third that could have been the third out had Myers held 
Knoblauch's foul pop. It also could have been the third out had Ken 
Caminiti, the third baseman, thrown the ball accurately to first. 
Caminiti's throw was high, high enough that Joyner couldn't catch 
it, even by jumping. The ball flicked off the top of his glove and 
bounded into foul territory as Knoblauch raced home. Instead of the 
Yankees being out of the inning 1-2-3, they scored three runs for 
a 3-0 lead, the other two coming on successive singles by Chili Davis, 
Tino Martinez and Scott Brosius. The defense rested, but not for long. 
In the second inning, with Ricky Ledee at first on a single, Knoblauch 
hit a grounder wide of third. Caminiti seemed to get a slow jump on 
the ball, then dived for it. But the ball hit his left wrist and continued 
into short left for a single. Jeter then hit a bouncer between second 
baseman Quilvio Veras and second base. Veras had a shot at getting 
the ball, but as he reached for it, it went under his glove for a 
run-scoring single. Ignoring the fallacy of the predestined plays, 
not to mention the predestined batters, who would not have batted 
in the second inning had Ashby had a 1-2-3 first, if Caminiti and 
Veras had made good but makable plays on the two grounders, O'Neill's 
ensuing fly to left would have been the third out and the Padres would 
have escaped the inning without the Yankees scoring. But Knoblauch 
scored on Jeter's hit and Bernie Williams followed O'Neill's fly out 
with a two-run home run. Ashby, who pitched with a sore throat and 
a cold, gave up the hits, seven in the first two innings, 10 altogether 
in his two and two-thirds innings of work. But he would have fared 
far better with better defensive play behind him. Solid defense was 
what the doctor ordered, but the prescription went unfilled. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>