<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981018.0148 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
While film executives raise their eyebrows and ponder the fate of 
``Beloved'' as a high-profile ``race movie,'' let us consider other 
more interesting and honest ways in which it can be seen. This big, 
rich film, based on Toni Morrison's extraordinary novel of the same 
name, has been called ``my `Schindler's List''' by its star and co-producer, 
Oprah Winfrey. Which means that it is a harrowing, fact-based story 
about people who outwit and outlast war, holding out for a future 
that no one intended them to have. ``Schindler's List'' was about 
Germany's war against the Jews. Think of slavery as the American South's 
war against African-Americans, and think of slaves as war veterans 
and survivors who, like prison and concentration camp inmates, have 
to reconstruct their souls as well as their bodies when the war ends. 
But ``Beloved'' is also a women's picture, Hollywood's time-honored 
antidote to the war movie. It is a fierce melodrama (never a derogatory 
word in my book) about a woman cast out by her community _ in this 
case, the newly freed, self-consciously respectable black community 
of Ohio _ for sins committed as a sexual being or a mother. Never 
mind that her deed was noble as well as monstrous. Sethe, played by 
Ms. Winfrey, must work through her destiny of punishment, expiation 
and sacrifice. What a pleasing irony that the only other big Hollywood 
film I can recall that so effectively joins the war drama to the women's 
picture is ``Gone With the Wind.'' We get only brief flashbacks to 
plantation days here (I need hardly say how different the perspective 
is), and we have no Civil War battles. The blacks of this world have 
left their plantations, and Sethe has managed to improve her lot simply 
by acquiring what Scarlett O'Hara deemed the mark of her degradation: 
a piece of property no one else cared for and a subsistence living. 
We have a troubled couple, too: Sethe and Paul D, the brother of her 
long-lost husband, trying to make sense of each other and trying to 
make a life together. But the stars, Ms. Winfrey and Danny Glover, 
look much more like the people we see every day than like the ones 
we usually see in the movies. It has been a long time since filmgoers 
were allowed to be moved watching hard-working middle-aged people 
fall in love and make love. Finally, ``Beloved'' is a multilayered 
ghost story in which the unquiet dead return to claim the living. 
Sethe and her youngest daughter, Denver, live in a haunted house, 
in thrall to the angry ghost of Sethe's dead child. When Paul D moves 
in, the isolated, unhappy Denver grows jealous; so does the ghost, 
for she takes human form, calling herself Beloved. And what does she 
want? Nothing less than Sethe's soul. Black families are rarely viewed 
as prey to the kinds of psychological complexities that have been 
at the center of the West's intellectual history since Freud. But 
here we are in ``Beloved,'' nine years out of slavery, with a full-blown 
Freudian family romance. Children witness the primal scene (their 
mother having sex with a man who is not even their father); daughters 
punish the male intruder with rejection or attempts at seduction; 
sisters compete for their mother's love. And over it all is a past 
that has laid siege to every sanctioned notion of what a family can 
or should be. What emotional burdens _ call them curses _ does someone 
who has endured certain horrors pass on to the next generation? The 
children of survivors are nurtured on their parents' nightmares as 
well as on their love. When ``Beloved'' was first published in 1987, 
some were uncomfortable with its supernatural aspect. But it was a 
brilliant choice. Ghosts embody what is almost past enduring: murder, 
imprisonment, guilt and shame over deeds that cannot be undone. The 
19th century produced some of our greatest ghost stories. And not 
only novels; I am thinking of black folklore, of all those slavery-shaped 
tales in which bloody bones rise up to utter curses and devils stroll 
into backyards to make small talk before the deadly bargain is struck. 
Richard Wright wrote that if Edgar Allan Poe had been black, he would 
not have invented horror, horror would have invented him. In ``Beloved,'' 
the inventor and the invention are as one. The director of ``Beloved,'' 
Jonathan Demme, understands all of these elements, though sometimes 
he staggers under their weight. He works well with actors (don't just 
think of ``Philadelphia'' or ``The Silence of the Lambs,'' think of 
``Melvin and Howard'' and ``Something Wild''), and he has a first-rate 
cast here. Ms. Winfrey is very good as Sethe, who both invents and 
is invented by horror. She projects self-protective sternness, but 
also vulnerability at those moments when Sethe finds herself opening 
up slightly, against her will. As Paul D, Glover is even better. He 
is such an attentive actor, making emotional shifts (from wariness 
to bravado to a wordless melancholy) with unfussy honesty. But it 
is Kimberly Elise as Denver and Thandie Newton as Beloved who give 
the most fascinating performances. Ms. Elise is the moody, isolated 
child in a family where tragedy has sopped up too much parental emotion. 
Born in Ohio, Denver is the one least marked by slavery, the one filled 
with silent yearning for another life. For her, freedom means finding 
a way to live and thrive outside that memory- and mother-haunted house. 
Ms. Elise's work is subtle and nuanced. Ms. Newton's is uncanny and 
amazingly bold. Despite looking like a lovely young woman, her Beloved 
begins human life where she left off when she died: as a voracious 
infant who can barely walk or talk, who smears food all over her face 
and stuffs it into her gaping mouth, who weeps, rages, giggles, demands 
her way, then vomits and goes to sleep if she is thwarted. And she 
rolls her eyes constantly, the way slightly brain-damaged children 
do, but also the way those repellent caricatures of pickaninnies used 
to. She is terrifying to watch. In the end, ``Beloved'' is a powerful 
story of postwar reconciliation. And I certainly hope it will reach 
audiences with at least the force of ``Gone With the Wind.'' The tale 
is every bit as compelling and infinitely more truthful. (How can 
there be reconciliation without truth?) It is also infinitely more 
generous, and in this way reminds me of William Wyler's film about 
World War II veterans and families, ``The Best Years of Our Lives.'' 
(Isn't it interesting that the Civil War feels as close, sometimes 
closer, as World War II?) In Wyler's film, too, the war has ended, 
but the changes it has wrought are everywhere. How do people grapple 
with what they saw and did, with the physical, psychological and spiritual 
damage they suffered? How do they resume a life with their families, 
or put together a family from whomever is left over? And how, between 
the hard cold social and economic facts of life and the subtler but 
no less implacable emotional ones, do they learn to claim the right 
not just to life or liberty but to the pursuit of happiness? 
</TEXT>
</DOC>