<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981018.0142 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Columbus stumbled across it in 1504 but never bothered to come back, 
and later explorers scorned it as a worthless outcropping of rock 
and bird dung. All of a sudden, though, the United States and Haiti 
are squabbling over the status of Navassa, an uninhabited Caribbean 
island barely two miles square that both countries claim as their 
own. The dispute, which Haiti is threatening to take to international 
tribunals, arose after an American scientific expedition authorized 
by the Interior Department spent two weeks on the island this summer. 
The group returned with tales of finding ``biological riches unimagined,'' 
which led Interior Secretary Bruce Babbitt to warn of his intention 
to protect the island from interlopers _ with Coast Guard vessels 
if necessary. ``If you were going to consider a system of protected 
areas, you'd definitely want to include Navassa in the portfolio,'' 
said Michael Smith, leader of the expedition, which was sponsored 
by the Center for Marine Conservation, a Washington-based environmental 
group. ``Navassa has a very special and extremely healthy coral reef,'' 
he added, ``and it is absolutely remarkable how much animal life we 
found there, including new species that are endemic to the island.'' 
The United States has controlled Navassa, just 40 miles off Haiti's 
southwest peninsula, for more than 140 years. But of the 24 constitutions 
Haiti has had since gaining independence from France in 1804, all 
but one of them described La Navase, as the island is called here, 
as an inalienable part of Haitian territory. The basis of the American 
claim is the Guano Islands Act of 1856, which authorized American 
vessels to establish sovereignty on any abandoned or unclaimed island 
that had reserves of the rich fertilizer derived from bird droppings. 
A year later, an American sea captain, Peter Duncan, planted the American 
flag on Navassa, which was followed by several decades of phosphate 
mining and construction of a Coast Guard lighthouse that was abandoned 
only in the 1950s. Today, Navassa ``is unorganized American territory, 
meaning that Congress has never set up or passed any statutes prescribing 
any particular type of administration,'' Babbitt said in a telephone 
interview from Washington. ``In the absence of that, the Interior 
Department is traditionally the place where these matters are dealt 
with.'' Babbitt declined to comment on Haiti's claim to the island, 
referring the matter to the State Department, which has consistently 
claimed American sovereignty for the Island. ``I'm just the head gamekeeper 
around here,'' he said. ``My job is to administer the place and protect 
the coral reefs, and that's what we're doing.'' But he did add that 
he regards Navassa's legal status as no different from that of several 
uninhabited islands in the Pacific that the United States administers, 
including Howland and Midway Islands. But Foreign Minister Fritz Longchamp 
of Haiti rejects the notion that Navassa is American territory of 
any sort. He pointed to the 1697 Treaty of Rijswijk, in which Spain 
gave up sovereignty over Haiti and the adjoining islands to France, 
and dismissed American possession of the island, and some 4,000 square 
miles of seabed around it, as irrelevant under international law. 
``La Navase is Haitian and a part of Haiti,'' he said in an interview 
here. ``If I own something and I make a decision not to use it, that 
does not give you the right to come and claim it because I have not 
been using it. How many islands off the coast of the United States 
are not inhabited? Does that mean anyone can come and claim them too?'' 
Complicating the situation even further, William Warren, a California 
businessman who says he wants to mine Navassa for organic fertilizer, 
has also made an ownership claim. He has filed suit against Babbitt 
and Secretary of State Madeleine Albright, citing a 1905 document 
in which the State Department said it ``possessed no territorial sovereignty'' 
over the island. For weeks now, the Navassa imbroglio has filled news 
broadcasts and talk shows here. At one point last month, the American 
ambassador, Timothy Carney, even suggested that since Haiti has many 
internal problems that need attention, the country's energies might 
be better directed toward resolving those issues, rather than focusing 
on a tiny island that few Haitians other than fishermen have ever 
visited. Since Haiti is the poorest nation in the Western Hemisphere 
and has been without a functioning government for the last 16 months, 
that observation, indelicate though it may have been, seemed self-evident. 
Nevertheless, Haitians have taken umbrage at Carney's remarks and 
begun to spin extravagant fantasies about his motives in pressing 
the American claim to the island. Lafanmi Lavalas, the political party 
organized by former President Jean-Bertrand Aristide, immediately 
condemned the American position and organized a protest late last 
month. Haiti is also awash with rumors that the United States covets 
Navassa because the August expedition discovered gold or uranium there 
or even, according to one version making the rounds here, a gateway 
to Atlantis. Those conjectures are baseless, but ``there is a great 
dollar dividend if we are talking biotechnology'' derived from some 
of the spider and insect species unique to the island, said Ernst 
Wilson, a Haitian oceanographer who has organized La Navase Island 
Defense Group to assert the Haitian claim. ``La Navase is a perfect 
laboratory, and biotechnological and pharmaceutical companies are 
going to want to get into this because there is money there, I know 
it,'' he said. Smith said that in the interests of lowering the political 
temperature, he would be willing to include Haitian scientists like 
Wilson on future visits to the island. His goal, he stressed, is to 
assure that Navassa remains a pristine refuge for animal and plant 
species whose existence is endangered elsewhere in the Caribbean. 
``Science should be an activity that bridges diplomatic problems between 
countries,'' he said. ``As an American organization, we are subject 
to the Supreme Court ruling which says Navassa was properly annexed. 
But whoever ends up with jurisdiction over the island, we would like 
to see them manage it well.'' 
</TEXT>
</DOC>