<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981018.0247 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
This is the time of year in Cortland, N.Y., when leaves turn red and 
gold and signs sprout on front lawns with the names of favored candidates. 
This year's crop offers an instructive guide to the neck-and-neck 
Senate race between the Republican incumbent, Alfonse D'Amato, and 
his Democratic challenger, Rep. Charles Schumer. Neither one appears 
on a single lawn. That may not be unusual, given the adage that all 
politics is local. In Cortland County, a lovely stretch of rolling 
hills and pretty old towns south of Syracuse, the creation of a new 
judgeship has fired a lively race between William Ames and Richard 
Van Donsel, whose names alternate about evenly along the leaf-strewn 
yards. When national politics comes up in conversations, it is almost 
always about President Clinton's problems _ almost always with a dollop 
of sympathy for the president and disdain for his perceived tormentors. 
But if the key to victory in the Senate race lies in upstate communities 
like this, it has not been found yet. D'Amato has the advantage that 
most people here are registered Republicans and know little about 
his opponent, while Schumer has the consolation that Cortland voters 
regularly elect Democrats and do not particularly like what they know 
of the incumbent. Even D'Amato's attempt to fan the old upstate-downstate 
rivalry against Schumer is not generating much heat. From up here, 
D'Amato's hometown, Hempstead, L.I., seems not much closer than Schumer's 
Brooklyn constituency. The Senate race just has not caught on, said 
Bruce Hollenbeck, who runs Hollenbeck Cider Mills on Route 392, just 
east of Virgil. ``Upstate is mostly Republican, so I think D'Amato 
is probably hard to beat here. Schumer, I don't know the guy.'' Hollenbeck's 
friend Sidney Greenberg, a lawyer who said he was ``closer to 87 than 
86,'' said of the race: ``I know Schumer is a good guy, but I can't 
point to anything he's done. D'Amato, in my view, is just another 
politician, and I mean that in the pejorative sense.'' Kenneth DeMunn, 
who owns JTS Lumber Inc., said: ``D'Amato leaves a very bad taste. 
Too much of the buddy system. Schumer looks like a real nice politician, 
but then all politicians do. We don't know what he's for. They both 
talk of good schools, low taxes, but nobody's telling us how.'' While 
D'Amato enjoys considerable name recognition after 18 years in the 
Senate, he must also put up with an image expressed in terms like 
``slippery'' or ``typical politician.'' Schumer is best known here 
as the Democrat who beat Geraldine Ferraro in the primary, and increasingly 
as the brunt of D'Amato's attack advertisements. Both must contend 
with the public's tangible irritation with all politics, brought on 
by the Clinton business. ``I don't like either one of them,'' Irv 
Goodrich, a retired math teacher at Cortland High School, said Sunday. 
``D'Amato has been in there long enough and should be investigated 
for all the stunts he's pulled. I don't know much about Schumer, but 
I don't think his record is that spectacular. He seems like he is 
strictly a metropolitan New York person. I guess I'll be looking for 
the lesser of two evils.'' From the day the campaign began, D'Amato 
has flooded television with ads like the one showing New York City 
Democrats turning into sharks as they swim upstate, and he has hammered 
away at Schumer as a wastrel liberal from Brooklyn. Schumer, who has 
unleashed scathing attacks of his own, branding D'Amato as a liar 
and extremist, has also played up the fact that his father lived in 
Utica as a boy, and that he is at home all over the state. More recently, 
the senator has attacked Schumer for missing votes in Congress, a 
criticism that appears to resonate less here than the upstate-downstate 
divide does. The political schism between the two parts of the state 
dates back at least a century. Robert Spitzer, a professor of politics 
at the State University of New York College at Cortland, said the 
predominantly rural conservative upstaters have traditionally perceived 
New York City and its suburbs as a greedy bastion of liberalism, whose 
profligate welfare programs suck the hard-earned dollars of the northern 
counties. The upstaters have also felt that New Yorkers look on them, 
if at all, as hicks and throwbacks. Above all, there is the sense 
that the small cities and rural hamlets upstate are overshadowed by 
the vast wealth and population of Greater New York. But the old stereotypes 
are coming undone. Despite a majority of registered Republicans, the 
County Legislature here has long been controlled by Democrats, while 
New York is now run by a tough Republican mayor. More important, the 
flow of largess has reversed and is going northward these days, as 
upstate has fallen on hard times while New York City has enjoyed a 
boom. Cortland and its population of 48,000 have been especially hard 
hit, a fact that figures in conversations and in the local paper, 
The Cortland Standard, far more than politics. Unemployment is at 
7.3 percent. Rubbermaid recently pulled out of town, leaving Cortland 
residents grumbling that the company left right after a decade of 
tax breaks expired. Smith Corona, which once employed thousands, has 
all but closed up shop now that nobody needs its typewriters anymore. 
But none of that has fully stilled the upstate-downstate resentments, 
or their invocation in political campaigns. ``Is it effective? Probably 
is, because candidates never pass up a chance to use the argument,'' 
Greenberg said. ``They're always crying that downstate is trying to 
impose its will on upstate.'' But DeMunn was not convinced the theme 
would help D'Amato. ``He's viewed as a New Yorker, too. Hempstead 
is even farther from upstate than Brooklyn,'' he said. ``They're all 
seen here as sharks, as a group of people from New York City out to 
do you harm.'' Even those who do not resent the downstaters see a 
huge divide. Victor Siegle, who owns a software business, JobOrder, 
and heads two regional economic development panels, knows that upstate 
benefits from downstate prosperity. But the differences between the 
regions are so profound, he argued, that the two probably should be 
separated. ``Even though we'd lose money, we'd be better off independent, 
like Puerto Rico,'' he said. ``It's so frustrating to see powerful 
forces run our lives.'' Siegle, who is Jewish, did not see anti-Semitic 
overtones in the ``sharks from Brooklyn'' image. In fact, he said, 
most people are unaware that Schumer is Jewish. Spitzer said: ``The 
split is less pronounced than it was several decades ago, but it's 
still very much a part of New York politics. But if you look at the 
Senate race, D'Amato is under significant handicaps. He's had three 
terms, and the third is traditionally the critical election for U.S. 
senators. There's a general feeling that D'Amato has worn out the 
welcome, a sense that it's time for somebody else. On the other hand, 
Schumer is from downstate, from Brooklyn, and still not that well 
known. His biggest problem is getting known.'' Attacking his opponent 
has always been D'Amato's main campaign weapon, Spitzer said. ``It's 
often said that nastiness turns voters off, but the fact is that negative 
campaigning is effective for the most part,'' he said. ``But of course 
it's a double-edged sword.'' The edge pointed at Schumer was allowing 
D'Amato to shape the challenger's image. So Schumer's most urgent 
task, said Jeff Stonecash, a political science professor at Syracuse 
University, was to start shaping his own identity. ``Schumer is lost 
if the incumbent takes the initiative to identify him.'' The congressman's 
image here is certainly fuzzy. ``There's been so much negative advertising 
that I don't really know what Schumer stands for,'' Fred Jacobs, a 
retired Smith Corona worker, said Sunday. ``D'Amato has been to Cortland 
several times when various companies have been going out of business. 
He supports us even though he hasn't been able to stop company closings.'' 
John Nozynski said he knew what would bring out the vote. ``We'd like 
to see someone represent us who is honorable, even-handed, sensitive 
to our needs, and doesn't just talk on TV,'' he said, expressing a 
nostalgia as poignant and noble as the grand Victorian mansion that 
he maintains as curator of the ``1890 House'' museum on Tompkins Street. 
The house was built by the first magnate of Cortland, Chester Franklin 
Wickwire, whose wire factory once covered many acres. On a trip to 
New York City, Wickwire espied the mansion that James Bailey, of Barnum 
&AMP; Bailey fame, had just built himself, and ordered the architect 
Samuel Burrage Reed to build him a replica in Cortland. It is a stunning 
example of the heyday of Victoriana, and Nozynski has painstakingly 
restored original wall patterns and furniture. Among these relics 
of Cortland's proud roots, Nozynski resisted the notion that upstaters 
would fall for something as crass as a campaign of slurs. ``Please 
don't paint us as people who would fall for that,'' he said. ``I think 
there's more to the minds of New Yorkers than something as glib as 
that.'' 
</TEXT>
</DOC>