<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981018.0172 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
As the Colombian government prepared for peace talks with rebels to 
try to end three decades of civil violence, an explosion believed 
to be the work of rebels hit the country's most important oil pipeline 
early Sunday, killing at least 25 people and wounding scores more. 
Police officials attributed the attack, on the Ocensa pipeline in 
northern Antioquia province, to the National Liberation Army, the 
country's second-largest rebel group. Its leaders were given a furlough 
from prison just a week ago to open peace talks with business and 
civic leaders. British Petroleum and the Colombian state oil company 
Ecopetrol are majority owners of the pipeline, which exploded shortly 
after 2 a.m. near the village of Machuca. The blast set fire to the 
village, where most of those killed were sleeping. Throughout the 
day, rescue workers flew to the region in helicopters to collect the 
dead and wounded. ``We have reports of 25 dead and 65 injured,'' Guillermo 
Leon Franco, director of the Antioquia health department, told Reuters 
news service. The pipeline carries 350,000 barrels a day of crude 
oil from Colombia's largest oil operation, British Petroleum's Cusiana-Cupiagua 
complex, and the explosion froze pipeline operations. The attack occurred 
near the town of Segovia, in a region where right-wing paramilitary 
groups have grown in tandem with a heightened army presence to protect 
oil operations from rebel activity. Alfredo Rangel, a former national 
security adviser to the government, said the attack seemed to be a 
sign from the rebels that ``they still have a presence in the region.'' 
Pipeline attacks have been a frequent source of income for the rebel 
group, which collects kickbacks from contractors hired to repair the 
damage. Several leaders of the Oil Workers Union are facing criminal 
charges for colluding in pipeline bombings. But until now, the main 
target of such attacks had been the Cano-Limon-Covenas pipeline, run 
by Occidental Petroleum. The rebels bombed the that pipeline 61 times 
this year and 64 times last year. Last year, 30 soldiers were killed 
and more than 15 wounded during guerrilla attacks on Occidental's 
pipeline and installations. Recently, attacks on the wellheads have 
become more frequent, a sign of the growing boldness of the rebels. 
By Sunday night, however, the rebel group had not come forward to 
claim responsibility. A commander of the group said through intermediaries 
that he could not reach the leaders at the front for confirmation, 
but he believed that members of his organization had carried out the 
attack. Like other oil companies working in Colombia, British Petroleum 
pays the government for military protection. Two years ago, the company 
acknowledged paying $33 million for a three-year protection contract. 
But the company has come under attack for alleged excesses by the 
army units. A newspaper investigation published over the weekend in 
The Guardian in Britain and El Espectador in Bogota said a British 
Petroleum security chief had helped arm and finance an army brigade 
implicated in death squad massacres in the 1980s. The man was dismissed 
after questions were raised, and the company has declined to comment. 
In recent days, the country's new president, Andres Pastrana, has 
given recognition as political movements to the National Liberation 
Army, believed to have 5,000 members under arms, and to the larger 
rebel group, the Revolutionary Armed Forces of Colombia, with an estimated 
15,000 combatants. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>