<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981018.0168 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
In the Midwest or South, 79 points and 985 yards of total offense 
usually mean that Ohio State or Florida has rolled over some hapless 
nonconference opponent. Out West, it gets you UCLA out-high-wiring 
Oregon in overtime Saturday night, 41-38, in the most thrilling game 
of the season thus far. Theirs was only the headline act of a weekend 
in which poll watching and Heisman Trophy handicapping finally lost 
out to good old, mystifying fun. How to explain Temple, without a 
victory entering the game, upsetting unbeaten Virginia Tech, 28-24, 
behind a freshman quarterback who was making his first start? Or Tulane 
running its record to 5-0 against Louisville in a game in which the 
teams' quarterbacks combined for 750 passing yards? Even top-ranked 
Ohio State _ which along with Kansas State leads the nation in winning-but-joyless 
football _ got a little crazy. Woody Hayes' three yards and a cloud 
of dust gave way to Joe Germaine throwing 39 times for 339 yards in 
a 45-15 pasting of Minnesota. But breathless good times and highlight-reel 
finishes have been the norm here on the left edge of the nation. Unfortunately, 
on the East Coast only insomniacs have been able to see two of the 
best finishes of this college season, both of which occurred at night 
on the West Coast. In the opening week, it was Washington's Brock 
Huard who tossed a 63-yard touchdown pass on fourth-and-17 in the 
final seconds to beat Arizona State. Two weeks ago, the Huskies had 
their hearts broken when Arizona quarterback Ortege Jenkins executed 
a full somersault over two defenders and landed on his feet in the 
end zone in the closing seconds to give the Wildcats a victory. At 
least the Bruins-Ducks game on Saturday started at 3:30 p.m. New York 
time _ though ABC Sports, sticking to its regional format, did not 
broadcast the fun nationally. What those Easterners who were without 
pay-per-view or didn't buy the game missed was seeing UCLA looking 
like a blockbuster team and quarterback Cade McNown looking like a 
Heisman-caliber star in building a 24-7 first-half lead. Then McNown 
threw two interceptions and threw up, literally, at midfield of the 
Rose Bowl, and the Ducks took a fourth-quarter, 31-24 lead. All that 
was a buildup to the final 2 minutes 40 seconds of regulation, which 
saw UCLA score twice and Oregon once. In that span, Oregon fumbled, 
McNown threw a 60-yard touchdown pass and the Ducks' Akili Smith answered 
with a 65-yard touchdown drive. Smith capped it with a 2-yard scoring 
toss. But the Bruins weren't done. McNown threw a 53-yard pass to 
the 3-yard line that was caught by his backup Drew Bennett, who was 
put in the game at receiver because he could jump. Then UCLA missed 
a field goal on the final play of regulation. Oh yeah, and then overtime. 
``We have a lot of fun, don't we?'' the Bruins' Danny Farmer said 
with a smile. Farmer caught two touchdown passes from McNown _ including 
the 60-yarder _ and already has a national championship: in volleyball, 
as a middle blocker for UCLA. ``You know, we don't get the recognition 
we deserve,'' Farmer said. ``But it's good ball out here.'' It is 
indeed. In the last 10 Rose Bowls, in which the Big Ten champions 
hold a 6-4 edge over the Pacific 10 champions, all have been competitive, 
with the exception of Washington's 34-14 victory over Michigan in 
1992. Better, because of the region's isolation from the rest of the 
country's news media outlets, there's a looser, more _ well, collegiate 
spirit to football here. UCLA coach Bob Toledo spoke with relish before 
the game about ``lights in the scoreboard burning out.'' When they 
did, and he escaped with the victory despite his team's sloppy play 
as well as his own bad decision that could have cost him the game, 
he was smiling and exuded utter rapture. When asked why he didn't 
call one of his three remaining timeouts to allow his kicker time 
to set up for the 21-yarder that ended regulation, he said with a 
smile: ``I was tired. I wanted the game to end.'' Instead, Chris Sailer 
hurried his boot and missed left. Compare Toledo's response to Steve 
Spurrier's lament after Florida eked out a 16-10 victory over Alabama 
recently: ``The Gators don't play like champions anymore.'' Or the 
increasingly dour demeanor of Ohio State's John Cooper despite guiding 
the nation's most dominant team. Out West, no one feels the weight 
of the polls. The same isn't true, however, of the Heisman race. A 
sad byproduct of the hype surrounding the trophy is that the nation's 
two best candidate's are convinced that they don't have a shot at 
it. They are also hurt that their campaigns have sparked negative 
comments. Texas' Ricky Williams needs 703 yards, or an average of 
140.6 in his remaining five games, to break Tony Dorsett's NCAA career 
rushing record. He is the best running back in the nation and an even 
worthier recipient off the field. Last week, for example, he wore 
No. 37 _ Doak Walker's number _ against Oklahoma at the Cotton Bowl. 
It was a tribute to Walker, the former Heisman winner, who had befriended 
Williams before his recent death. Williams believes the Heisman goes 
to the best player on the best team and has prepared himself to be 
snubbed because Texas (4-2) is rebuilding and has not been on television 
very much. The other Western candidate, of course, is McNown. Before 
his 395-yard, three-touchdown day against Oregon, the Bruin quarterback 
had been written off because he hadn't put up gaudy numbers. Despite 
leading his team to the nation's longest winning streak, 15 games 
_ and the No. 2 ranking by The New York Times computer and in The 
Associated Press poll _ he was lampooned in the school paper as McNone. 
He put himself back in the race with his game against Oregon, but 
he doesn't seem to care anymore. Engaging and competitive, McNown 
has tired of the second-guessing and dismisses the Heisman race as 
``silly talk.'' Still pale from a stomach virus after the game, but 
wearing a smile as glowing as his red hair, he spoke joyously of the 
Bruins' comeback and the wide-open finish. No poll, no Heisman talk. 
The best thing about it was that McNown acted as if he didn't care 
whether anyone was watching at all. Either way, he had big fun. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>