<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981018.0094 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Our meeting was set for noon, but it was after 1 and I was lost. I 
knew he lived in this little seaside village, but I couldn't find 
him. So I called from a gas station. ``I'll come along to fetch you,'' 
he said. ``I'll be in a Deux Chevaux. You can follow me back.'' I 
was nervous. He was, I knew, 83 and by all reports quite fragile. 
He was known to detest interviews, and most interviewers, and he'd 
agreed only reluctantly to see me. Soon the ancient car appeared, 
maneuvering adroitly around the tourists wandering in the narrow street. 
He stopped, thrust out a hand by way of greeting, smiled and said, 
``Come along, then; it's not far.'' And so I met Patrick O'Brian, 
the celebrated British-Irish author of the Aubrey-Maturin novels about 
the British Navy during the Napoleonic Wars, books that have been 
called both literary tours de force and some of the best sea adventures 
ever written. His latest, ``The Hundred Days,'' 19th in the series, 
was about to be published, and I'd flown down from Paris to see him. 
O'Brian's town is on the Mediterranean near the Spanish border. Once 
a quiet fishing village, it's now a tourist destination. ``Must you 
use the name?'' he asked. ``It seems like everyone who's read the 
books wants to come. Thank God the townspeople protect me. When someone 
asks for me, they shrug and shake their heads, or they say: `He's 
not here. He's gone away.''' Patrick O'Brian was not what I'd been 
led to expect, which was a testy old party who dwelt in the past, 
with a bookworm's pallor and a disdain for the workaday modern world. 
He is shy but hardly withdrawn. He is, after all, a storyteller. He 
is polite, almost courtly, and his color, if not quite brown, befits 
a man who has sailed all his life and lived half a century on the 
Mediterranean littoral. His face is lined, but his eyes are bright 
and his gaze piercing. He could be 20 years younger than he is. Alone 
at his desk, he may dwell in the 18th century, but literary fame and 
no small amount of money have shown him that the end of this century 
has its sweet moments, too. Particularly sweet for a writer who had 
to wait until his 60s for fame to find him. By now, the outlines of 
O'Brian's literary career are fairly well known. After more than 20 
years of middling success as a novelist, short story writer and translator, 
he was induced by his publisher to write a novel about the British 
navy in the Napoleonic Wars. ``Master and Commander'' appeared in 
1969. It was the first of his books to feature Jack Aubrey, a British 
naval officer, and Stephen Maturin, an Irish-Catalan physician, naturalist 
and spy who was Jack's friend and constant shipmate. Eighteen novels 
about the pair have followed, with the most recent, ``The Hundred 
Days,'' published in September. The 20th is already well under way. 
``Master and Commander'' had a modest success in England and Ireland, 
and a dozen more books in the series were produced over the next decade. 
But it wasn't until 1989, when Starling Lawrence, now his American 
editor, read one of the books, ``The Reverse of the Medal'' (No. 11), 
on a flight from London to New York, and Lawrence's company, W.W. 
Norton, began to publish the books in the United States that they 
were taken up by serious critics. Within two years, 400,000 had been 
sold in the United States. In all, more than 2 million copies of the 
Aubrey-Maturin novels have been sold. O'Brian has been compared to 
Melville and Conrad, even to Proust. Iris Murdoch, the English novelist 
and scholar, was one of his first champions, and his fans include 
Eudora Welty and Tom Stoppard. The Aubrey-Maturin series has been 
said to rival the sequential novels of Trollope and Anthony Powell. 
O'Brian is particularly pleased when he is compared to Jane Austen, 
whom he reveres as the finest of all English novelists. First editions 
of most of her novels share shelf space in his small library here 
with first editions of Gibbon and Dr. Johnson and a battered but still 
useful 1810 edition of the Encyclopaedia Britannica. The second book 
of the series, ``Post Captain,'' set mostly in country houses and 
as much a novel of manners as a sea story, has been said to be O'Brian's 
homage to Ms. Austen. Patrick O'Brian was born in Galway in 1914 and 
grew up in genteel but often straitened circumstances. A sickly child, 
he was educated mostly at home, reading widely and deeply. Eventually 
he mastered French, Italian, Spanish and Catalan. He knows some Irish 
and reads easily in Latin. Thanks to friends with boats, he was acquainted 
with the sea from childhood. Like his creation, Stephen Maturin, he 
is a passionate naturalist and even now tries to arrange his book 
tours so as to spend time in museums or in the field, observing birds 
and animals. An avid amateur astronomer, he spends hours with his 
treasured telescope watching the night sky, much as Aubrey and his 
officers do at sea in the novels. After World War II, in which he 
was an ambulance driver in London and later served in a still unspecified 
branch of military intelligence, O'Brian and his wife, Mary, moved 
to Wales. Wales is beautiful; it can also be grim. ``Dear people, 
splendid mountains, but a terrible climate,'' he said. France beckoned. 
It would be easier, they decided, to be poor in a warm climate, so 
in 1949, they came to Roussillon. ``It was an anxious, hungry time,'' 
he recalled, ``yet we were upon the whole extraordinarily happy.'' 
The sea was close at hand, the mountains loomed over the village and 
just behind the house _ a cottage, really _ was a vineyard. Tourism 
has changed the face of the Roussillon coast forever; the streets 
are jammed with cars and tour buses, parking is impossible and tacky 
new houses are defacing the land. But the little O'Brian vineyard 
remains. Almost as proud of his wines as he is of his prose, he offered 
me two glasses at lunch. ``This one is the wine of the year,'' he 
said, ``and this one is five years old.'' Both were attractive red 
wines, and the 83-year-old wine-maker was obviously pleased to hear 
someone say so. ``For years, I made the wine myself,'' O'Brian said. 
``But last year, I fell from a ladder reaching for a book on a high 
shelf. I crushed two vertebrae, and now I have to have a young man 
help me with the wine.'' The one-bedroom O'Brian house, with its red-tile 
roof and inner patio, is as Spanish as it is French, which is appropriate 
in a Catalan town. Nearby Perpignan was the capital of Catalonia until 
the 15th century. O'Brian writes until lunch time in a long, cool 
room under the house that is more cave than basement. After lunch, 
he returns to his writing table until tea time, 4:30. Only then will 
he take telephone calls. If the writing is going well, he may return 
to his manuscript. He writes in longhand, as did all his 18th-century 
literary heroes, then has the manuscript typed for editing. In fact, 
little editing is needed. Older manuscripts show whole pages with 
hardly a phrase or a word crossed out. O'Brian lives alone. His wife, 
whom he met in London during the war, was his editor and typist most 
of her life. She died this year. With a smile, he waves away any further 
inquiries into his private life. He does admit to ``several children 
and six grandchildren'' of whom he is is immensely proud. Success 
has changed O'Brian's life considerably. In France, he lives cut off 
from most things British and Irish, but his frequent book trips have 
taken him abroad regularly. Besides his quaint Deux Chevaux Citroen, 
he has a modern, powerful Renault, which takes him to the Perpignan 
airport at Rivesaltes for the flight to Paris. After a night at the 
Travelers Club on the Champs-Elysees, he takes the Eurostar train 
to London, where he slips happily back into the 18th century at his 
club, Brooks'. There too he revels in the past. ``I remember having 
Charlton Heston to dinner there,'' he said, ``and telling him that 
the chafing dish we were served from was a gift to the club from the 
Elder Pitt.'' A friend and admirer for many years, Heston contributed 
an essay to a critical appreciation and bibliography of O'Brian's 
work published in 1994. The success of the Aubrey-Maturin novels has 
made an authentic cult figure of O'Brian. Fans besiege him on book 
tours and discuss him and his fictional characters at length on the 
Internet. One popular Web site is called the Gunroom, the name for 
the officer's wardroom in a man-of-war of the time (the Patrick O'Brian 
page at www.wwnorton.com). There is also an armamentarium of associated 
material, including an atlas and geographical guide to the novels 
called ``Harbors and High Seas,'' a lexicon and literary companion 
to the books called ``A Sea of Words,'' now in its second edition, 
and a cookbook, ``Lobscouse and Spotted Dog,'' based on what Jack 
Aubrey and Steven Maturin and their shipmates ate ashore and at sea 
(including rats). Aubrey and Maturin are also amateur musicians, violinist 
and cellist, respectively, and so two CD's of the music they play 
aboard ship have been recorded by the Philharmonia Virtuosi. O'Brian's 
pre-Aubrey novel of the sea, ``The Golden Ocean,'' has been reissued, 
as well as his 1976 biography of Picasso and two volumes of short 
stories. Some critics have suggested that the more recent novels in 
the Aubrey-Maturin series are not of the same quality as the earlier 
ones. Indeed, the wars are over and, with ``The Hundred Days,'' Napoleon 
is vanquished forever. Because he never expected the series to go 
on as long as it has, O'Brian has had to make occasional creative 
adjustments to their chronology. But the second and third decades 
of the 19th century saw the wars of liberation in Latin America, and 
impeccable sources in Naval Intelligence indicate that Jack Aubrey, 
now Admiral Aubrey, will be on the quarterdeck, his friend Dr. Maturin 
at his side, for many voyages to come. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>