<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981018.0183 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Newly confident after a meeting with Prime Minister Yevgeny Primakov 
in Moscow (at which that longtime KGB Arabist offered ``unconditional 
support for Palestinian peace efforts''), Yasser Arafat took much 
of the zip out of President Clinton's pre-election October surprise. 
The deal for an agreement to move into final-stage negotiations was 
seemingly all set. The Israelis had agreed to give up an additional 
13 percent of West Bank territory as the final territorial inducement 
to start the endgame. Moreover, Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu 
had named as his foreign minister the redoubtable Ariel Sharon, a 
figure trusted by Israelis to protect their security and trusted by 
many Palestinians as a forthright adversary who can deliver what he 
promises. (On reassuring the right, ``only'' de Gaulle; only Nixon; 
only Sharon.) Sharon's visit to King Hussein in the Mayo Clinic was 
a symbol of the mutual respect of lifelong foes. Needed from Arafat 
was tangible evidence of his promises to shut down terrorism on a 
specific timetable, as well as to revise his ``covenant'' to destroy 
Israel by vote of the Palestinian National Council. He had already 
agreed to these in the Hebron accords nearly two years ago. The PLO 
was now selling these promises for the second time, but too many suspected 
terrorist murderers are serving in the Palestinian police force. This 
time Israel required proof of compliance. President Clinton thought 
he had Arafat on board as this month began. With a total of 40 percent 
of the West Bank now in hand, Palestinians _ Clinton was assured _ 
would be set to end the impasse. Arafat would agree to demonstrate 
how they would carry out old promises, thereby to move to the final 
phase of the long negotiation: the grand agreement about more land, 
borders, arms limitation, water, sovereignty and capitals. But something 
happened on the way to the Wye Plantation in eastern Maryland. Chairman 
Arafat dug in his heels. The first inkling came in the selection of 
the site. Why Wye? Clinton, naturally, wanted Camp David, with its 
resonances of Begin-Sadat-Carter. Netanyahu had agreed to head for 
that famous Catoctin Mountain retreat. But Arafat declined; a generation 
ago, the PLO had condemned Sadat's courageous peacemaking as a sellout 
of the Arab jihad. Instead of heading north to Camp David, the leaders 
headed east to the less rustic and meaningful Wye Plantation. What 
turned Arafat away from a deal last weekend? I can't read his mind, 
but two logical answers: First, the Primakov pitch. As these negotiations 
began in Madrid, the PLO support was collapsing. The Soviet Union 
was coming apart; Iraq was defeated by the allies; and Iran was still 
bleeding from its disastrous war with Iraq. But less than a decade 
later, the strategic balance is shifting: Financially ailing Russia 
remains a nuclear power; Iraq has worn down the United Nations; and 
Iran's Shabad-4 missile and its Russian nuclear know-how threaten 
the Middle East and Europe. Second, the Clintonites are good at stage-managing 
agreements but demonstrably weak when it comes to enforcing them. 
Neither Milosevic in the Balkans nor Saddam in the Persian Gulf is 
in compliance with deals Clinton brokered or multilateraled. Arafat 
can ask: Why should the PLO alone be burdened with the ignominy of 
compliance? West Bank land is sand in the hand and cannot be taken 
back; but promises about terror can be rescinded when their American 
guarantor becomes distracted. The Wye meeting will not be allowed 
to fail; diplomacy does not admit of public flops. Clinton can facilitate 
some narrowing of differences, and Al Gore's presence suggests some 
progress is built in. Soon enough, with forced smiles and hedging 
about much remaining to be done, the leaders are likely to announce 
an advance toward an agreement to move to final-stage talks. The sign 
of Israeli seriousness is Netanyahu's turn to Sharon, whose eyes light 
up when he sees a map. As warrior and politician, he knows every inch 
of his revered Judea and Samaria, what can be given up and what must 
be held. The sign of Palestinian seriousness will be a willingness 
to comply with past agreements, which Arafat will do only if he must. 
Then _ with Clinton or Gore presiding _ on to the final deal, which 
is not beyond the reach of realists. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>