<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981018.0191 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
McKesson Corp., the nation's largest drug distributor, said late Sunday 
that it would buy HBO &AMP; Co., the nation's largest supplier of 
computerized patient-monitoring systems in a stock swap valued at 
about $14 billion. McKesson HBOC, as the company will be called, expects 
to be the nation's leading health care services company when the deal 
is completed next spring. It will supply drugs and services to 5,000 
hospitals, 25,000 retail pharmacies, 10,000 extended-care sites and 
35,000 physicians' groups. The two companies had tried to reach a 
merger agreement this summer, but the deal fell apart when word leaked 
out and HBO's shares fell sharply. Since then, both had made other 
deals in the rapidly consolidating drug industry, including HBO's 
announcement last month that it would acquire Access Health Inc. in 
a $1 billion stock swap that would extend its reach into patient-management 
systems for insurers and managed care companies. Mark Pulido, the 
president and chief executive of McKesson, said the two companies 
resumed bargaining after customers kept urging them to combine. The 
two companies had tried to reach a merger agreement this summer, but 
the deal fell apart when word leaked out and HBO's shares fell sharply. 
Since then, both had made other deals in the rapidly consolidating 
drug industry, including HBO's announcement late last month that it 
would acquire Access Health Inc. in a stock swap that would extend 
its reach into patient-management systems for health insurers and 
managed-care companies. Such systems help insurers decide whether 
to authorize hospitalization for patients and provide telephone counseling 
for patients. Pulido said the two companies went back to the bargaining 
table after customers kept urging them to combine. The deal will give 
stockholders of HBO, based in Atlanta, 0.37 share of McKesson for 
each of their shares. McKesson is based in San Francisco. The price 
represents an 11 percent premium over HBO's closing price of 29 9/16 
Friday. McKesson, based in San Francisco, expects the deal to begin 
adding to earnings in its first year because of an estimated $75 million 
gain from what it described as `synergies and cross-selling opportunities. 
HBO has 350 employees selling to hospitals compared to just 50 for 
McKesson while McKesson's 550 strong sales force calling on physicians 
dwarfs HBO's group of 50. ``There's low hanging fruit,'' said Pulido 
of the opportunities to sell each other's products and services. Pulido 
will be chief executive of the merged company. Charles McCall, now 
chairman, chief executive and president of HBO, will become chairman. 
The deal came shortly after McKesson's major rival, Cardinal Health 
Inc., had diversified by acquiring Allegiance Corp., a major distributor 
of hospital supplies. Both Cardinal and McKesson had announced deals 
this year to acquire other large drug distributors only to have those 
plans scuttled by federal antitrust regulators. Cardinal wanted to 
acquire Bergen Brunswig, and McKesson, a smaller rival called AmeriSource 
Health, but the Federal Trade Commission was worried that consumers 
would be hurt by having just two companies control 80 percent of drug 
distribution. McKesson is far larger than HBO, with $19.7 billion 
in revenues in the twelve months ending Sept. 30 compared with $1.46 
billion for HBO. But HBO has been growing faster and far more profitable. 
McKesson traces its history to a Manhattan drugstore opened in 1833 
by John McKesson. In addition to distributing drugs, McKesson distributes 
robotic drug handling systems and management services to pharmacies. 
It became the nation's largest distributor of surgical supplies last 
year by acquiring General Medical for $775 million. Its McKesson Water 
Products subsidiary, which owns the Alhambra and Crystal brands, is 
the third largest marketer of bottled water behind Nestle and Suntory. 
HBO was founded in 1974 as the outgrowth of an attempt by a group 
of hospitals in central Illinois to develop a shared patient accounting 
system. Its name reflects those of its founders, Walter Huff, Bruce 
Barrington and Richard Owens. Pulido said the new company would be 
able to help customers reduce $180 billion spent annually on administrative 
costs and save $330 billion by avoiding inappropriate care to patients 
because of inadequate information about their status or unavailability 
of the most appropriate treatment. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>