<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981018.0201 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
They are cousins with the same name, Liborio Bellomo, the same nickname, 
Barney, and, law enforcement authorities say, the same occupation: 
mobster. But Liborio Salvatore Bellomo, 41, insists that he has been 
subjected to horrendous prison conditions and wrongly entangled in 
a New Jersey Mafia investigation because of an identification mixup 
with his cousin, Liborio Thomas Bellomo. Strangely enough, Liborio 
T. Bellomo, 39, agreed in an affidavit that New Jersey investigators 
had the wrong Bellomo and should be focusing on him, not his cousin. 
The complaining cousin, Liborio S. Bellomo, was described by the FBI 
as the acting boss of the Genovese crime family when he pleaded guilty 
in 1997 to federal extortion charges in Manhattan and was sentenced 
to 10 years in prison. In April, the New Jersey attorney general's 
office got a court order transferring Bellomo from the Federal Penitentiary 
in Atlanta to the Mercer County Jail in Trenton. The reason, New Jersey 
prosecutors said, was that his name surfaced in an extortion plot 
and they wanted him to appear before a grand jury. Bellomo refused 
to testify. In July his lawyer, Anthony Mautone, sought a court order 
to return Bellomo to federal custody, contending that the prison transfer 
violated Bellomo's constitutional rights and that the authorities 
had ``erroneously confused'' the identities of the cousins. Moreover, 
Mautone asserted that the imprisoned Bellomo was confined under severe 
security conditions in an overcrowded cell for 22 to 23 hours a day. 
Bellomo, the lawyer said, wanted to be returned to more pleasant surroundings 
at a federal prison where he had recreational and work privileges. 
There are ample reasons to confuse the two Bellomos. Their fathers 
are brothers and their mothers are sisters. Liborio S. Bellomo, who 
before his conviction had homes in Pelham Manor, N.Y., and in Bal 
Harbor, Fla., was listed by prosecutors and investigators as a high-ranking 
capo, or captain, in the Genovese crime family. He is known in the 
underworld as Barney and Big Barney, and he is the Bellomo who is 
now serving a prison term. Liborio T. Bellomo has been identified 
by federal and state authorities as a member of the Genovese crime 
group who lives in Bayside, Queens, but who is suspected of being 
connected to Genovese activities in northern New Jersey. According 
to court records, his nicknames are Barney and Benny. He has a federal 
criminal record, according to court papers. He is free and there are 
no current charges against him. ``There have been numerous occasions 
in the past,'' Liborio T. Bellomo said in an affidavit filed in June, 
``when mistakes were made and people would incorrectly attribute to 
me things that were meant for my cousin, or they would attribute to 
my cousin, things meant for me.'' He noted that federal authorities 
in previous criminal cases had tangled the backgrounds of the cousins. 
In seeking Liborio S. Bellomo's testimony, Robert Codey, a New Jersey 
assistant attorney general, in court papers and in oral arguments, 
said Bellomo's name had arisen in a racketeering investigation of 
Daniel Provenzano of Upper Saddle River, N.J. Provenzano, 35, is the 
nephew of Anthony Provenzano, a New Jersey teamster official accused 
of being a Genovese capo, who died in 1988 while serving a federal 
prison term for racketeering. Daniel Provenzano, who the authorities 
said was a Genovese associate, was arrested in June 1997 on charges 
of trying to extort $100,000 from the owner of an insurance brokerage 
firm in Franklin Lakes, N.J. The firm's owner, Jeffrey Pumilia, had 
cooperated with the authorities, who secretly recorded on videotape 
a meeting Provenzano had with Pumilia and his wife, Anna, in the Pumilia 
home on May 30, 1997. Provenzano, according to prosecutors, identified 
Liborio Bellomo as the head of the Genovese crime family, referring 
to him on tape as Barney, and said that Pumilia would be killed unless 
he turned over $100,000 to the Genovese family. In a transcript of 
the conversation, Provenzano is quoted as saying: ``With Barney's 
reputation, you got to realize something. The guy is a stone cold 
killer, OK?'' In his court arguments, Mautone, the lawyer for Liborio 
S. Bellomo, maintained that his client had never met or spoken with 
Provenzano and that any possible references by Provenzano concerned 
his cousin, Liborio T. Bellomo. At the time of the 1997 meeting, Liborio 
T. Bellomo worked for a company partly owned by Provenzano and, in 
a court deposition, Liborio T. Bellomo said he had met Pumilia. Mautone 
also said in court that Liborio S. Bellomo had been held without bail 
in a Manhattan prison awaiting trial on unrelated charges at the time 
of the undercover investigation of Provenzano. ``They used a ruse 
to get him to New Jersey,'' Mautone said in an interview on Friday, 
referring to Liborio S. Bellomo. ``They know he had nothing to do 
with the investigation and what they really want is to rehash all 
that stuff from New York about his being the alleged boss of the Genovese 
family.'' Codey, the lead prosecutor in the Provenzano inquiry, said 
in court papers that prosecutors were aware of the different roles 
of the Bellomo cousins and had not confused their identities. Investigators, 
he added, have information that Provenzano knew Liborio S. Bellomo 
and had met with him. After a hearing on Friday, Judge Mary Cooper 
of U.S. District Court in Trenton indicated that she would rule this 
week on Liborio S. Bellomo's bid to return to his prison cell in Atlanta. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>