<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981018.0206 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Despite more than 20 hours of personal engagement by President Clinton, 
talks with Israeli and Palestinian leaders on an interim peace accord 
will continue past their original deadline and into Monday, U.S. officials 
announced Sunday evening. ``The work is continuing at a good pace,'' 
said State Department Spokesman James Rubin. ``There is a serious 
effort being made, and the meetings today and our overall mood and 
the atmosphere justifies almost certainly continuing these meetings 
tomorrow.'' Clinton's spokesman, Joe Lockhart, said: ``We believe 
it's in the best interests of the peace process to continue the discussions.'' 
U.S. officials did not try to put a gloss on the extension, citing 
the detailed nature of the problems to be worked out and the continuing 
lack of trust among the parties. One senior administration official 
said extension was not failure, and success was still possible. It 
was not immediately clear whether Clinton would return on Monday to 
the Wye Conference Center near here, where Israeli Prime Minister 
Benjamin Netanyahu and Palestinian leader Yasser Arafat have been 
since Thursday. But with three days of direct negotiations by Clinton, 
who was joined on Sunday by Vice President Al Gore, and with a full-time 
mediation effort by Secretary of State Madeleine Albright and the 
director of central intelligence, George Tenet, a failure to reach 
agreement here would be a devastating blow to Clinton's prestige and 
to the search for a Middle East peace. But some officials suggested 
that the U.S. urgency is not fully shared by the Israeli or Palestinian 
leaders, who will have to make difficult choices that will almost 
certainly alienate important parts of their constituencies. As of 
Sunday evening, U.S. officials confirmed, Netanyahu and Arafat have 
not met together since Friday. An Israeli official said Sunday night, 
``We can't predict the results. As long as progress is being made 
we are prepared to stay. The big issue for us _ security _ is far 
from being resolved. It's quite disappointing.'' What is at stake, 
after a 19-month delay, is an interim accord under which the Israelis 
will withdraw from another 13 percent of the West Bank in stages over 
12 weeks, in return for phased and verifiable Palestinian steps to 
fight terrorism. ``The parties are into real bargaining at last,'' 
one official said, ``and we want to keep them talking.'' But the official 
said that while significant progress had been made on different issues, 
including security, there was no complete agreement on any of the 
major issues. An Israeli official said specifically that the third 
Israeli withdrawal and a commitment from the Palestinians to publicly 
change their charter, which calls for Israel's destruction, were still 
not solved. The Americans made a big push to get an agreement. Clinton, 
who had stayed for a dinner Saturday night with Arafat and the Palestinians, 
helped organize a long night of meetings supervised by Ms. Albright, 
who has remained at the Wye Center since Thursday. Clinton, together 
with Gore, returned Sunday morning for another long day of chats, 
walks, meals and pressure. Clinton first met with his team, then with 
the Israelis, including a long lunch with Netanyahu. Arafat, in his 
traditional regalia, was said to have taken a bicycle ride for more 
than an hour, while bodyguards, both U.S. and Palestinian, jogged 
alongside. At about 6 p.m., Clinton met for an hour with Arafat, then 
took a break for dinner with his staff. He was scheduled to meet again 
with Arafat at about 9 p.m. and then to have another conversation 
with Netanyahu after that. ``The talks continue and the president 
will remain engaged throughout the evening,'' Lockhart said. But he 
said he did not not expect the three leaders to meet together at any 
time during the night. Asked whether after so much direct involvement 
by so many senior members of the Clinton administration it was possible 
to allow Netanyahu and Arafat to leave here without an agreement, 
Rubin simply said: ``That's a very well-formulated question.'' U.S. 
officials had said that their decision to bring the leaders here was 
a risk so soon before the mid-term elections on Nov. 3, but that no 
president was likely to be punished by U.S. voters for making an effort 
to advance the cause of peace in the Middle East. One official said, 
however, that much of what remains to be decided is in the hands of 
Netanyahu and it was ``potentially risky,'' at least, if an agreement 
required public pressure on Israel, which could alienate some U.S. 
voters. Sunday evening, Rubin would not discuss the stakes for the 
administration, except to say that the Americans ``do feel a sense 
of urgency.'' Entering these meetings, ``we felt very strongly that 
in the absence of making these kinds of agreements and putting the 
peace process back on track there were serious dangers ahead for the 
peoples of the Middle East,'' he said. ``We believe in a sense of 
urgency and we are trying to instill that into the parties,'' Rubin 
added. ``But I would not want to characterize how urgent they feel 
the situation is.'' The Americans are particularly conscious that 
the Oslo accords expire on May 4. By that date, Palestinians and Israelis 
are supposed to have completed a final peace settlement that sets 
Palestine's borders, its status, the fate of refugees and the future 
of Jerusalem. Arafat has threatened to declare Palestinian statehood 
unilaterally on May 5, but the Americans and even the opposition Labor 
Party in Israel, which negotiated the Oslo accords, have warned him 
not to take such unilateral actions. At the same time, U.S. officials 
say that a May 4 deadline cannot be ignored, and that tensions in 
the region could explode if Arafat and the Israelis are not well on 
their way toward an agreement. But this interim deal must be settled 
first. If that can be accomplished, the final status talks will formally 
re-open under Clinton's aegis, with the aim of trying to complete 
at least the framework for a peace treaty before next May. Rubin appealed 
to the two sides to find ``the political will'' to agree to this relatively 
minor accord. ``There is time to complete the work if the political 
will is there to make the tough decisions,'' he said. Rubin denied 
that the Americans have any interest in a partial agreement. Difficult 
issues remain, officials said, including a method by which Palestinian 
efforts to combat terrorism will be judged and an Israeli demand for 
the extradition of Palestinians wanted in Israel. There has been talk 
that the CIA, which sits with both sides on a security committee, 
could vet the cases against wanted Palestinians and decide whether 
they should be tried. When Israel asks for extradition now, , the 
Palestinians answer that the person is wanted for charges by the Palestinian 
authorities, so may not be handed over. The Palestinians also want 
guarantees of prisoner releases by the Israelis, and want firm guarantees 
that a third interim withdrawal by the Israelis from the West Bank, 
called for under the Oslo and Hebron accords, will take place. At 
the moment, there is a general agreement that the issue will be handled 
by the borders committee set up under the final status talks. But 
Rubin said that Washington clearly did not want a third interim redeployment 
to create the same kinds of problems that all sides face here, with 
their efforts to finish the first two redeployments. Rubin and the 
Americans were also eager to knock down an Israeli newspaper report 
that Jordan's King Hussein, under treatment for lymphoma at the Mayo 
Clinic in Minnesota, is dying. The newspaper, Yediot Ahronot, said 
in its Sunday editions that U.S. officials had told Netanyahu's aides 
that the king's condition is terminal and ``it is doubtful he will 
ever return to actively functioning as king in full capacity.'' It 
said that the Americans and Israelis had discussed a transition of 
power to the king's brother, Crown Prince Hassan, and fears that there 
could be instability in Jordan. The statement described the king as 
``making good progress'' and said, ``We look forward to his full recovery.'' 
But it added: ``We have great confidence in Crown Prince Hassan, who 
has been and remains a very able partner for King Hussein, as well 
as for the United States.'' ``Both the king and crown prince have 
continued to play very active and helpful roles in support of the 
peace process and the Wye peace talks,'' the statement said. Rubin 
said later that the report was entirely untrue, and that both Clinton 
and Ms. Albright had spoken by telephone with the king in recent days. 
Ariel Sharon, the new Israeli foreign minister, also issued a statement 
denying that he had said that the king, whom he visited before coming 
here, is dying. But photographs of the meeting showed Hussein looking 
very ill after another round of chemotherapy, and U.S. officials have 
also been careful to be in touch with the crown prince, including 
a telephone call to him Sunday morning from Ms. Albright. Hussein, 
who has ruled Jordan for 45 years, suffers from non-Hodgkins lymphoma, 
a type of cancer that primarily afflicts the lymph nodes and spleen. 
He has been receiving treatment at the Mayo Clinic since mid-July. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>