<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981018.0105 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Congress moved to rewrite American copyright law earlier this month 
when it passed two hotly contested pieces of legislation. The first 
lengthens protections by 20 years for an array of 20th century cultural 
icons, including Mickey Mouse. The second guarantees online providers 
of artistic material that their responsibility for copyright infringement 
will be limited as the digital age progresses. On Oct. 7, a year and 
a half after the Copyright Term Extension Act was first introduced 
and after intense lobbying for it from powerful copyright holders 
like the Walt Disney Co. and Time Warner Inc., Congress passed the 
bill and extended the life of copyright protection for the creators 
of original works. Since 1976, copyrights have been good for the life 
of an artist plus 50 years. The new legislation lengthens copyrights 
for works created on or after Jan. 1, 1978, to the life of the author 
plus 70 years and extends copyrights for works created for hire and 
owned by corporations to 95 years, from the current 75. With its vote, 
Congress prevented Disney's copyrights for several of its most lucrative 
cartoon characters from becoming public property in the next few years. 
Mickey Mouse, first copyrighted in 1928, had been set to pass into 
the public domain in 2004; Pluto, Goofy and Donald Duck would have 
followed in 2009. Several days after the copyright extension legislation 
passed, the House and Senate approved the On-Line Copyright Infringement 
Liability Limitation Act. That legislation protects Internet service 
providers from liability for unwittingly transmitting material that 
infringes a copyright. Both bills generated plenty of controversy 
during the last year. Opponents argued that they were unconstitutional, 
stifled creativity and research or threatened privacy and competition. 
But the proposals had powerful support from large corporations, artists' 
interest groups and the Patent and Trademark Office. Both bills fit 
neatly into the patent agency's efforts over the last several years 
to modify American intellectual property laws so that they ``harmonize'' 
with those in Europe and Japan. In 1995, controversy raged around 
a bill that altered the life span of a American patent from 17 years 
from the date of issuance to 20 years from the date of application 
_ making U.S. law identical to patent-term laws in Europe and Japan. 
It passed. The philosophical basis for copyright protection is twofold: 
to protect the rights of artists to profit from and control the use 
of their work and to preserve public interest by guaranteeing that 
eventually the right to use the works will pass into the public domain. 
Arguments over which of those purposes takes precedence have flared 
off and on since the first copyright law was passed in 1790. It bestowed 
protection on artists for 14 years from publication, with an option 
for a further 14-year renewal. That legislation lasted until 1831, 
when the initial term was extended to 28 years with a 14-year renewal. 
In 1909, the renewal term was stretched to 28 years. Then, in 1976, 
the renewal period was extended again to 47 years and copyright protection 
for the life of the author, plus 50 years, was given to anything published 
after 1976. That law seemed to satisfy artists and corporate copyright 
holders until the expiration date of many valuable copyrights drew 
near. An impressive list of mid-century works of art were set to lose 
their copyrights over the next few years, including the songs of George 
and Ira Gershwin as well as the Disney cartoon characters. This would 
have happened just as the potential for new uses of characters, songs 
and images is expanding with new markets on digital television, cable 
services and the Internet. In Europe, artists and their heirs already 
had two extra decades to control and profit from copyrighted works. 
So in the United States, heirs like the Gershwin Family Trust, large 
corporations like Disney and Time Warner, and organizations like the 
Motion Picture Association of America and the American Society of 
Composers, Authors and Publishers began lobbying for a change in federal 
law. Opponents argued that copyright holders were trying to change 
the rules of the game they had originally accepted and said that creative 
and cultural expression would be stifled if the public was not allowed 
free and fair access to works of art. Copyright holders and their 
heirs, in turn, insisted that artistic work is property, just like 
real estate, paintings or jewelry, and that they should be able to 
pass on their wealth to their descendants. Their supporters said that 
if American works of art fell into the public domain 20 years before 
European ones, the United States would lose its advantage in the international 
trading arena. The global economy was cited as a central reason for 
the other piece of copyright-related legislation. To protect content 
on the so-called information superhighway, Congress voted to limit 
liability for online copyright infringement. Proponents called it 
a big step forward in freeing companies to expand into electronic 
commerce and deliver movies, music and other content over the Internet. 
The bill limits the infringement liability of Internet access providers 
that unknowingly store, transmit or link World Wide Web users to copyrighted 
material. Providers like America Online or Yahoo will not be liable 
if the transmission is initiated by another person, if the storage 
or transmission happens via automatic technological processes and 
if no copies of the material are kept any longer than necessary to 
complete the transmission. The provider is also exempt from liability 
if it did not know that the material in question infringed a copyright 
and did not make money from any activity directly related to infringement. 
The bill is so-called implementing legislation for two treaties agreed 
upon by the World Intellectual Property Organization, and Congress 
must still ratify those treaties. Even though the 105th Congress is 
close to adjournment, other copyright-related proposals are still 
pending. A list of pending legislation is available on the U.S. Copyright 
Office's site on the World Wide Web (http://lcweb.loc.gov/copyright/penleg.html). 
President Clinton is expected to sign both newly passed bills into 
law. A text of the Copyright Extension Act can be viewed on the Web 
(http://thomas.loc.gov/cgi-bin/query/z?c105:S.505:), as can a text 
of the On-Line Copyright Infringement Liability Limitation Act (http://thomas.loc.gov/cgi-bin/query/z?c105:H.R.2281:). 
</TEXT>
</DOC>