<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981018.0159 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Talks between the Clinton administration and Northwest Airlines ended 
inconclusively Sunday, with lawyers for the airline unable to overcome 
the administration's objections to Northwest's bid to buy a controlling 
stake in Continental Airlines, participants said. According to one 
account, the antitrust division of the Justice Department has until 
the end of Monday to file suit to block the deal, which has had a 
big impact on the domestic airline industry since it was announced 
in January. But one person close to the negotiations said that the 
government had some wiggle room and assured Northwest on Sunday that 
it would not take action Monday. The government has received several 
extensions from Northwest since it began reviewing the deal earlier 
this year, but the airline recently declined to give the government 
more time to force it to make a decision. ``In many ways it is up 
to Justice,'' a second person who was briefed on the negotiations 
said Sunday. ``If they wanted to be super conservative, they would 
file tomorrow.'' Officials at the Justice Department declined to comment, 
as did spokesmen for Northwest and Continental. Northwest, the United 
States' fourth-largest carrier, aims to acquire a majority stake in 
Continental, the fifth-largest carrier, from a Texas investment group 
for $311 million plus 4.1 million shares of Northwest stock. The two 
carriers intend to enter into a broad alliance, combining frequent-flier 
plans and selling seats on each other's flights while maintaining 
separate managements, boards and employees. The so-called virtual 
merger touched off a series of deals among the other large airlines, 
though none involved the purchase of an equity stake, which requires 
government approval. United, the nation's largest carrier, entered 
into an alliance with Delta Air Lines, the third-largest, while No. 
2 American Airlines linked up with U S Airways. The alliances were 
announced at a time when concern in Washington about the power of 
the big airlines to dominate major airports was already on the rise. 
Earlier this year, the Transportation Department proposed a series 
of guidelines designed to prevent larger carriers from preying on 
smaller airlines. The Justice Department has also been investigating 
several carriers, including Northwest, for antitrust violations, while 
several bills designed to promote more airline competition were introduced 
in Congress. Because the other alliances were formed in response to 
the Northwest-Continental proposal, whatever action the government 
takes will affect not only that deal but the others as well. Earlier 
this year, United and Delta abandoned their plan to sell seats on 
each others' domestic flights, because of objections by Delta's pilots. 
But last week, Gerald Greenwald, United's chairman and chief executive, 
said that the carriers would seriously consider reviving their proposal 
if the Northwest-Continental deal went forward. ``If this is approved, 
we are going to have all the airlines trying to emulate it as much 
as possible,'' Kevin Mitchell, chairman of the Business Travel Coalition, 
which lobbies on behalf of several large corporations, said Sunday. 
Mitchell, who argues that the deal would hurt competition, added that 
the Justice Department asked him to give his opinion in a formal statement, 
which he said they were planning to include in their lawsuit should 
they move to block the transaction. Northwest has said that it will 
put its Continental shares in a trust controlled by a slate of independent 
directors and has vowed not to buy any more Continental stock. But 
the government is not satisfied with the trust, which expires after 
six years. If the government does go to court, Northwest and Continental 
could decide to walk away from the deal. But a person with knowledge 
of their plans said that they were determined to fight, because they 
are convinced the government has a weak case. ``They run substantial 
risk of losing should they bring their case,'' the person said of 
the Justice Department. ``They are on weak legal and factual ground, 
and they don't have an economic case.'' 
</TEXT>
</DOC>