<DOC>
<DOCNO> APW19981125.0232 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Hundreds of students tried to march Wednesday to the heavily guarded 
house of Indonesia's former President Suharto to press demands that 
be tried for corruption and human rights abuses. Hundreds of troops 
blocked about 1,500 students at a park adjacent to the U.S. ambassador's 
residence after they moved from a busy downtown roundabout and through 
an exclusive suburb where the former leader lives. There were no reports 
of arrests or injuries and there was no anti-American sentiment expressed. 
Stopped about a kilometer (half-mile) from Suharto's home, the students 
chanted anti-government slogans and shouted, ``Suharto is a dog.'' 
Some taunted a line of soldiers who were carrying sticks and bamboo 
shields. A few protesters shook tambourines while others danced and 
sang: ``We are in the streets for democracy.'' Students have tried 
several times in recent days to reach the home where the 77-year-old 
Suharto lives as a virtual recluse. Two busloads of students also 
were blocked from demonstrating outside the State Secretariat, next 
door to the presidential palace. Wednesday's protests came after troops 
forced several hundred students to end a 12-hour occupation of the 
attorney general's office Tuesday night. Unbowed, hundreds congregated 
at nearby Atma Jaya Catholic University Wednesday morning before starting 
their demonstrations. The campus was where security personnel opened 
fire on anti-government protesters Nov. 13. As many as 17 people were 
killed in the violence, including nine students. On Tuesday, about 
1,000 students forced they way into the lobby of the office of Attorney-General 
Andi Muhammad Ghalib, who headed an earlier investigation into Suharto's 
wealth, which is estimated by Forbes Magazine to be dlrs 4 billion. 
Ghalib, a serving three-star army general, has been widely criticized 
by opposition groups for going soft on Suharto, himself a retired 
general. Students ridiculed Ghalib on Tuesday. They produced a live 
hen during their protest and chanted: ``Ghalib wants to be a chicken, 
not a tiger.'' Others shouted ``Hang Suharto'' as student representatives 
held talks with Ghalib, who refused to accept their demands that Suharto 
be put on trial within one month. Many students later left the building 
voluntarily. Pressured by the military, a remaining group of 200 agreed 
to board army trucks that ferried them to their university campuses 
shortly before midnight. Some students scuffled with officers, but 
the evacuation was largely peaceful. Last week, Suharto's successor 
and former protege, President B.J. Habibie, announced the government 
would set up a new inquiry into allegations that Suharto illegally 
enriched himself, his family and a clique of cronies during his 32 
years in power. Details of the proposed commission of inquiry have 
not yet been released and its announcement has failed to mollify student 
protesters, who have accused the government of protecting the former 
president. Suharto has denied any wrongdoing and has told private 
visitors that he is willing to face any investigation into his affairs. 
Calls for a proper inquiry into Suharto's wealth have grown to the 
point where the ruling Golkar Party, who helped keep him in power 
for three decades, has suggested that he be placed under house arrest. 
Separately Wednesday, about 100 women demonstrators staged a peaceful 
rally in downtown Jakarta against rising violence in crisis-ridden 
Indonesia. On Sunday, 14 people were killed in riots that started 
as a street brawl between rival Christian and Muslim gangs in the 
capital's north. About 100 women also protested in Surabaya, Indonesia's 
second most populous city. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>