<DOC>
<DOCNO> APW19981125.1211 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
In an effort to save his crumbling coalition and broaden support for 
peace, Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu struck a tentative deal Wednesday 
to bring a moderate deserter back into his hard-line Cabinet. Staunch 
right-wingers who oppose ceding war-captured land to the Palestinians 
have been threatening to leave Netanyahu's government over the latest 
land-for-security agreement with the Palestinians. Such a move would 
leave Netanyahu without a parliamentary majority and thus vulnerable 
in no-confidence motions, which Netanyahu could face next month when 
he presents the annual budget to the Knesset. The return of David 
Levy, the former foreign minister, would bolster support for Netanyahu 
but the premier would still need to find more votes, most likely from 
his political rivals in the form of a national unity, or power-sharing 
government. Political commentators said Wednesday that the prime minister 
wanted Levy back in the fold as an ally so that Netanyahu would be 
in a stronger position when opening negotiations with the main opposition 
Labor Party. Three influential Cabinet ministers _ Foreign Minister 
Ariel Sharon, Trade Minister Natan Sharansky and Finance Minister 
Yaakov Neeman _ said it might be a good idea for Netanyahu to start 
courting Labor. Both Sharon and Netanyahu canceled trips in order 
to deal with the coalition crisis. Netanyahu backed out of the Swiss 
portion of a three-country European tour. He left late Wednesday to 
Britain and will continue on from there to Spain. Sharon was to have 
led Israel's delegation to a 50-nation donor conference for the Palestinians 
in Washington next week and held talks with U.S. Secretary of State 
Madeleine Albright and members of Congress but stayed behind to handle 
negotiations. Israeli TV networks said Sharon would meet with former 
prime minister Shimon Peres and Labor leader Ehud Barak to discuss 
prospects for a unity government. Netanyahu's coalition has been shaky 
from the start. It includes several small single-interest and religious 
parties, and Netanyahu has spent the last two and a half years trying 
to balance the often conflicting needs of each partner. Levy would 
likely return to the Cabinet as national infrastructures minister, 
a position vacated by Sharon in September. As part of the deal, Levy 
and Netanyahu would run their parties on the same slate in the next 
election. To sweeten the pot, Netanyahu reportedly promised the social 
welfare advocate to increase budgetary funds for social programs. 
Neither side commented on the package, apparently struck by intermediaries 
who negotiated through the night and reached a tentative deal before 
dawn Wednesday. An official announcement was not expected until Netanyahu 
returned home Sunday. Levy's Gesher Party, a working-class party that 
broke from Netanyahu's conservative Likud Party before 1996 elections, 
approved a return to Netanyahu's coalition Wednesday. But two of five 
other Gesher legislators did not attend the meeting, an apparent sign 
that those lawmakers will not rejoin the government. Levy resigned 
in January in protest over the deadlock in the peace talks with the 
Palestinians, saying then that the government was ``on a flight to 
nowhere.'' On Tuesday, Levy suggested that with the signing of the 
Mideast accord last month, the government looked more appealing. ``Now 
that the government is taking the political course that I demanded 
... we in Gesher will convene and decide,'' he told Israel TV's Channel 
Two. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>