<DOC>
<DOCNO> APW19981125.1191 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Blood taken from newborns' umbilical cords appears to offer a good 
source of life-saving tissue for cancer victims and others who likely 
would die without bone marrow transplants and do not have related 
donors. The largest study yet of transplants using cord blood for 
patients who have no related donors shows a lessened risk of potentially 
fatal reactions that can result when people get marrow from donors 
whose tissue types are not closely matched. Transplants were considered 
successful for four out of five patients. ``The procedure was wildly 
successful beyond anyone's expectations,'' said LeeAnn Jensen of the 
National Heart, Lung and Blood Institute, who oversaw funding for 
the study. Marrow transplants are a standard part of cancer treatment. 
In an attempt to kill cancer, doctors often give such high doses of 
chemotherapy that they also destroy the bone marrow, which manufactures 
blood cells. So they replace it with blood-producing cells _ called 
stem cells _ that are taken from donors. Stem cells can also be retrieved 
from the bloodstream, and in the latest study, doctors harvested them 
from blood in the discarded umbilical cords of newborns at two New 
York City hospitals. Eighty-one percent of the transplants in the 
study were considered successful, meaning the blood graft took hold 
within six weeks. Only 25 percent developed graft-vs.-host disease, 
a dangerous condition in which transplanted tissue attacks the recipient's 
body. ``I do think that this may ultimately replace unrelated bone 
marrow (transplants), but we're 10 years away from that,'' said Dr. 
Joanne Kurtzberg of Duke University Medical Center, which did 170 
of the study's 562 transplants. The study, directed by Dr. Pablo Rubinstein 
of the New York Blood Center, was published in Thursday's New England 
Journal of Medicine. It reviewed transplants at 98 U.S. and foreign 
hospitals using cord blood from his program, the first and largest 
public placental blood bank in the world. The patients had leukemia, 
blood disorders or genetic diseases. With bone marrow transplants, 
Rubinstein said, at least five of the six genetic markers on the infection-fighting 
white blood cells must be identical in donor and recipient. But cord 
blood transplants with only a four-of-six match have succeeded. ``It 
turns out that with placental blood you can forgive a little more 
incompatibility'' between donor and recipient, he said. That leeway 
makes it easier to find matches, allowing the life-saving transplant 
surgery for up to 90 percent of patients who can't find a compatible 
bone marrow donation, Kurtzberg said. Besides lessening the risk of 
disease, using placental blood means no donor must suffer hundreds 
of painful needle jabs to draw out bone marrow, and cells from newborns 
are far less likely to harbor blood-borne diseases, Rubinstein said. 
The study did not look at long-term survival rates. Cord blood has 
been the subject of increasing study in recent years. The National 
Institutes of Health, which financed Rubinstein's study, has begun 
a five-year study of cord blood that would also increase the cord 
blood available for transplants. Dr. Paul Billings, director of the 
nonprofit Cord Blood Donor Foundation, praised the study's conclusions. 
He was not involved in the study. But Billings, whose foundation operates 
one of the country's half-dozen public cord blood banks and promotes 
donations, said public banks need to collect specimens from genetically 
unique populations, such as American Indians. Another expert who did 
not participate in the study said cord blood transplants may turn 
out to be beneficial for patients with other conditions. Dr. Robertson 
Parkman, head of bone marrow transplantation at Children's Hospital 
in Los Angeles, said it could help those suffering from lymphoma and 
tumors in the breast, ovaries or lungs. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>