<DOC>
<DOCNO> APW19981125.0872 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Ever since Hurricane Mitch destroyed his home and clothing stall, 
Oscar Solorzano has sifted through bloated rats, fly-infested meat 
and human feces for such small treasures as a mud-caked watch or a 
rank-smelling Barbie doll to wash and sell. Working on the steps leading 
down to the fetid Choluteca River behind the Alvarez market, Solorzano 
has joined a growing rank of trash miners in Honduras' devastated 
capital. ``I once had to push a dead horse out of my way, which was 
pretty gross,'' Solorzano said. ``But you can get used to anything 
after a while.'' Desperately poor, many people are putting sanitation 
second to survival after Hurricane Mitch earlier this month killed 
10,000 people, officials say, and left those already eeking out a 
living with nothing. From Nicaragua to Guatemala, the number of cases 
of cholera, dengue and leptospirosis are rising. ``I think now is 
when we're going to see the disease curve start going up,'' said Dr. 
Luis Gerardo Castellanos, coordinator of infectious diseases for the 
Pan American Health Organization in Tegucigalpa. ``We're seeing a 
lot of cases of respiratory illnesses, colds, etc. with the dust, 
and environmental ailments, and people working to clean up without 
shoes or shirts on in the mud and water, which means their defenses 
are down.'' At least 560 cases of cholera have been confirmed in the 
hardest-hit countries of Nicaragua, Honduras, Belize, El Salvador 
and Guatemala, according to the Pan American Health Organization. 
At least 21 people have died from the disease, which is contracted 
mainly by contaminated food. Guatemala and Nicaragua account for 95 
percent of the cases. At Tegucigalpa's main hospital, Hospital Escuela, 
diarrhea and intestinal problems have risen from about three a week 
to more than 50, doctors said. In the northern city of San Pedro Sula, 
officials warn that nearly half the meat being sold at discount prices 
comes from unlicensed markets that don't meet health standards. In 
Chimaltenango, Guatemala, for instance, doctors saw 37 cholera cases 
in a single day _ more than the total for the two weeks before the 
disaster. In Nicaragua, officials are investigating 264 possible cases 
of leptospirosis, which is caused by a rare bacteria in rat urine. 
The disease, which leads to liver and kidney failure, also has appeared 
in small numbers in Honduras and Guatemala, but officials said the 
increase could be due to a program that recently taught local doctors 
to detect it. Health workers have reported 1,086 cases of mosquito-borne 
dengue _ about 400 more than the number reported during the same period 
last year. Honduras accounts for all but six of those cases. Doctors 
from a battery of international aid groups have spread out from Nicaragua 
to Guatemala. The Pan American Health Organization is calling for 
stronger measures to improve hygiene and control rodents and mosquitos, 
particularly in shelters. The Taiwanese and German governments, the 
World Bank and the Pan American Health Organization donated dlrs 2 
million to spray Honduras' highest risk areas with insecticide. In 
Tegucigalpa's central market, where huge pools of stagnant water still 
block many streets, a group of Taiwanese Buddhists fumigated this 
week. Last week, sanitation officials declared the market off-limits, 
so the 500 venders have moved into the debris-strewn street in front 
of the market, where they sell food and grill meat. Near the Choluteca 
waters where bodies were still being pulled out last week, Maria Carbajal 
sells cabbage and carrots. Sewage streams under the table of produce, 
which is about six inches off the ground. ``It stinks so bad my head 
hurts,'' she said. Besides, she said, business was bad. ``The people 
who have money won't buy here, and the ones who don't just take from 
the trash and eat it.'' 
</TEXT>
</DOC>