<DOC>
<DOCNO> APW19981125.0883 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Emergency measures are needed to save Russia's people from the ravages 
of the country's economic collapse, Prime Minister Yevgeny Primakov 
said Wednesday. Primakov said the 1999 budget would have to include 
the unspecified measures to cushion the economic blows. A draft of 
the long-awaited budget was delivered to the Cabinet later in the 
day. However, Primakov, speaking at the Ministry of Emergency Situations, 
said the economy had no problems that couldn't be fixed with help 
from the state. ``We can't go on waiting for the market environment 
to solve our problems,'' the prime minister said, according to the 
Interfax news agency. ``In such a difficult transition, development 
must progress along a mechanism worked out in advance.'' Russia's 
economy, which had begun to grow last year for the first time since 
the Soviet collapse, succumbed this year to the global economic crisis 
that started in Asia. It crashed in August, when the Russian government 
devalued the ruble and effectively defaulted on its foreign loans. 
Primakov's remarks were consistent with his previous statements regarding 
the role of government in steering the economy. The extent of that 
role may become clearer when the government agrees on a budget, which 
Primakov promised in the next few days. So far, Primakov's Cabinet 
has been unable to settle on a budget, and was reportedly divided 
last week among three rival versions of the plan. The Finance Ministry 
submitted a new plan Wednesday that is intended to address all the 
Cabinet's concerns, Interfax said. It envisages a 2.5 percent deficit 
and assumes that Russia will be able to reschedule some of its debts, 
Finance Minister Mikhail Zadornov was quoted by Interfax as saying. 
The budget will encompass the government's approach to tackling the 
economic crisis. However, a private economic analyst was quoted as 
saying the worst of the crisis had passed. Speaking to an economic 
forum, Andrei Illarionov, director of the private Institute of Economic 
Analysis, said the crisis reached a peak in September and has eased 
since then under Primakov's leadership, Interfax said. He noted that 
the ruble, which was trading at about 18 to the U.S. dollar on Wednesday, 
had settled into a relatively stable range. Primakov's remarks about 
emergency measures were presumably meant to offer support to the Emergency 
Situations Ministry, which carries out relief missions. Primakov said 
a new federal rescue service should be established in 2005, the ITAR-Tass 
news agency said. And he called on the Emergency Situations Ministry 
to improve its civil defense preparedness in light of the potential 
for regional conflicts in Russia. Also Wednesday, Deputy Finance Minister 
Mikhail Kasyanov was quoted as saying that foreign investors had agreed 
to reschedule to country's debt to the London Club of creditors. The 
two sides began talks Monday in London. The government is trying to 
persuade creditors to restructure a portion of the Paris and London 
Club debts that it inherited from the Soviet Union. Kasyanov told 
Interfax that an agreement was reached with the London Club under 
which Russia will start repaying its debt on Dec. 2. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>