<DOC>
<DOCNO> APW19981125.1184 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Iraqi exiles said Wednesday that the U.S. government has decided to 
back a new Iraqi dissident leader to spearhead a reinvigorated campaign 
to oust President Saddam Hussein. The United States is getting behind 
Adnan al-Pachachi, a former foreign minister, to forge a united Iraqi 
opposition movement that would try to topple Saddam, the dissidents 
in exile said. U.S. Assistant Secretary of State Martin Indyk proposed 
al-Pachachi's name during his meeting with 16 Iraqi opposition leaders 
in London on Tuesday, some of the participants said. In Washington, 
a U.S. State Department official said Indyk made it clear at the meeting 
that it was up to the Iraqi opposition to decide how it should be 
organized. The official, speaking on condition of anonymity, said 
that al-Pachachi was just one of the Iraqi opposition figures who 
met with Indyk and that it was not up to the United States to anoint 
an opposition leader. Al-Pachachi, who also attended the meeting, 
said in a telephone interview from London: ``I think this is our last 
chance and we should not loose it.'' U.S. Embassy officials in London 
were not available for comment and no administration statement on 
the meeting was immediately available. U.S. President Bill Clinton 
has proclaimed that Saddam's ouster is a major U.S. goal in efforts 
to protect U.S. interests in the region. The U.S. Congress has also 
allocated dlrs 97 million aid for Iraqi dissidents. On Tuesday, Indyk 
urged the opposition figures to drop their differences and unite in 
the struggle against Saddam, said the opposition participants, speaking 
on condition of anonymity. The dissidents, who spoke with The Associated 
Press, included supporters of al-Pachachi as well as members of other 
opposition groups. The backing for al-Pachachi indicates that the 
United States is edging away from Ahmed Chalabi, the head of the U.S.-backed 
Iraqi National Congress. The INC is a 7-year-old umbrella organization 
of Kurdish, Shiite and leftist groups. Most of its activists have 
abandoned the organization in protest against Chalabi's leadership. 
Al-Pachachi was the foreign minister in the government that was toppled 
in the 1968 military coup that brought Saddam's Baath party to power. 
He later became a political adviser to the president of the United 
Arab Emirates. He has been involved in opposition efforts to topple 
Saddam since the end of the 1991 Gulf War and is widely respected 
among Iraq exiles. Al-Pachaci may be a favored choice because he is 
a Sunni. Members of this mainstream sect of Islam hold key positions 
in the Iraqi regime and al-Pachachi would be in the best position 
to woo them if he ever won control of the country. The dissidents 
said Indyk's proposal backing al-Pachachi came after many participants 
told him there was no consensus on Chalabi's leadership. Chalabi is 
a member of the Shiite community, which despite being in a slight 
majority in Iraq wields little power. On Wednesday, Iraq dismissed 
the London talks as ``miserable and impossible dreams.'' ``Those who 
sold their honor ... have becoming agents of the U.S., British and 
Zionist intelligence agencies'' said a spokesman for the Iraqi Culture 
and Information Ministry. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>