<DOC>
<DOCNO> APW19981125.0225 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
A crisis engulfed one of Taiwan's banks Wednesday as the chairman 
and other directors were dismissed on charges of making improper loans. 
The government appointed new supervisors and provided emergency cash 
to try to head off a run by depositors. Hundreds of people flooded 
branches of the Taichung Business Bank to withdraw their savings, 
and the Central Bank approved 9 billion Taiwan dollars (U.S. dlrs 
270 million) of funds to help the bank pay the panicked depositors. 
Taichung was accused of lending up to 7.4 billion Taiwan dollars (U.S. 
dlrs 227 million) to six shaky investment and property companies that 
had suspected ties to the bank's chairman, Tseng Chen-jen, according 
to Vice Finance Minister Yen Ching-chang. Tseng was appointed as the 
bank's chairman Oct. 31 and approved the loans just days later, officials 
said. Under Taiwan laws, the Finance Ministry can dismiss board members 
of troubled banks to protect people's savings. The Finance Ministry 
suggested that the courts prosecute Tseng for abusing his position 
of trust. Tseng is also the head of the Kuang Shan business conglomerate. 
The ministry ordered Central Deposit Insurance Co., which insures 
Taiwanese bank deposits, to supervise Taichung Business Bank for six 
months. Finance Minister Paul Chiu said Taiwan's economy is still 
relatively sound and will be able to achieve the projected 5 percent 
growth if financial irregularities can be stopped quickly. In addition 
to the improper loans, Taichung Business Bank, together with its affiliated 
Tai Yu Products Corp., failed to pay up to 4 billion Taiwan dollars 
(U.S. dlrs 123 million) due for stock purchases. The Bureau of Investigation 
said it is investigating whether the two companies used company funds 
to prop up their shares. The incidents sent the blue chip index on 
the Taiwan stock exchange plunging. It closed down 2.9 percent at 
7,213.50 points. Early this month, the government ordered seven companies 
to temporarily take their shares off the stock exchange after they 
got in trouble borrowing money to invest in stocks, then using the 
stocks as collateral to borrow and invest more. Also Wednesday, Ho 
Hsi-feng, head of the Kuo Yang group of construction companies, was 
arrested on charges of illegal stock deals. Ho sold Kuo Yang group 
6 billion Taiwan dollars (U.S. dlrs 185 million) of cheap shares in 
exchange for more valuable shares held by the group, in deals suspected 
of being designed to help bail out Ho after he incurred huge losses 
in stock purchases, prosecutors said. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>