<DOC>
<DOCNO> CNN19981125.2130.1443 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> CAPTION </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
New York Yankee hall of famer Joe DiMaggio celebrated his 84th birthday 
today in a Florida hospital. Doctors say the prognosis for his recovery 
from complications following lung cancer surgery is good. Jim Huber 
reports. The greatest living ball player, he will always be the Yankee 
clipper, joltin' Joe DiMaggio. In a perfect, sensible world, we would 
bow to give our thanks for a multitude of blessings and include Joe 
DiMaggio, somewhere Midway. How appropriate, his birthday, just hours 
before Thanksgiving, for it offers a collaboration of emotions so 
important to our perspective. Joe DiMaggio, my hero. From icon to 
icon, and just about right, for Arnold Palmer would have been 12 when 
the great Yankee clipper hit in 56 straight games, his hero, then, 
before snead and hogan and the men of his sport. Joseph Paul DiMaggio 
remains, a half century later, a hero of the largest sort, far transcending 
baseball, a symbol of class and magnificence, the last of his kind, 
a graceful dinosaur with a difference. Joe D. seems immortal. Joe 
DiMaggio! In the turbulent '60s, when Paul Simon scribbled his famous 
line, "Where have you gone, Joe DiMaggio? A nation turns its lonely 
eyes to you," he was expressing a nation's yearning for a less complicated 
time. Looking for a hero, someone in whom to believe. He was all things 
to all people at a time when people needed something. A world collapsing, 
hearing the distant drumbeats of war, desperate for a Moment of cheer. 
How did you like your trip over? Well, we had a little rough trip. 
But I rather enjoyed it. High ironic then that he and the splinter 
would spend one of the most stunning Summers in baseball history as 
a prelude to infamy. I was 17 years old during the famous 1941 season, 
50 years ago and like many American kids in those days and today, 
I followed the box scores closely. Watch the magnificent season unfrl. 
Decades later after the war and Marilyn, Mr. coffee, after 1,000 ceremonial 
first balls, and an occasional old-timers game, there was diMaggio 
in line, the only guest specifically requested by the emperor of japan 
at a state dinner. Decades later, the only athlete invited when President 
Reagan hosted gorbachev. Decades later, still the man. All right. 
How I keep pushing. Keep pushing. go. Where have you gone Joe DiMaggio? 
In reality, nowhere. He remains as much with us today as he did a 
half century ago. Then, we followed long distance. On the radio, newspapers, 
magazines, and newsreels. Today he is much, much closer. Deep within 
us all. I'm Jim Huber. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>