<DOC>
<DOCNO> CNN19981125.1130.0021 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> CAPTION </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
This is "CNN Headline News." Hello, I'm Toria Tolley sitting in for 
Catherine Callaway. With millions of people crowding highways, airports 
and rail stations, holiday travelers may be most thankful for reaching 
their destinations. We have two live reports beginning with Gary Tuchman 
at New York's Penn station. Any action, Gary? a lot of action. It's 
been a very busy morning and it promises to get busier as the day 
goes on. Across the United States, Amtrak has about 500 stations. 
Many only have one train a day. But not this one, Penn station in 
New York City. 123 trains on a typical day. Today, the day before 
Thanksgiving, 150 trains making this the busiest amtrak station in 
the United States. Everyone stares at the sign, when they post the 
gate number, the track number for the train, they take off and get 
to the train, try to do it quickly so they don't have to stand. Two 
of the guys doing that are standing right here. They go to the merchant 
Marine academy in New York, correct? Yes, sir. It is Thanksgiving 
break and I bet you're glad to be done with classes now, right? That's 
correct. Where are you going for Thanksgiving? Baltimore. Why Baltimore? 
Because that's where his house is. I'm from California. Your friend 
is inviting you home for Thanksgiving? That's right. We only get to 
go home once in a while, so we go home Thanksgiving and christmas. 
Most of the time, we're out to sea. This is calm compared to going 
out to sea? it is. Gentlemen, happy Thanksgiving. Hope you have a 
good one. On a typical day, people using Amtrak and the subway systems 
total 500,000 people. It could fill Yankee stadium ten times. In addition 
to the train stations, the airports are very crowded. 1200 miles to 
the south of me is my colleague, morning patter. Mark? Gary, here 
in FT. Lauderdale, things have slowed down a little bit. We had big 
crowds here this morning and were expecting bigger crowds later this 
afternoon. But right now, we're in a lull between flights. They took 
off for Dallas, Los Angeles. We're waiting for the next crowd to come 
in. The officials here say at this airport, they're expecting about 
36,000 people to come in and out today. About a quarter million people 
to come through this airport, through the entire week and a half holiday 
period. They've brought extra people on staff here, police officers, 
security people, baggage handlers and all to try to move the crowds 
through quickly. And it seems from our vantage point, having been 
here for hours, that they're doing a pretty good job. The crowds are 
coming through, but they're getting to their flights on time and everything 
seems to be working fairly well. Now, the officials here say that 
they have some tips for people who are traveling. These apply not 
just to the FT. Lauderdale airport, but to airports around the country. 
The number one tip is, of course get there early. Perhaps an hour 
earlier than normal, because in some places, there are parking problems, 
traffic problems, baggage problems, all the things you would associate 
with a holiday. So if you can get there early, you have a better chance 
of making the flight. This is not a day where you want to miss your 
flight, because so many others are booked up. The chance of getting 
another flight is not very good. Call ahead before you go to the airport 
to make sure your flight is leaving on time. It may be a beautiful 
day like it is hoor in FT. Lauderdale, but on the other end, there 
may be some problems. So you want to make sure that everything is 
taken care of. Remember that the biggest travel day actually at the 
airports is going to be Sunday, not today, it's going to be Sunday. 
So the problems today are going to be magnified then. Toria, back 
to you. Thank you so much, Mark Potter and Gary Tuchman for the live 
reports. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>