<DOC>
<DOCNO> CNN19981125.2130.0026 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> CAPTION </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Good evening from Atlanta. Lynne Russell with your "CNN Headline News." 
Thousands of people are getting the fixings ready for their Thanksgiving 
dinner guests tomorrow. Aaa says 63% of people who leave home for 
the holiday will be staying with family and friends. The organization 
estimates 28 million people are driving to their destinations and 
6 million are flying, taking a train or bus. Many airports have put 
extra security measures in place, and that may affect how quickly 
passengers can board planes. Those measures were behind a delay today 
at Los Angeles international airport. Terminal two is back up and 
running, operations are back to normal there. We had a sudden influx 
of passengers and passengers screening. We had a conversion of passengers, 
visitors and about 200 protesters all here at the same time. As a 
result, the screening agents were not 100% sure that everybody passed 
through was properly screened. And as a result, so as not to compromise 
the airport security, the terminal was evacuated, people were brought 
back in front of passengers screenings. The terminal was swept and 
passengers were rescreened. The roads and skies weren't the only places 
filled with holiday travelers. Gary Tuchman checked out the crowds 
at the train station in New York. You say you made it on your Amtrak 
train and successfully found a Seat in an overcrowded car. Congratulations. 
It wasn't so Z. -- easy. Watch your step please. On the Wednesday 
before Thanksgiving, it looked as if they were giving away train tickets 
at New York's Penn station when you took a glance at the mass of humanity. 
Over 100,000 passengers were expected to ride Amtrak on Wednesday 
nationwide, about 40% higher than normal. It's not nice. It's two 
hours of torture. I'm sure I'm going to sit next to somebody who wants 
to talk stocks or something like that and be really bored for the 
next eight hours. That is, if he sits at all. This is the heaviest 
day of the year, all seats will be used today. The main method to 
avoid standing on Amtrak is to buy a reserved ticket, but they sell 
out the quickest. I've been trying for four days to get a reserved 
ticket, at midnight, calling every night at midnight, but it didn't 
happen. And when it doesn't happen, the only option left is to rush 
to the train as soon as the track number is posted. Amtrak ended up 
adding 27 trains Wednesday to its normal Penn station weekday total 
of 123. We expect this year will be the best in at least a decade. 
You would have to go back to the mid-'80s to find a year when we've 
done as well as we expect to do this year. Not everybody is happy 
they're traveling the day before thanksgiving. I should have left 
last night. I don't know. I'm an idiot. But most beleive they're doing 
it for a very good reason. why do it? mom. No choice. I love my mom. 
For the people here, the crowded difficult conditions will all be 
a memory by the time they eat their Thanksgiving dinner Thursday, 
until of course, it's time to return at the end of the weekend. Gary 
Tuchman, CNN, New York. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>