<DOC>
<DOCNO> MNB19981125.2100.0076 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> CAPTION </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
We want to begin with what long ago became a public crusade for a 
private practitioner. Dr. Jack Kevorkian after years in the medicine 
business is known for one thing, helping the terminally ill take their 
own lives. But in some cases, it's gone beyond that, according to 
to some. And in this case, a huge test case, it is much more. This 
time he used a television network to do his bidding, to air the tape 
of him taking a life. He issued, in effect, a challenge to the prosecutors. 
Come get me, and make your case. Today they did, and tonight they 
have. And Dr. Jack Kevorkian is facing first-degree murder charges, 
and this test case is under way. That's where we begin with NBC news 
correspondent Pete Williams. Within an hour after Michigan authorities 
announced today's charges, Dr. Kevorkian turned himself in, accused 
of first-degree murder for injecting lethal drugs into Thomas youk, 
a Michigan man who suffered from a terminal muscle disease. Prosecutors 
say after watching the complete videotapes this morning that Kevorkian 
made of the man's death, parts of which were shown on "60 minutes," 
they decided they had overwhelming evidence of murder. Notwithstanding 
public sentiment on the issue of assisted suicide, it is incumbent 
upon me to make charges decisions based solely upon the law, and not 
emotion or sympathy. Prosecutors say it's irrelevant that youk asked 
Kevorkian to perform a mercy killing because they say the victim's 
consent is not a defense to a murder charge. They also charged Kevorkian 
with violating the assisted suicide law. Even though Kevorkian said 
he was trying to get arrested to use his TV appearance to focus more 
attention on mercy killing, legal experts say the prosecutors had 
no choice. He feels he's justified. I understand that. But we as a 
society really can't allow any of our members to just simply flaunt 
the law and to do so with immunity. But despite Kevorkian's repeated 
acts of legal defiance, many experts in medical ethics predicted no 
jury will convict him. No one in America, a physician, has ever been 
convicted for a mercy killing. Juries, judges have tremendous sympathy 
in situations like this. Today's charges followed a decision by CBS 
to turn the tapes over in response to a subpoena. And although religious 
figures and even a few of its own stations criticized CBS for broadcasting 
the tape of a man's death, some critics say it was the right thing 
to do. That picture that's so controversial opened up a big dissuggestion 
about a very hard issue about life and death. Tonight Dr. Kevorkian 
is out on bail, waiting for his trial with a Stern warning from the 
judge that he'll lose his freedom if he helps anyone else die. Pete 
Williams, NBC news, Washington. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>