<DOC>
<DOCNO> MNB19981125.2100.3207 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> MISCELLANEOUS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> CAPTION </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Thanks, Janice. Before we go here tonight, here's Jane pauley with 
a program note. Thanks, Brian. Tonight on "time and again," up on 
the big screen with the stars of "Saturday night live." Adam Sandler 
has a huge hit with "the waterboy," but he's just the lathest "Saturday 
night live" star to make it in the movies. We'll here from other stars 
from "Saturday night live." The not ready for prime time players go 
Hollywood. "Time and again" with Jane pauley next. That is our broadcast 
for this Wednesday night. We hope to see you right back here this 
same time on Friday evening. I'm Brian Williams. For all of us here, 
good night, and happy Thanksgiving. That's what I call high-quality 
H 2 O "Saturday night live" goes to the movies. Adam Sandler's just 
the latest in a long line. I'm Jane pauley and this is "time and again." 
the president and her love is compassionate and steadfast." With that, 
Bill and Hillary Clinton began another journey together. With daughter 
Chelsea and dog buddy, they headed off for a vacation and an uncertain 
future. That's "time & again" for now. Thanks for joining us. I'm 
Jane pauley. And we're history. I mean, I thought he was great-looking 
and fun and he was just somebody who challenged and made you happy 
all the time. There's been a horrible accident tonight in the pacific 
northwest, and it's fatal. 30 people on a city bus. A gun's involved. 
The bus falls 50 feet into an apartment building. We will have a late 
live update on this story. In politics, the answers are in. The president 
responds to the 81 questions submitted from the house committee considering 
his impeachment. How do these answers differ, if at all, from the 
others? Nightfall across this country brings the calm after the retailing 
whirlwind. Americans by the millions hitting the stores, the Internet, 
and the phones, buying up big time, backed by a big economy. Are there 
problems on horizon? And from "dateline NBC" tonight, 'tis the season 
to tug. How much of charity money goes where it's needed most? And 
good Friday evening to you. Few things to update you on as we join 
you this day after Thanksgiving, which is nationwide traditionally 
the engine that fires up the big retailing season each year. We will 
look at how this big purchasing day is shaping up with retailers across 
the country from here in New York out to the west coast. In just a 
moment, we'll take you to Seattle. A city bus full of passengers has 
fallen almost 50 feet into an apartment building. It's a fatal accident. 
It appears a gunshot played a role in it. We're still getting information. 
We'll have a live update later. We begin this evening with the development 
and effort under way in the house. This evening, the president returned 
from camp David after his Thanksgiving holiday with a few rounds of 
golf under his belt and another legal of -- legal hurtle of sorts 
behind him. The 81 questions that cover virtually every aspect of 
the Lewinsky scandal as to what his answers have revealed and where 
this will lead the case on the hill, we'll begin with Claire Shipman. 
After a day of golf and handshaking, the president sent his response 
to Capitol Hill, and nowhere in the 26 pages does he admit to perjury 
or obstruction of justice. His carefully worded answers prepared by 
his legal team stuck closely to previous testimony. He insisted he 
did not mislead anyone under oath. He repeatedly could not recall 
or remember details, especially when asked whether he'd coached his 
secretary, Betty Currie, to lie. I believe that I asked her certain 
questions and made certain statements, he said, although I don't remember 
exactly what I said. But he flatly denied asking Ms. cure reto retrieve 
and conceal his gifts to Ms. Lewinsky. Asked about the fact that he 
testified he received gifts from Lewinsky once or twice, he was also 
vague. At the time, those were the gifts I recalled. After I had a 
chance to search my memory and refresh my recollection, I was able 
to be more responsive. There might still be gifts that I haven't identified. 
Even the most basic questions were met with classic Clinton-style 
answers. Asked if he is the country's chief law enforcement officer, 
he said "the president is frequently referred to as the chief law 
enforcement officer, Al know nothing in the constitution specifically 
designates the president as such." Republicans say the White House 
is again splitting legal hairs. The fact of the matter is very clearly 
he lied before the grand jury, he lied before a federal judge, and 
there's really no real dispute about that. Others say the president's 
caution is appropriate. There have been suggestions there could be 
a prosecution even after the president leaves office. I think any 
answer he gives has to be done with the greatest care. On Capitol 
Hill, as the Judiciary committee draws up articles of impeachment 
a vote could come just weeks from now. Sources tell NBC news the president's 
lawyers are not likely to accept an invitation from republicans to 
come back before the committee to mount a defense of the president. 
Why would the White House pass up a chance to make the president's 
case? Simply put, they want this to go away as quickly as possible. 
And the White House is now very much concentrating on the end game. 
For example, we've been told that should an impeachment vote in the 
house fail, aides here would still like to see censure and they will 
push democrats to vote for it. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>