<DOC>
<DOCNO> MNB19981125.2100.0573 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> CAPTION </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Those jockeying for position just outside the southwest airlines terminal 
at lax tonight as millions of Americans embark on the busiest single 
travel weekend of the calendar year. Those watches right now anywhere 
butt inside an airport lounge can perhaps be thankful that they are 
not involved in the fight that is air and land travel across this 
country tonight. This year, the F.A.A. predicts Sunday will be the 
single highest air volume traffic day. Others predict tonight is the 
toughest to get around in any other transportation category. For example, 
Amtrak says it expects to carry a record 100,000 passengers on the 
railways today. Greyhound expects to send its buses on a total of 
29,000 trips today, up from 18,000 on any other day. And aaa says 
34 million people are planning to travel, including 28 million going 
by car. Traffic is clogging many of the nation's major roads right 
now. We begin in New York. That is the Jersey side of the G.W. bridge, 
the I-95 critical connection between New Jersey, Manhattan, much of 
New England to the north. It is crawling at this hour. Chicago, highways 
from every direction Con verge in one place, the cloverleaf patterns 
called the spaghetti bowl. That's how it's moving or not. The road 
from San Antonio through Oklahoma City and beyond runs through Dallas, 
Texas, and you're looking south at interstate 35 there tonight, and 
the mass exodus continues on roads in the west, where we figure it's 
still early on the bay bridge in San Francisco, where they're moving 
at speed. More on the great escape from Jim Avila. Heavy rain in the 
northwest, closed traffic lanes in interstate 5 south of Seattle today. 
Flood warnings in coastal Washington and Oregon. But the storm caused 
few delays for most Americans making trips this weekend. Hey, guys. 
You got tags on your luggage? In suburban Chicago, the velasquez family 
got an early start, up before dawn for a vacation to Mexico. It's 
the second heaviest travel weekend in the year. Oh, man! The tickets! 
They arrive at oare airport two hours before their flight. We're up 
early. If you haven't done it, and I have done it, O'hare on today 
is crazy. And it's not crazy now, so it was worth it. More Americans 
thry now than ever before. A record number of flights this weekend. 
Families are more spread out and the economy is strong, so people 
have money. At the airports, fleans jammed. The 1998 load rate of 
73% is the highest since 1946. And because of that, the average fare 
is at its highest in history. Passengers are paying an average 14 
cents a mile, rising steadily since deregulation in the 1980's. Harold 
salfen, and the international airlines passengers association. The 
airlines continued to go U up on their prices because they can get 
that price for that seat. So, where are the bargains in travel? Driving. 
Colorado's David Patterson filled up his truck this morning for 85 
cents a gallon, a tankful $7 cheaper than last year. It seems cheaper 
than last year. Colorado's always been expensive. Across the country, 
the average gas price is at its lowest since March of 1992. Aaa's 
Jonathan Lehrer. Why are prices so low? Well, it has to do with the 
relatively stable economy and an oversupply of oil on the world market. 
Another reason to be thankful as the most mobile country heads off 
for travel. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>