<DOC>
<DOCNO> MNB19981125.2100.2421 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> CAPTION </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
With Thanksgiving weekend comes the start of the holiday movie season. 
There are summer block busters, the other season, and the movies coming 
out right now. With us tonight is Carrie rickey, film critic for the 
"Philadelphia inquirer," joins us in Philadelphia tonight. Carrie, 
we can all read the covers of the magazines, but when you critics 
get together in your secret meetings to decide which movies are going 
to make it and which won't, what is the because, which are the big 
movies, and what are going to be the hits? Oh, boy. That's a big question. 
We're all looking forward to seeing "the prince of Egypt," we look 
forward to seeing "babe," which opened today. We're looking forward 
to seeing "stepmom," which opens Christmas day. But our secret handshakes 
are the pig handshake, I guess. Glad you say that. The hoof, I guess. 
Do they have hooves? It's a hand shick. They have delicacies at the 
end of their arms. We have a bit of a trailer from "babe." You got 
a problem, sweetie? i -- Who is it, honey? It's kind of a pinky whitey 
thingy. Show him in. I'd like the bag back, please. Hey, pinkness, 
look at the little guy. You want to break his heart? But it doesn't 
belong to him. Now, first observation is babe has a new voice. They've 
taken away the old voice, and it's been replaced by -- A different 
person is doing it. The first one was replaced with E.G. Daley. Women 
do babe's voice. So, he's got many qualities. Draw no conclusions. 
Now, there's been much written about this movie. It evidently stumbled 
on its way to the box office. What was that about, and will it hurt 
it? Did it stumble? I know they were doing a lot of post production 
work and had to cancel their charity premiere. It got to theaters 
on time, and it's not as great as the first one, but it's pretty good. 
It's charming. What about "the siege"? "The siege." I don't call that 
quite a holiday movie. It opened a couple weeks ago. Like "enemy of 
the state," it's a nightmare scenario movies, blaming the government 
for a lot of our ills and the government is the cause of our ills, 
and the savior, somehow. And "the siege" is a very -- stars Denzel 
Washington, Annette bening. When Mar rble -- martial law is declared. 
Happens all the time. Good Americans are rounded up and imprisoned. 
We didn't get to "you've got mail," the delightful Internet romp with 
Tom Hanks and megaryan. But perhaps next time. Carrie rickey, thanks 
for coming on. I I poll jies for the satellite delay. Good to see 
you. Enjoy your holiday. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>