<DOC>
<DOCNO> MNB19981125.2100.1817 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> CAPTION </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Because -- And where do we go -- when it's summer? John-John Kennedy 
with his father. The next tape we're going to hear concerns the Cuban 
missile crisis. And Doris kearns Goodwin, it's a conversation with 
former President Eisenhower, notable here, President Kennedy begins 
the conversation calling him general, notable because, of course, 
the president was a world war II veteran, and referred to him as general. 
What was the relationship like between these two men? Well, I'm not 
sure how close it had been. Certainly during the campaign Eisenhower 
was supporting Nixon at the very end. But in a moment like this when 
you have the biggest crisis that Kennedy will face, the Cuban missile 
crisis, there's that felt need to somehow call on former presidents. 
So, he calls on Eisenhower, he calls Hoover, he calls truman. There's 
a sense of they're a special club. It's interesting. At one point 
they ask Kennedy to participate in a poll in 1962 that talked about 
who were the greatest presidents of the past, and he said he couldn't 
participate because no one could know what it's like to be president 
unless you sit in that seat. So, truman had to worry about his controversies, 
etc. He wants their comfort and wants to tell them what's going on. 
Here now the phone call between J.F.K. and D.D.E. @ J.F.K. and D.D.E., 
two men who were polar opposites in so many way, including style, 
of course. And, Dick Goodwin, before we hear the next tape, J.F.K. 
with his brother-in-law, sergeant shriver, the first peace corps director, 
tell us about being present at the creation of the peace corps. Well, 
it had been talked about as an idea by democratic party people and 
senator Humphrey, but we arrived in the middle of the campaign -- 
we were flying around in the -- the country -- arrived at the campus 
at the University of Michigan. Ted sorensen went to the cafeteria 
to get something to eat while Kennedy went to the steps of the student 
union to speak. Students had wait T up to hear him. Somebody rushed 
in and said, you know, he just proposed a peace corps. We were stunned. 
He said, you guys should have stayed with me. He said, before I knew 
it, I had asked for a peace corps. And thousands of students, starting 
at Michigan, within days began to sign up. Nonexistent peace corps. 
Right. And then we made a major speech on it. It was politically a 
good thing to have done, it turned out. Later he put his brother-in-law, 
sergeant shriver in charge of the exeas corps, to indicated how highly 
he regarded it as a priority. And he said to him, I gave you a lemon, 
and you made lemon aide. And you would have been there for the actual 
germ of the idea. There were concerns that certain elements of government 
were going to use this new peace corps as a propaganda tool, I.E., 
the C.I.A. here now John Kennedy and sergeant shriver talking about 
that very danger. Doris kearns Goodwin, final word. Would J.F.K. have 
wanted these tapes to be released? I have no doubt that J.F.K., like 
L.B.J., would want people to hear his voice, and it keeps him alive 
in a very, you know, real vivid way, more than anything does, more 
than a written word. There was a time when rose Kennedy said to me 
that if she was certain her kids could come back again, they would 
still choose the lives they had been given to lead, even though for 
three of them there were young deaths. I could never choose that for 
myself. But whenou hear these strood events he's part of, you realize 
he will live forever. The political junkies Goodwin, Doris kearns 
and Richard. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>