<DOC>
<DOCNO> NBC19981125.1830.0041 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> CAPTION </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Good evening. It is a Thanksgiving eve to be thankful, frustrated, 
unsettled, surprised and a little wistful. We begin with the unsettling 
-- the right to die. A major development in the long-running campaign 
of Dr. Jack Kevorkian to bring death to those no longer interested 
in living. Kevorkian will be charged with first-degree murder as a 
result of his latest death, which was shown on "60 minutes" last Sunday. 
Here's NBC's Pete Williams. Within an hour after Michigan authorities 
announced today's charges, Dr. Kevorkian turned himself in to face 
a charge of first-degree murder for injecting lethal drugs into Tom 
youk, a Michigan man who suffered from a terminal muscle disease. 
Prosecutors say after watching the complete videotapes this morning 
that kevorkian made of the man's death -- parts of which were shown 
last Sunday on CBS "60 minutes" -- they decided they had overwhelming 
evidence of murder. Notwithstanding public sentiment on the issue 
of assisted suicide, it is incumbent upon me to make charging decisions 
based solely upon the law, and not emotion or sympathy. Prosecutors 
say it's irrelevant that youk apparently asked kevorkian to perform 
a mercy killing, because, they say, the victim's consent is not a 
defense to a murder charge. Prosecutors also charged Kevorkian with 
violating Michigan's new assisted suicide law, accusing him of helping 
the man plan his death. And even though Kevorkian said he was trying 
to get arrested to use his TV appearance to focus public attention 
on mercy killing, legal experts say the prosecutors had no choice. 
He feels he's justified, and I understand that. But we as a society 
really can't allow any of our members just simply to flaunt the law 
and to do so with impunity. But in spite of Kevorkian's repeated acts 
of legal defiance, many experts in medical ethics predicted today 
that no jury would convict kevorkian, given these circumstances. No 
one in America, a physician, has ever been convicted for a mercy killing. 
Juries, judges have tremendous sympathy for situations in which people 
ask for help in dying. Today's charges followed a decision by CBS 
to turn the tapes over, in response to a subpoena. And although religious 
figures and even a few of its own stations criticized CBS for broadcasting 
the tape of a man's death, some television critics say it was the 
right thing to do. That picture is so controversial, opened up a big 
discussion about a very hard issue about life and death. Tonight, 
Dr. qokian is out on boil, waiting for his trial with a Stern worning 
from the judge that he'll lose his freedom if he helps anyone else 
die. Pete Williams, NBC news, Washington. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>