<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981125.0312 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
In the end was the beginning, as the New York City Ballet crowned 
its 50th-anniversary gala on Tuesday night with an especially festive 
look back at its first performance, on Oct. 11, 1948. There was the 
same triple bill of George Balanchine's ballets: ``Concerto Barocco,'' 
``Orpheus'' and ``Symphony in C.'' But a half-century later, there 
was also time for the mother of all curtain calls. Nearly 250 former 
dancers of the City Ballet filled the stage of the New York State 
Theater to take a mass bow. Those who had been in the corps, even 
in 1948, led the way, lining up in the rear as former soloists and 
then those who had performed as principals massed to the front. Little 
girls from the School of American Ballet rushed to present little 
bouquets to the retired ballerinas. Maria Tallchief, certainly a charter 
member, stood next to Suzanne Farrell, who came to the fore in the 
1960s. Arthur Mitchell, now artistic director of Dance Theater of 
Harlem, walked in solo and received a big hand. Mikhail Baryshnikov 
and Jacques d'Amboise beamed amid the waving throng, which included 
present company dancers. Gold confetti rained down as the orchestra 
played a loud version of ``Happy Birthday.'' This event had its ritualized 
aspect. In his welcoming remarks from the stage, Peter Martins, the 
artistic director, once again asked the audience to drink a toast. 
Balanchine and Lincoln Kirstein, the company's founders, had begun 
the practice with a vodka toast to Stravinsky at their 1972 Stravinsky 
Festival, and the idea was since taken up at various celebrations. 
This time, each member of the audience was handed a shot glass and 
a miniature bottle of vodka along with a program; all rose readily 
to the occasion at the start of the evening for a bottoms-up tribute 
to ``Mr. B. and Lincoln,'' as Martins put it. A few minutes earlier, 
there was a repeat performance of the fanfare that Stravinsky wrote 
on the occasion of City Ballet's move from its first home at City 
Center to the State Theater in 1964. Robert Haley and Raymond Mase 
were splendid onstage as the trumpeters. Amid the familiar, there 
was nonetheless something fresh and distinctive: a tribute to Tanaquil 
Le Clercq. Although her career was cut short by polio in 1956, she 
remains in memory as one of the world's great ballerinas, the epitome 
of the ideal dancer in the ballets of both Balanchine and Jerome Robbins. 
Because she was Balanchine's last wife, she has been considered one 
of his most important muses. Yet as Robbins noted during one of the 
film clips and photographs projected on Tuesday, ``Tanny could do 
anything.'' She was Robbins' muse, too, as seen in a clip of ``Afternoon 
of a Faun,'' where drama was inherent in her movement. A photo of 
her as Sacred Love in Frederick Ashton's ``Illuminations'' hinted 
at her mystery, visible also in a photo of her as the doomed heroine 
in Balanchine's ``Valse.'' But the essential Le Clercq came through 
in a film clip of Balanchine's ``Western Symphony.'' One saw her technique 
and clarity, her centered toe work. But as the dance hall girl of 
the Western corral of Balanchine's imagination, she strutted on her 
long legs with total wit and style. There was never a touch of vulgarity 
to her swagger and flounce. She was elegance personified. Martins 
presented a bouquet to Ms. Le Clercq at her seat, and the audience 
rose for an ovation. Martins also paid tribute to Robbins, who joined 
the company as dancer and choreographer shortly after its founding. 
``We already miss him,'' Martins said of Robbins, who died in July. 
As for Balanchine's three ballets, it was clear why they would become 
the classics of the future, as Kirstein put it. ``Concerto Barocco,'' 
set to Bach's Double Violin Concerto, and ``Symphony in C,'' named 
after its Bizet score, are Balanchine's signature pieces. ``Orpheus,'' 
set to a commissioned score by Stravinsky, is not. It is an experimental 
work of its time (1948), a foray into lyric theater, almost a miniature 
opera without words. ``Concerto Barocco'' (1941) may be Balanchine's 
greatest ballet. It can, as in this splendid performance, evoke the 
spiritual side of art and stun the eye with its basic purity. The 
eight women in the ensemble started on a wonderfully frisky note, 
a perfect foil for the two female principals, Yvonne Borree and Jennie 
Somogyi. Balanchine initially identifies the two women with the score's 
violin soloists (Guillermo Figueroa and Jean Ingraham), but he does 
not merely mirror the music's structure. How witty of him to incorporate 
the khorovods, or chain dancers, of his Russian background, although 
Americans have seen these patterns as daisy chains. Other motifs bloom 
throughout the ballet. Symmetry is established only to be broken. 
A simple hop on toe in ballet's fifth position is taken up by the 
entire ensemble, always moving in interplay with the principals. Ms. 
Somogyi, swift in her scurries on toe and grand in her leaps, contrasts 
with Ms. Borree, elegant and wonderfully taut in her adagio with Nikolaj 
Hubbe. Unlike so many in these roles, they brought out the differences 
between the ballerinas. Hugo Fiorato kept up a brisk tempo and gave 
the right serenity to ``Orpheus,'' which included debuts by Kyra Nichols 
as Eurydice, Jock Soto as the Dark Angel and Monique Meunier as the 
leader of the Bacchantes, who tear Orpheus apart after he loses Eurydice 
and she returns to the dead. Nilas Martins has come a long way since 
he made his debut in the title role in 1993; his childlike fervor 
has been replaced by a mature and effective image of despair. To match 
him with Soto, as his guide to the underworld (actually Hermes, the 
inventor of the lyre) is merely to match two similar physical types. 
At this point, Martins still rounds out the movement too much and 
Soto lacks tension. Whether he is seen as Orpheus' alter ego, his 
angel or his parent is irrelevant when neither contrast or complement 
is established. Isamu Noguchi's quaint phallic decor does not help 
much; the feeling is that the dancers, asked to incorporate gesture 
into dance movement, are not sure who they are. Ms. Meunier went over 
the top as an extra-wild Bacchante. Balanchine's background allowed 
him to take whatever he had seen in his life. The silk curtain in 
``Orpheus'' recalled the curtain that the Russian director Vsevelod 
Meyerhold used in the opera ``Orpheus and Eurydice.'' In ``Symphony 
in C,'' Balanchine's debt was to Leo Staats, the choreographer at 
the Paris Opera Ballet whose neoclassical plotless ballets he deeply 
admired. In 1947, Balanchine choreographed ``Palais de Cristal'' for 
the Paris Opera Ballet. In New York in 1948, it became ``Symphony 
in C,'' and it was now danced with dazzle and verve. Miranda Weese, 
brilliant in the first section with Damian Woetzel, was followed by 
Philip Neal and Wendy Whelan, who was fascinating in her unorthodox 
and hard-edged performance. The other fine principals were Alexandra 
Ansanelli, Peter Boal, Samantha Allen and Albert Evans. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>