<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981125.0185 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
With New Year's Eve 1999 looming, it would be easy to dismiss the 
end of 1998 as a non-event. But for anyone who wants to make this 
New Year's Eve special by leaving town, traveling to one of the First 
Night celebrations being planned in 183 American cities this year 
might be a refreshing alternative. Although First Nights are designed 
to provide alcohol-free, family- and arts-oriented events for a city's 
residents, even the smallest city is likely to present an array of 
cultural performances and activities that might interest an out-of-towner. 
In addition, cultural institutions and other public spaces sometimes 
will take on new roles for First Night. Instead of touring the Museum 
of the City of New York, for instance, First Night participants in 
Manhattan this year can learn Latin dancing there. In Burlington, 
Vt., the Patrick Gym at the University of Vermont will become the 
stage for a Peruvian dance group called Inca Son. And in Raleigh, 
N.C., the Convention Center Plaza will be the site of an early evening 
children's countdown to the new year, complete with fireworks and 
a drop of the city's giant acorn (the symbol for this City of Oaks). 
First Night International, the nonprofit organization that licenses 
all First Nights, has a Web site at www.firstnightintl.org with links 
to individual cities' sites. Programs are subject to change, and all 
First Nights charge a modest price for buttons that admit participants 
to indoor entertainment, although food and beverages usually must 
be bought separately. Below are 10 First Night celebrations where 
you can party like it's 1999. Annapolis As befits this city of Colonial 
buildings and naval profile, First Night Annapolis will feature hundreds 
of performances and events on or near the waterfront and in some of 
its history-rich buildings. The City Dock, at the foot of Main Street, 
will be filled with illuminated boats and the sounds of African and 
Caribbean music. Other entertainment will range from a presentation 
of ``Much Ado About Nothing'' by the Richmond Shakespeare Company 
at the Asbury Methodist Church to shows by Jeanie Bryson, jazz singer 
and daughter of Dizzy Gillespie, at the Banneker-Douglass Museum. 
Masked revelers and costumed characters will glide through city streets 
_ but be mindful of their tradition: they're not supposed to speak. 
You can join the Chesapeake Caledonian Pipe Band at the top of Main 
Street for the city's traditional March to Midnight down to City Dock, 
followed by fireworks. (One minor disappointment: Plans for a giant 
illuminated crab to descend at midnight are being shelved until the 
millennium party next year.) First Night buttons cost $10, $14 after 
Dec. 19. Information: First Night Annapolis, 100 Cathedral St., Annapolis, 
Md. 21401; (410) 268-8553 or www.fstngt.org. Atlanta Peachtree Street 
in midtown will be the epicenter of the city's sixth First Night. 
Twenty-five indoor sites (including theaters and churches) along Peachtree 
will serve as stages for continuous 30-minute music and dance shows. 
A parade that anyone can join will be led by the Seed and Feed Marching 
Abominable, which includes more than 40 people in colorful makeup, 
wigs, hats and costumes that are heavy on sequins and feathers. There 
will be a family festival from 3 to 9 p.m., and fireworks at midnight 
in front of the Colony Square Plaza at Peachtree and 14th Streets. 
A planned rendition of ``Gone With the Wind'' will be performed by 
one man with a fast tongue: It's billed as taking just 20 minutes. 
First Night buttons are $7, $12 on Dec. 31; free for children under 
6. Information (including hotel packages): First Night Atlanta, 999 
Peachtree Street, Suite 795, Atlanta, Ga. 30309; (404) 881-0400; www.firstnightatlanta.com. 
Boston First Night Boston, which produced the first of these celebrations 
in 1976, remains the largest (1.5 million expected) and among the 
most lavish (more than 1,000 performers scheduled). Plans are already 
in place for a three-day First Night 2000 extravaganza. This year 
entertainment will range from the New England Philharmonic to the 
Weepin' Willie blues band to standup comedy and even calypso and gospel 
played on steel drums by a group of students at a Catholic church 
who bill themselves as St. Mary's Heavenly Fire Steel Band. Among 
the 45 sites _ both indoors and out _ will be the Boston Common, Copley 
Square and the Old State House museum. There will be fireworks over 
the Boston Harbor. If you're lucky, you might even snag one of the 
hotel rooms reserved for First Night revelers. First Night buttons 
cost $12, free for children under 4. Information: (617) 542-1399 or 
www.firstnight.org. For hotels: the Greater Boston Convention and 
Visitors Bureau, (888) 733-2678. Burlington, Vt. After 15 First Nights, 
Burlington has figured out how to make its celebration something of 
a hot ticket. As in previous years, some 20,000 revelers are expected. 
Among the highlights will be a fireworks display for children at 7:15 
p.m., performances by local favorites like the Green Mountain Cloggers, 
and a workshop, music and dancing by Inca Son, a 12-member Peruvian 
troupe. Horse-drawn wagon rides through the Church Street Marketplace 
are free with a button. First Night buttons cost $8, or $35 for a 
family of five, until Dec. 24. After that, all tickets $11; children 
under 2 free. Information (including hotel packages): (800) 639-9252 
or www.firstnightburlington.com. nn Miami Beach In Miami Beach, home 
of sand, surf and supermodels, First Night Miami Beach has planned 
lots of G-rated activities (like a children's festival at the Miami 
Beach Convention Center) and performances in English, Spanish and 
Creole. Iliana Lopez and Franklin Gamero, principal dancers with the 
Miami City Ballet, will perform, as will the Pilobolus Too dance company 
and La Gran Scena Opera Co. At one art installation, revelers will 
be asked to write resolutions on pieces of cloth that will be in a 
large quilt to be displayed next year. First Night buttons are $10, 
$5 ages 6 to 12, under 6 free. Hotel packages available. Information: 
(305) 670-7053. New York First Night New York provides an alternative 
to the huge crowds in Times Square. Early events include a petting 
corral and pony rides at Bryant Park from noon to 4 p.m. Live reggae 
music will be the highlight of a D.J. dance party at the Manhattan 
Mall, Avenue of the Americas and 33d Street, with a balloon drop at 
midnight. Latin music, dance lessons and a Havana-style dance party 
are moving uptown and downtown this year, to the Museum of the City 
of New York at Fifth Avenue and 103d Street and to the National Museum 
of the American Indian, at Bowling Green and Broadway, near Battery 
Park. Donna McKechnie, a Tony Award-winner for ``A Chorus Line,'' 
will perform as part of an evening of Americana at the New York Society 
for Ethical Culture at 2 West 64th Street, at Central Park West. For 
hardy souls, there will be a skating party at the Wollman Rink in 
Central Park. First Night buttons cost $25, $15 ages 13 to 21, $5 
ages 3 to 12 before Dec. 24; after that, the prices are $25 for adults 
and seniors, $20 ages 13 to 21. Information: (212) 922-9393 or www.firstnightnyc.com. 
Raleigh, N.C. Here is a New Year's Eve celebration that manages to 
embrace the scraps of auld lang syne. First Night Raleigh encourages 
revelers to show up at the Scrap Exchange Tent on the Bicentennial 
Plaza downtown to have old stuff turned into hats, masks and costumes 
that they can wear in the 6 p.m. People's Procession through downtown. 
The parade (5,000 usually participate) will be led by a 200-foot dragon 
mascot named Trigon and a large mobile puppet with a six-foot-long 
smile called Face. The early evening is reserved for the new Kids 
Countdown at the Convention Center Plaza, from 7 to 8. It's essentially 
a children's version of the late night event and will be the culmination 
of an afternoon of family festivities at the North Carolina State 
Museum of Natural Sciences and the North Carolina Museum of History. 
For adults, there will be evening performances at 35 sites in the 
downtown area, including music by the Raleigh Oratorio Society and 
the Raleigh Flute Choir, and dance by Chuck Davis and the African 
American Dance Ensemble. First Night buttons cost $6 through Dec. 
25, $8 after; free for children 2 and under. Information: (919) 990-1158 
or www.firstnightraleigh.org. St. Louis Cups of hot coffee and cocoa 
($1) will be staples at some shuttle stops around downtown St. Louis 
as part of this year's celebration. The idea is to keep revelers warm 
enough to take part in a choreographed Grand Procession from the Central 
Library and the City Museum shortly after 11 p.m. to the Kiener Plaza 
on Broadway, for a finale of entertainment and fireworks. Throughout 
the evening, in a 10-block area of downtown, there will be street 
performers outside along with food vendors on Washington Avenue. Inside, 
seven locations will offer entertainment for children and adults, 
including a Velcro wall for climbing and the music of P. Funk with 
Lost Children at the America's Center, and storytelling and line-dance 
lessons in the Great Hall of the Central Library. First Night buttons 
cost $8, $4 for children in advance; $10, $5 for children on New Year's 
Eve. Information: (314) 588-0002; www.firstnight-stl.com. St. Petersburg, 
Fla. A laser light show in St. Petersburg's new domed baseball stadium, 
Tropicana Field, will begin the activities this year, which will end 
with waterfront fireworks over the gulf. In between will be an assortment 
of performances in music styles from blues and Cajun to rock and world 
beat. The Florida Orchestra's Bayside String Quartet and the 97th 
Regimental String Band also will perform in St. Peter's Sanctuary. 
The city's Historical Museum will become a stage for Allen Moffatt 
and Blind Willie, a blues and gospel duo, and for Peter Merrigan, 
a contemporary acoustic guitarist. The Florida International Museum 
will be used for a performance of ``Snow White and the Seven Dwarfs.'' 
But perhaps the most festive sites will be the Pier, at the foot of 
Second Avenue, with magic acts, a circus and a mariachi band; North 
Straub Park, which will have a steel drum performance and fireworks; 
and South Straub Park, which will feature a percussion garden _ sculptures 
that can be played. First Night buttons cost $8, $5 ages 6 to 12, 
free under 6. Information, (813) 823-8906. San Diego Celebrating First 
Night is as good an excuse as any to go to San Diego. All the festivities 
will take place downtown at Embarcadero Marina Park. The mix of merriment 
will include performances by groups with names like the Zydeco Blues 
Patrol and the Javalinas. There are plans for a Native American camp 
and a Renaissance camp. Both will include presentations about customs. 
An international food court and fireworks also are scheduled. First 
Night buttons cost $10, $5 for children under 12 and seniors. Information: 
(619) 296-8731. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>