<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981125.0342 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
When federal drug agents swept past puzzled tourists this month to 
seize three luxury hotels that line the powdery beaches of this Caribbean 
resort, it perhaps came as little surprise that the police had found 
evidence linking such properties to the biggest drug mafia in Mexico. 
What was more startling were the questions that agents kept posing 
about the man they suspected of being the mafia's silent partner in 
the hotels. Over and over, they asked employees about Mario Villanueva 
Madrid, the state governor and a member of President Ernesto Zedillo's 
governing party. ``They're practically accusing me of being a trafficker!'' 
Villanueva protested, recounting how he immediately boarded a private 
jet and flew to Mexico City to deny any financial ties to the hotels 
and complain to some of Zedillo's senior aides. Despite those complaints, 
Mexican officials say Villanueva continues to figure in a sweeping 
investigation of drug operations in his state of Quintana Roo. But 
while one Mexican intelligence report describes Villanueva as being 
``implicated in the criminal organization'' that has turned the state 
into one of the most important conduits for cocaine being shipped 
to the United States, the federal government has neither filed criminal 
charges against him nor been able to contain his political counterattack. 
In a blunt challenge to federal officials, Villanueva has demanded 
that they show what evidence they might have against him. He has even 
fought publicly with leaders of Mexico's governing party, presidential 
loyalists whom he and other hard-line governors are challenging for 
control Indeed, because of Villanueva's allegiance to the old guard, 
the police investigation is now much more than that: It has become 
an electrifying test of Zedillo's ability to deal with challenges 
of crime and politics that are multiplying in the governing Institutional 
Revolutionary Party as the once-absolute authority of the president 
erodes. The confrontation underscores both the rapid pace and contradictory 
nature of Mexico's political evolution. Until recently, most Mexican 
governors served at the president's will. Messy problems in the provinces 
were often solved by their dismissals, and Zedillo's predecessor, 
Carlos Salinas de Gortari, forced the resignations of almost a dozen 
governors and governors-elect after they ran into accusations ranging 
from embezzlement to ballot theft. Zedillo has slowly committed himself 
to more modern rules of greater autonomy for the elected leaders of 
the 31 states. But good government has not necessarily followed from 
greater democracy. As in Quintana Roo, the president's powers often 
still rest on a criminal justice system that is deeply in crisis, 
and on a political system that is still being born. For the time being, 
the federal authorities seem to be pursuing their investigations in 
Quintana Roo with unusual vigor. They have seized several hotels worth 
$200 million that they traced to the traffickers. They also shut down 
a private security company at the Cancun airport that officials say 
the traffickers used to safeguard drugs and even film the movements 
of visiting federal agents. A senior Mexican official said the odds 
were better than even that Villanueva would be indicted on conspiracy 
or other charges after his term concludes in April. Under Mexico's 
constitution, a governor cannot be prosecuted unless he is first impeached 
by the federal Congress. ``Just because he comes and says, `Look, 
I'm not guilty,' does not mean that the thing ends there,'' the Mexican 
attorney general, Jorge Madrazo, said in an interview. ``What I can't 
tell you is whether I am going to indict Mario Villanueva.'' For his 
part, the governor insists that he is a modern leader whose blunt 
speech is misunderstood in the mannerly world of Mexico City politics. 
``I am one of the few people in this country who openly speak the 
truth,'' he said in an interview. To the governor's political opponents 
in Quintana Roo (pronounced ``kin-tah-nah ROW'') Villanueva is an 
authoritarian masquerading as a reformer, a man who _ whatever his 
possible ties to the drug trade _ has tossed political enemies in 
jail, set unofficial records for corruption and fully earned the nickname 
El Chueco, or ``The Crooked One.'' As his jet banked over a stretch 
of rain forest to land on a recent afternoon at Chetumal, the quiet 
state capital where he grew up on the southern end of the Yucatan 
Peninsula, Villanueva compared himself to another embattled politician, 
President Clinton. ``In the United States, if they want to drag you 
down, they accuse you of illicit sex,'' he said. ``Whoever is not 
liked in Mexico today gets accused of being a trafficker.'' Later, 
as he drove through town in a Chevrolet Suburban, Villanueva described 
his tenure as a period of growth that in some ways mirrors his own 
rise from a poor peasant family up through the ranks of the governing 
party, known as the PRI for its initials in Spanish. ``Mario is an 
extraordinary politician,'' said Francisco Lopez Mena, a notary who 
has represented him. ``He is very seductive in his talk. He never 
says no.'' As governor he has ruled with a heavy hand. After taking 
office in 1993, he briefly imprisoned on corruption charges three 
PRI politicians who had not cooperated fully with his election campaign, 
and many other acts of petty repression have followed. Last December, 
the state police jailed an anti-government organizer on defamation 
charges because he had distributed copies of a Mexico City newspaper 
that carried a report about Villanueva's purported drug ties. In July, 
a PRI politician had formally complained to the federal government 
that the governor had ordered gunmen to beat him. The governor denied 
that he had committed abuses. ``They want to portray me as a man who 
lives outside the law, or that I am a person that does not respect 
the rights of others, and it's just not true,'' he said. Baldemar 
Dzul Noh, an opposition legislator in the Mexican Congress said: ``He's 
very aggressive with anybody who disagrees with him. He runs our state 
like a feudal plantation.'' He and his closest friends control the 
state's main newspapers, the state congress, the courts and the police. 
Several of his political adversaries complained in interviews their 
phones are tapped. By the standards of the old PRI, that kind of power 
was unexceptional. But in 1995, stirrings of trouble began to attract 
outside attention. In one case, a union leader in Cancun reported 
to federal administrators that thousands of gallons of kerosene were 
being diverted from the Cancun airport to refuel drug planes at clandestine 
airstrips. A secret investigation followed, but before it could be 
completed, the whistle-blower was killed in his Cancun garage. State 
prosecutors eventually concluded that airport managers had hired the 
assassin, according to newspaper reports that quoted the state investigative 
file. But Villanueva's prosecutors never filed charges. ``There was 
never any serious attempt to punish the guilty,'' said the union leader's 
widow, Dulce Maria Bustamante. Until the mid-1990s, Cancun had served 
Mexico's traffickers much as other coastal resorts. It was a place 
to relax, to launder profits and to take delivery of the occasional 
load of South American cocaine. But after the police seized a tractor-trailer 
laden with cocaine near Chetumal in 1995, a group of drug-enforcement 
agents, including several military officers, traveled to Quintana 
Roo to investigate further. In a secret July 1997 report to federal 
prosecutors, the director of Mexico's anti-drug police, Lt. Col. Edgardo 
Cedillo Gonzalez, outlined some explosive findings. ``Allow us to 
inform you that great quantities of drugs, including cocaine, are 
being smuggled through Quintana Roo, approximately four tons a week,'' 
states the report, a copy of which was given to The New York Times 
by an opponent of the governor. ``Among those implicated in the criminal 
organization is the state governor, Mario Villanueva, alias `El Chueco.''' 
Police commanders were coordinating the drug shipments, the report 
says, while the staff chemist at the local office of the federal attorney 
general was employed by the traffickers to analyze the purity of cocaine 
shipments. One Chetumal merchant was routinely carrying cash bribes 
from the drug mafia directly to Villanueva, the report says. The officer's 
report identifies the smuggler in charge in the state as Ramon Alcides 
Magana. Mexican and U.S. officials say Magana is a former army lieutenant 
and federal police officer who went to work for the powerful trafficker, 
Amado Carrillo Fuentes, as a bodyguard. He was promoted to manage 
Carrillo Fuentes' operations in Cancun, shortly before pressure on 
the traffickers' air routes prompted them to ship cocaine in speed 
boats into the coastal marshes of Quintana Roo from Central America. 
Villanueva vigorously denied the accusations in the 1997 report, emphasizing 
that enforcement of drug laws is a responsibility of the federal government. 
``We don't know what they do or where they are,'' he said of the traffickers. 
When he first learned of the report, Villanueva said he flew immediately 
to Mexico City to protest his innocence. ``I demand that you show 
me the files,'' he said he told Madrazo, the attorney general. ``If 
I have something to do with this, well, then investigate me!'' Madrazo 
took the governor up on his offer. He had the special prosecutor, 
Mariano Herran Salvatti, question Villanueva in detail under oath 
for several hours. After that appearance, Villanueva told Mexican 
newspapers that both Madrazo and Herran assured him that he had been 
cleared. ``They told me I was clean,'' he recalled, ``that there was 
nothing on me.'' But Herran told a different story. ``There's no way 
that we could say Villanueva has been exonerated, because only our 
investigation can determine that,'' he said. ``To say he has nothing 
to do with drug trafficking just doesn't correspond with what's happening.'' 
Herran continued, ``An investigation with many lines of inquiry is 
under way, and at the right moment the result will be made public.'' 
As the investigations have broadened, the traffickers in Quintana 
Roo have grown more brazen. Three times in the last year, officials 
said, Magana's gunmen have kidnapped federal drug investigators. But 
when they made the mistake of abducting an army lieutenant in a secret 
narcotics-intelligence unit, they provoked a blow-torch response. 
Word of the kidnapping reached the defense minister, Gen. Enrique 
Cervantes, just as the traffickers were starting to torture the officer 
for information. According to officials familiar with the incident, 
Cervantes flew into a fury. He sent one group of soldiers, backed 
by armored personnel carriers, to surround Magana's Mexico City home, 
trapping the trafficker's wife inside. Then he sent three more planeloads 
of troops to Cancun, where they started breaking down the doors of 
the traffickers' mansions. The raids turned up a trove of documents, 
Mexican and U.S. officials said, including messages and notes that 
suggested that state police officials had been alerting the traffickers 
about drug agents' movements in Quintana Roo. The soldiers also found 
papers to a car driven in Magana's escort convoy. It was registered 
with the Quintana Roo police and assigned to Oscar Garcia Davila, 
whom investigators identified as the leader of the lieutenant's kidnappers. 
A year earlier, Garcia had been hired to command police operations 
in Cancun and the northern part of the state only months after he 
had been purged from the federal police for corruption. After the 
army's June raids in Cancun, federal investigators announced that 
they had identified Garcia as Magana's security chief, and said they 
had discovered a state police credential indicating that he was still 
on active duty. He is now a fugitive. Villanueva, who still refers 
to Garcia by his first name, says he knew nothing of his ties to the 
traffickers. ``I did not know that Oscar was involved in that kind 
of situation,'' he said. In the twilight of his six-year term, when 
most governors are quietly preparing to retire or positioning themselves 
for another job, Villanueva has been unusually busy. Last year, he 
became embroiled in a contretemps with U.S. diplomats after the U.S. 
consul in Cancun complained that he had been threatened by one of 
the governor's aides for complaining about official foot-dragging 
in the investigation of the death of a U.S. tourist. In June, Villanueva 
sent the state congress a package of constitutional reforms, one of 
which sought to reduce the period in which a public servant could 
be held accountable for crimes committed during their time in office. 
Opposition deputies quickly dubbed it ``the impunity law.'' Faced 
with the prospect of an embarrassing debate that would focus on his 
own political troubles, the governor quietly withdrew the bill. Another 
attempt to safeguard his future ended in a noisy confrontation _ this 
time with the leaders of his own party. When Villanueva encouraged 
several of his closest associates to seek the PRI's nomination to 
succeed him as governor, the party's national leadership blocked their 
candidacies. After weeks of infighting, the nomination was finally 
won in a September primary by Joaquin Hendricks Diaz, a former army 
officer who had been seen as a dark horse. The prospect of his governorship 
does not bode well for Villanueva. Relations between the two have 
been cool since 1995, when Hendricks, as the PRI's state president, 
displayed an independent streak that enraged the governor, several 
members of the party said. Soon, Hendricks noticed plainclothes police 
officers outside his home. Then a friend reported that the governor 
had ordered his arrest. Panicked, Hendricks crawled into the trunk 
of a car and fled Chetumal with one of his relatives at the wheel. 
Two years later, the two men reconciled. And after Hendricks won the 
PRI nomination this fall, the governor expressed support for his candidacy. 
But Villanueva's frustrations with Mexico City boiled over soon afterward. 
In a rambling, late-night speech last month to Quintana Roo's PRI 
leaders, he accused both the party's national president, Mariano Palacios, 
and its secretary general, Carlos Rojas, for meddling in the state's 
affairs. In remarks that made headlines around the country, he demanded 
an apology from Palacios and a resignation from the leader's deputy. 
Rojas shot right back. Noting that Villanueva had garbled Hendricks' 
name in the speech, he insinuated that the governor was drunk when 
he delivered it. ``He was not in the best of conditions,'' Rojas told 
reporters. Villanueva denied the accusation. Were prosecutors to recommend 
bringing charges against Villanueva, it would pose an agonizing choice 
for Zedillo. Dropping the case could weaken his authority. But pursuing 
it aggressively might create new turmoil in the PRI just a year before 
crucial national elections. Villanueva said he was not worried about 
the future. ``I abide by the law, and if something wrong has been 
done in my administration, I'll take responsibility,'' he said. ``If 
they want to put me on trial, there are lawyers who can manage things 
in courts.'' 
</TEXT>
</DOC>