<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981125.0353 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Brazil has long been proud of its place in world cinema. But these 
days the country is quite simply film mad. Headlines appear on the 
front pages of the major newspapers every time a Brazilian film wins 
an international award or an Academy Award nomination. E-mail and 
the Internet are settings for debates over movies, like the one that 
erupted last year when Bruno Barreto's ``Four Days in September'' 
fueled complaints that it soft-pedaled Brazil's years of military 
rule. Just as Brazilian films can be categorized according to which 
regime was in power when they were being made, so too can Brazilian 
governments be judged by the films with which they coincide, given 
that the films are often receiving government subsidies. No sooner 
did the current president, Fernando Henrique Cardoso, take office 
than he endorsed a pioneering film-finance program that gives tax 
breaks to companies investing in Brazilian film production. The Audio 
Visual Law, passed in 1994, is credited with jump-starting Brazil's 
film industry after the previous president, Collor DeMello, had withdrawn 
government support for the arts in general and film in particular 
for four years. The late '90s are a time of great optimism for Brazil's 
movie industry. Production is booming. According to Jose Carlos Avellar, 
the director of Riofilme, a film distribution company, there are 40 
films in the pipeline for release next year. In addition, the tax 
law has given rise to new initiatives that make filmmaking in Brazil 
even more viable. So many filmmakers have been energized by this new 
climate that last spring, when the Sundance Institute convened a filmmakers' 
workshop to help develop new talent in Brazil, there were more than 
150 submissions for a dozen slots. It is with impeccable timing, then, 
that ``Cinema Novo and Beyond,'' the largest retrospective of Brazilian 
cinema ever mounted in the United States, opened this month at the 
Museum of Modern Art. Organized by the museum in association with 
Riofilme and the Brazilian Ministry of Culture, the program is presenting 
59 features and 15 short films ranging over four decades. For those 
acquainted with the glory of Brazilian film from the early '60s, the 
show is a dream come true; its sparkling new prints restore a half-forgotten 
history to compelling visual splendor. For those who have never known 
what they were missing, it's an extravagant opportunity to catch up. 
And with the show also booked at major museums and film centers throughout 
North America after it closes in New York on Jan. 22, it is likely 
to shape the popular notion of Brazilian film for years to come. The 
recent renaissance in Brazilian cinema has not been merely a matter 
of money or political will. Nor is it a function of worldwide attention, 
though certainly the international success of ``Central Station,'' 
which opened in the United States this month, must reassure the politicians 
of the soundness of their financial investment. Avellar links the 
current production renaissance to the dynamism and invention of the 
1960s film movement known as Cinema Novo, which has served as both 
blueprint and inspiration for what could be achieved. ``That's the 
only way we could recover from zero like this in only four years,'' 
he said. It was to Cinema Novo, too, that the thoughts of Jytte Jensen, 
a film curator at the Modern, turned when she determined that there 
was a need for such a show. She was just becoming aware of the new 
films emerging from Brazil, but what dismayed her was the condition 
of her favorite films from the '60s. ``I couldn't believe the terrible 
state of those early films, which were barely surviving in faded, 
worn-out prints,'' she said. Cinema Novo is the movement that put 
Brazil on the world cinema map. Contemporaneous with the French New 
Wave, with which it shared sources of inspiration, Cinema Novo was 
influenced equally by Italian Neo-Realism and the great Russian director 
Sergei Eisenstein. Dedicated to resisting the dominance of Hollywood, 
finding a truly Brazilian cinematic style and exposing the unexplored 
lives of real Brazilians in the favelas (slums) and the sertao (drought-parched 
backlands), Cinema Novo filmmakers were possessed by a cinematic fever. 
The films may have been dedicated to the principle of ``miserabilism,'' 
which illuminated the country's poverty, but they translated their 
mission into the most gorgeous of spectacles in shimmering black and 
white. In 1963-64, the release of three films set the terms of Cinema 
Novo forever: Glauber Rocha's ``Black God, White Devil,'' Nelson Pereira 
dos Santos' ``Barren Lives'' and Ruy Guerra's ``Guns.'' Rocha, the 
theorist of the movement, termed Cinema Novo's approach ``the esthetics 
of hunger.'' So it was. But there is a beauty that attends the long 
takes and allegorical compositions, the shots of landscapes bereft 
of vegetation and peasants bereft of hope. The starkly poetic images 
in this tradition are as vivid now as then, but they're made even 
more poignant by the realization of what a short life Cinema Novo 
actually had as a coherent movement. April 1, 1964, is the key date. 
That's when a military coup d'etat placed Brazil under a dictatorship 
that would last for 20 years. Immediately, Cinema Novo was transformed: 
some of its directors went into exile, some found a low profile in 
advertising or other fields, and some tried to work within the new 
constraints. The movement itself mutated, spinning off marginal and 
underground variations spiced with parody and experimentation. The 
interesting films of this period tended to be heavily coded, with 
political messages concealed under layers of melodrama, carnival or 
romance. Joaquim Pedro de Andrade's ``Macunaima'' (1969) popularized 
the so-called ``cannibalist'' movement with its tongue-in-cheek call 
for an unapologetic consumption of the foreign. In his study, ``Tropical 
Multiculturalism,'' the scholar Robert Stam praised the carnivalesque 
wit of ``Macunaima''and offered a citation from Andrade's own manifesto: 
``Cannibalism is an exemplary mode of consumerism adopted by underdeveloped 
peoples.'' The film's use of Rabelasian wit and brutally surrealist 
images made it an unforgettable fable. Other masters of the early 
Cinema Novo pursued different esthetic and political strategies. Carlos 
Diegues made one of the most famous Brazilian films, ``Bye Bye Brazil,'' 
which placed two of Brazil's most cherished myths into collision with 
one another: the carnivalesque and the modern. As the past collided 
with the future in the journey of a troupe of actors touring the countryside, 
Diegues fashioned the resulting chaos into a critique. Leon Hirzman 
(an underrated member of the Cinema Novo generation, with a trio of 
works in the retrospective) made ``Sao Bernardo'' (1971), a devastating 
tale of a peasant who transforms himself into a wealthy landowner 
at the cost of his own soul. Its depiction of a violent and paranoid 
boss, who sees communism behind every disagreement and retaliates 
with murder, reflected the Brazilian people's experience of its own 
government in this period. At the same time, the relationship between 
the violent Paulo and his abused schoolteacher wife Madalena (played 
by the exquisite Isabel Ribeiro) unfolds like a Shakespearean tragedy 
in its descent into death, grief and madness. By November 1984, political 
change was beginning to sweep the country and the Rio Film Festival 
was revived. Democracy was in the air, a constitution was about to 
be ratified and the military was preparing to step down. For this 
writer, seeing ``Twenty Years Later,'' by Eduardo Coutinho, at that 
festival was transformative. Coutinho's film, about the murder of 
union organizer Joao Pedro Teixeira, was buried by peasants at the 
time of the 1964 coup in order to save it; 17 years later, he returned 
to the scene of the crime and completed his movie. With the end of 
military rule in the '80s, Brazilian cinema, emerging from years of 
repression, exploded into a movement that one critic called a ``hunger 
for esthetics.'' Suzana Amaral's powerfully moving ``Hour of the Star'' 
(1985), based on a Clarice Lispector story, followed a poor woman 
from northeast Brazil who comes to Sao Paulo. It's a film deeply rooted 
in Brazil's internal migration to the metropolis. But this time around, 
Ms. Amaral follows her anti-heroine Macabea through a landscape littered 
with the detritus of popular culture, wasted lives and urban dysfunction. 
The selection of work of the '90s at the Modern shows that the Brazilian 
film revival is not a matter of hype but of deep-rooted invention 
and cinematic reflection. High points range from ``Foreign Land,'' 
the early Walter Salles and Daniela Thomas opus of Brazilian identity 
crisis abroad, to the work of two diasporic Brazilians who have returned 
to make new work: Helena Solberg's revisionist documentary ``Carmen 
Miranda, Bananas Is My Business'' (1995) and Jose Araujo's lyrical 
ode to the northeast Brazil, ``Landscape of Memories'' (1996). There 
are two themes that run throughout ``Cinema Novo and Beyond,'' linking 
its past to its present. One concerns hunger and appetite, scarcity 
and excess, as explored in Brazilian myth and daily life. The other 
concerns journey and location, exile and return, both internal and 
external, from the imported soldiers of Os Fuzis and the itinerant 
prostitute of ``Iracema'' to the displaced widow in ``Twenty Years 
After.'' In Brazil, popular culture, daily life, the clash between 
the modern and the primitive, all remain vital themes for a country 
still discovering its own stories. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>