<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981125.0334 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
This city announced Wednesday that it plans to bid for the 2008 Summer 
Olympic Games. In a ceremony at the Great Hall of the People, suggesting 
top-level endorsement, Mayor Jia Qinglin submitted the proposal to 
the head of the Chinese Olympic Committee, which is to decide in January 
whether to apply to the International Olympic Committee. To an unusual 
degree, Chinese leaders see acting as host for the Olympics as a matter 
of pride and international acceptance of China's status as a great 
power. ``We think that as the world's most populous country with a 
vigorous and growing economy, China should host the Olympic Games 
and make more contributions to the Olympic movement,'' said Wu Shaozu, 
president of the country's Olympic committee, at Wednesday's ceremony, 
the New China News Agency reported. Early this decade the Chinese 
government lobbied heavily around the world for the right to have 
the 2000 Games in Beijing, pledging to spend $7.5 billion to improve 
its creaky urban infrastructure and even, many experts believe, timing 
the release of prominent dissidents to allay criticism of the country's 
human rights record. Chinese, official and ordinary alike, reacted 
with dismay and anger in 1993 when Sydney, Australia, beat Beijing 
by just two votes in balloting of the International Olympic Committee. 
After China's violent crackdown on student-led pro-democracy demonstrations 
at Tiananmen Square in 1989, many members of the U.S. Congress, other 
Western politicians and human rights groups had argued that it would 
be wrong to reward China with the Olympics. Although it was not at 
all clear that rights concerns, rather than logistical and other factors, 
caused the loss, many Chinese have borne a grudge on the matter since. 
Wednesday, a Chinese Olympic committee spokeswoman said China had 
lost the 1993 vote because of ``nonsports factors.'' In the last few 
years China has successfully emerged from its post-1989 diplomatic 
isolation and has worked, with some success, to downgrade the role 
of human rights disputes in its relations with Western countries. 
If, as expected, the International Committee receives a proposal from 
Beijing, it will have to consider other problems here, including some 
of the world's most dangerous air pollution and severe traffic snarls. 
Chinese sports have also been tarnished by repeated scandals involving 
use of performance-enhancing drugs, though the government has vowed 
to clean up the problem. But there is little doubt that if selected, 
China would go all out to make the Games a success. There will be 
ample time for Beijing and other cities to burnish their applications. 
Officially, bidding for the 2008 Games does not open until next year, 
with selection in 2001. Toronto; Buenos Aires; Istanbul, Turkey; Seville, 
Spain; and Osaka, Japan, have already announced that they will vie 
for the honor. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>