<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981125.0243 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
It was Veterans Day, and as Harold Leventhal ducked into Carnegie 
Hall through a rear door and followed a yellowish strip painted over 
an Indian red floor, you got the feeling he had been here before. 
``Harold!'' boomed a voice from the back of what's officially known 
as the ticket office office, ``How are you? You're looking great. 
Today's your day, Harold. You're a veteran, a veteran promoter.'' 
As Leventhal was quick to remind him, he actually is an Army veteran, 
with a memorable stint in the Signal Corps in India in World War II. 
But if anyone in American music qualifies as a veteran promoter, it 
is Harold Leventhal, who began as a song plugger for Irving Berlin, 
survived the blacklist with the folk singing Weavers, put on Bob Dylan's 
first concert hall date and has been bringing artists to places like 
Carnegie Hall for nearly half a century. He is pretty much down to 
one event a year, two Thanksgiving weekend concerts that began with 
the Weavers around 1960, then featured Pete Seeger and for years now 
have featured Arlo Guthrie, with Seeger as a guest this year at Carnegie. 
The concerts on the Friday and Saturday after Thanksgiving keep adding 
new generations. This year they include Seeger's grandson, Tao Rodriguez, 
and Guthrie's children, Abe and Sarah. But pushing 80, Leventhal remains 
a living history of 20th-century music from the big-band era through 
the folk revival, when he managed or promoted concerts for such artists 
as the Weavers, Seeger, Theodore Bikel, Judy Collins and Joan Baez 
and handled the business affairs for Woody Guthrie as he began to 
show the effects of Huntington's disease, the degenerative illness 
that finally killed him in 1967. He now spends much of his time managing 
the Woody Guthrie archives with Guthrie's daughter, Nora. ``Harold's 
a remarkable person, totally honest with a great sense of humor,'' 
said Seeger, who pays tribute to Leventhal in the program notes for 
the Thanksgiving concert. ``He did something extraordinary for the 
Weavers. He stuck his neck out and had faith in us when others wouldn't. 
You might say he had faith in America, too.'' Leventhal never much 
went beyond the artists and ethos of the folk era, but he doesn't 
feel he missed much, either. ``I got some calls from rock groups,'' 
he said without much interest. Prodded for examples, he cites ``A 
trio. I can't recall the name. Stills was one of them.'' It was Crosby, 
Stills and Nash. ``But I wanted to stay where I was comfortable and 
stay with people I thought were making a good contribution. I never 
felt comfortable in the rock world. The behavior. The whole scene. 
It wasn't my style.'' Leventhal's style mixes liberal politics, the 
Bronx of the Depression years and the laid-back sensibilities of the 
folk era. Wearing a gray sweater vest and sky blue turtleneck over 
his Santa Claus physique, he has the look of a frizzy Jewish Buddha 
and the ability to drop remarkable names casually, the way Mel Brooks' 
2,000-Year-Old Man does. Leventhal was born in Ellenville, N.Y., in 
1919, the youngest of five children of immigrant parents, his mother 
from the Ukraine, his father from Lithuania. His father died of the 
flu eight weeks after Leventhal was born. The next year the family 
moved to the Lower East Side, his mother working as a janitor in the 
building where they lived, and then to the Bronx in 1933. Without 
a record player in the house, music was not a big part of his youth, 
except for an occasional trip to the Yiddish theaters on Second Avenue. 
But his older brother, Herbert, got a job with Irving Berlin, and 
Leventhal followed him there, soon working as a song plugger, taking 
Berlin's songs to big bands like Harry James' or singers like Dinah 
Shore, then staying out schmoozing until 2 in the morning at Lindy's 
and other nightspots. A favorite memory is pairing Frank Sinatra with 
Benny Goodman as a one-night fill in. Somehow he found a way to transplant 
those skills to India when he served there as a corporal in the Signal 
Corps. ``The most charismatic man I ever met was Nehru,'' he allowed 
in talking about his World War II days. A photo of the two hangs in 
his office. ``Handsome. Debonair. Gracious in his manner. A very impressive 
man.'' It turns out India's first prime minister also gave him a letter 
of introduction to take to Gandhi. ``The first day I met him was a 
Thursday; he doesn't talk on Thursday,'' Leventhal recalled. ``I wrote 
him a note, and he wrote on it I should come back the next day, which 
I did. The first thing he wanted to know was how Paul Robeson was. 
I didn't know much except to say that as far as I knew he was OK. 
We had several talks. He wanted to know about Truman, who had just 
become president. He was very inquisitive about that. It was all a 
unique experience for an Army corporal.'' After the war he gravitated 
back to the music business and one night in 1949 found himself in 
Greenwich Village listening to the Weavers, who were unknown at the 
time. Folk music was the most distant of commercial backwaters at 
the time, but he liked the members, their politics and their music 
and soon signed on as their manager. It was the most important liaison 
of his career. The Weavers _ Pete Seeger, Fred Hellerman, Lee Hays 
and Ronnie Gilbert _ were the first commercial successes of the folk 
revival of the 1950s and '60s. And their members, particularly Seeger, 
became some of the most prominent targets of Sen. Joseph McCarthy's 
investigations and the blacklists that followed. The Weavers were 
dropped by their label and went from million-selling artists to commercial 
pariahs. But they stayed together, outlasted the McCarthy era and 
in the end prevailed. Seeger recalls that Leventhal pushed them to 
do concert dates during their darkest days. He was turned down by 
Town Hall but managed to book them at Carnegie Hall and sold out in 
1955 as the McCarthy era was at its peak, Seeger said. Leventhal's 
laconic voice gets an uncharacteristic bite when he talks about those 
days. ``These were people to be admired, for their music and for facing 
up to the blacklist,'' Leventhal said. ``I'm proud to have been part 
of it and proud that we never succumbed to any of the pressure.'' 
As folk music became more commercially successful, most of the artists 
made their way to his office. There, he has a poster with his trademark, 
``Harold Leventhal Presents'' at the top for Bob Dylan's first concert 
hall date, at Town Hall, April 12, 1963. Tickets were $2, $2.75 and 
$3. A personal favorite was Phil Ochs, one of the earliest of the 
artists dubbed the Next Dylan, who became a mainstay of the folk and 
protest songs, then turned to drugs and drinking and committed suicide 
in 1976. ``He was obsessed with being bigger than Dylan and then with 
being a cross between Dylan and Elvis,'' he said. ``It was a shame. 
I admired him in the early days, and then it was as if everything 
got thrown off balance.'' There are a few recent copies of Rolling 
Stone on a couch, but Leventhal's office has the feel of history more 
than commerce, with posters and programs from a half century of concerts, 
shows and movies he produced or co-produced. One memorable wall has 
four signed pictures of him with Irving Berlin, Benny Goodman, Frank 
Sinatra and Peggy Lee. Leventhal tends to dote on the favorites, Seeger, 
the first Weavers concert at Town Hall, Jacques Brel and the Weavers 
film for which he was a co-producer, ``Wasn't That a Time.'' ``I think 
we played a very positive and meaningful role in the culture of the 
country,'' he said. ``You take Woody Guthrie. His music is more popular 
today than when he was living. So much of the music today is so self-centered. 
It's all about people's personal problems and almost none of it's 
about the problems of humanity.'' Not that everything was quite so 
memorable. He peered over at the framed Playbill for the Joseph Heller 
play ``We Bombed in New Haven,'' for which he was a co-producer in 
1968. ``Bombed in New York, too,'' he said. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>