<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981125.0405 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
If it's Thanksgiving Day, it's time to thank those who make sports' 
little corner of the world a better place: Mark McGwire and Sammy 
Sosa, who touched all the bases in their home-run duel and also touched 
the hearts of all those people who realized they really cared about 
baseball again. The U.S. Olympic women's hockey team that didn't deserve 
to disperse after their gold medal in Nagano, Japan. Joe Torre, whose 
serene guidance as the Yankee manager was reflected in the casual 
calm of their record 125 victories. Mark O'Meara, who finally emerged 
from golf's shadows to put on a Masters green jacket and lift the 
British Open's claret jug. Vinny Testaverde, who patiently waited 
for his opportunity as the Jets' quarterback and is now making the 
most of it. Nelson Doubleday and Fred Wilpon, for putting up $91 million 
to keep Mike Piazza with the Mets for seven more seasons. Jackie Joyner-Kersee, 
who decided to stop competing in track and field after a glorious 
gold-medal career as its first lady. Mike Piazza, for realizing that 
the Mets' fans aren't that tough to live with, that all they ask is 
for a slugger to be worth all the money he makes, even if it's $91 
million. Paul O'Neill, whose Yankee presence in right field honors 
the same grassy area where Babe Ruth stood in Yankee Stadium. Jayson 
Williams, a rare voice during the pro basketball lockout who seems 
to appreciate all the millions of dollars he earns simply for grabbing 
rebounds for the Nets. Ken Daneyko, the Devils defenseman who is as 
tough as ever after his toughest fight: rehab for alcohol abuse. Jason 
Sehorn, who understood his knee surgery was simply the risk he took 
in returning kickoffs for the Giants. Lindsay Davenport, who finally 
climbed the mountain of women's tennis to win her first U.S. Open 
title. Al Leiter, who returned to the Mets for $32 million when he 
might have signed for even more millions elsewhere. John Elway, who 
held the Super Bowl trophy aloft for the first time and who decided 
to return to the Denver Broncos for what might be the first 16-0 regular-season 
record in National Football League history. Marion Jones, the world's 
fastest woman who threatens to break all the records. Sen. John McCain, 
R-Ariz., the primary sponsor of the federal law that is designed to 
protect fighters from the predators that lurk in boxing. Casey Martin, 
the ``guy in the cart'' who made all the world's disabled golfers 
feel better about themselves. Dominik Hasek, the Buffalo Sabres' goaltender 
whose spectacular saves for the Czech Republic earned the gold medal 
for that nation in the first Olympic hockey tournament with National 
Hockey League players. The Toms River (N.J.) Little League champions, 
who seemed to have more fun winning than anybody else. Jerry Bailey, 
the jewel of a jockey whose horse sense always makes the best thoroughbreds 
better. Michael Jordan, whose legacy is now the Chicago Bulls' six 
National Basketball Association titles. Scott Brosius, who was virtually 
unknown to Yankee fans when he was obtained in a trade for Kenny Rogers 
and who now is known as one of the most productive third basemen in 
Yankee history. Tubby Smith, who coached the University of Kentucky 
to the national college basketball championship in his first season. 
Se Ri Pak, the South Korean rookie on the Ladies Professional Golfers 
Association tour who put her nation on the world golf map. Charles 
Oakley, who now that he's with the Toronto Raptors will be appreciated 
even more for having been the Knicks' soul. Dale Earnhardt, who finally 
won the Daytona 500 after having won nearly every other race on the 
stock-car circuit. Tim Raines, the spokesman for the Yankees' team 
get-well card on ESPN as Darryl Strawberry awaited colon-cancer surgery. 
Wayne Gretzky, who is suffering through another miserable Rangers' 
season without ever publicly complaining that he doesn't have a sharpshooter 
on his line to convert his often perfect passes. And especially Joe 
DiMaggio, who was 84 Tuesday but had to celebrate his birthday where 
no one ever should, in a hospital. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>