<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981125.0355 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
A one-star admiral serving at the Navy's headquarters in the Pentagon 
has been relieved of his duties and accused of improperly steering 
military contracts to a woman with whom he was having an adulterous 
affair, Navy and defense officials said Wednesday. The officer, Rear 
Adm. John Scudi, is accused of violating the Pentagon's ethics rules, 
as well as several other charges under the Uniform Code of Military 
Justice, including obstruction of justice, giving false statements 
and adultery. If formally charged in the military equivalent of grand 
jury proceedings, Scudi would be only the second admiral to face criminal 
charges since the Uniform Code of Military Justice was enacted by 
Congress in 1951. The first case occurred in 1957 when a rear admiral 
was convicted of homosexuality and sexual misconduct and dismissed, 
according to the Navy. Some of the charges against Scudi _ including 
having an adulterous affair and lying about it to investigators _ 
inevitably echoed Kenneth Starr's accusations against President Clinton, 
which have led to an impeachment inquiry that continues to roil the 
House. Some Republicans have argued that discipline and morale in 
the military have suffered because Clinton, as commander-in-chief, 
is not subject to the same standards of moral behavior as soldiers 
and officers. However, Navy and defense officials, who agreed to discuss 
the accusations in more detail than usual for an on-going investigation, 
said the charges involving extramarital sex were secondary to those 
involving the unlawful awarding of government contracts. Within the 
military justice system, adultery is rarely prosecuted and, when it 
is, almost always accompanies other accusations of criminal wrongdoing. 
The officials said Scudi, who as director of the Navy's offices of 
privatization and base management oversaw the awarding of millions 
of dollars in contracts, was accused of steering some $150,000 in 
contracts over several years to a consulting firm owned by the woman 
with whom he had a long-running affair. He did so, the officials charged, 
without properly seeking competitive bids for the work. Although he 
did not detail the accusations, Navy Secretary Richard Danzig also 
highlighted the charges involving the awarding of contracts. ``I'm 
struck by how this case involves questions about impropriety with 
contractors,'' Danzig said in an interview on CNN. ``And that means 
we need to pay special attention to it.'' Scudi, 54, who is married, 
declined through a Navy spokesman to comment on the accusations, some 
of which were first reported Wednesday in The Washington Times. The 
Navy relieved Scudi of his duties in the Pentagon in August and reassigned 
him to the Washington Navy Yard as the investigation continued, officials 
said. The Navy has tentatively scheduled a preliminary hearing on 
the charges for Dec. 14. During that hearing, known as an Article 
32 hearing, a presiding officer will decide whether to hold a court-martial. 
If convicted of all the charges, Scudi could face dismissal, a loss 
of pay and benefits and a maximum of 11 and a half years in prison. 
Although charges involving adultery or fraternization remain rare, 
the armed services have been buffeted in recent years by cases involving 
sexual conduct. Over the years, such accusations, especially against 
senior officers, were usually handled quietly, with early retirements 
or administrative punishments that stopped short of criminal charges. 
In recent years, however, the handling of cases involving adultery 
and other sexual behavior has received more scrutiny _ both inside 
and outside the Pentagon _ and that has led to more high-profile prosecutions. 
Earlier this year, the Army found itself under fire for allowing a 
two-star officer, Maj. Gen. David Hale, to retire even though a subordinate's 
wife had accused him of coercing sex. In July, the Pentagon's Inspector 
General accused Hale of a pattern of ``inappropriate behavior'' _ 
though not coercive _ involving adulterous affairs with the wives 
of four subordinates, misuse of taxpayer money and lying to investigators. 
The Army is now deciding whether to subject Hale to a court-martial, 
even though he is now retired. After the investigation began, Scudi, 
a 32-year veteran, also requested retirement, but Navy officials said 
the request would have no effect on the prosecution. Officials familiar 
with the investigation, who spoke only on condition of anonymity, 
said the allegations against Scudi extended over several years and 
involved contracts awarded during previous assignments at the Pentagon 
and in San Diego. The accusations came to light after the woman learned 
that Scudi had begun a second adulterous relationship, this time with 
a senior civilian employee of the Navy, the officials said. Scudi 
faces a second adultery charge for that relationship. Officials also 
said that when investigators began looking into the contracts, he 
lied about his actions and tried to obstruct justice by urging the 
contractor not to cooperate. But the woman, whom the officials declined 
to name, agreed to cooperate with Navy investigators. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>