<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981125.0179 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
The earliest hearing aid was simplicity itself and is still in use: 
a cupped hand behind the ear. But today's technology has made hearing 
aids much less obtrusive and much more helpful. While early hearing 
aids tried to improve upon the external ear, with devices to direct 
the sound coming from the front into the ear of the listener and block 
noise from the sides and rear, modern devices fit surreptitiously 
behind or into an ear while augmenting the sound coming in. In the 
17th century, artisans made metal ``ears'' to fit over the natural 
ears. Ear trumpets, cones that could be aimed at the source of a sound, 
came into use in the early 1800s. By the late 1800s, the acoustic 
horn became available. It was a flexible tube with two ends _ one 
cone shaped to catch the sound, the other gently tapered to fit inside 
the ear. The approach changed from art to engineering in this century. 
In 1913, Siemens became one of the first companies to offer electronically 
amplified hearing aids. These early units were large and not very 
portable _ about the size of a tall cigar box _ but they had a speaker 
that fit into the ear. Acousticon's Model 56 in the mid-1920s was 
one of the first really portable units, although it was quite heavy. 
Some of the technological advances of World War II showed up after 
the war in hearing aids. Zenith's pocket-sized Miniature 75 helped 
set a trend toward smaller and more effective prosthetics. Transistors 
led to startling improvements in hearing aids. Tiny transistors in 
newly developed miniature microphones could be built into the frames 
of eyeglasses along with better, smaller batteries. Mounting a hearing 
aid behind the ear, as in Zenith's Diplomat of the late 1950s, is 
called BTE in the industry. The next step was to put hearing aids 
in the ear (ITE), then, as they got even smaller, partly into the 
ear canal (ITC). Now hearing aids can fit completely into the ear 
canal (CIC). Until the early 1990s, most hearing aids were analog 
and consisted of a microphone, an amplifier and a speaker (transducer). 
But with the availability of miniature computer components, as well 
as the audio-processing technology found in CD and DVD players, the 
digital hearing aid was born. Most hearing aids now have some digital 
components, and all-digital hearing aids are becoming popular. Using 
the power of computer chips, or microprocessors, digital hearing aids 
are able to manipulate the incoming sound to amplify the specific 
frequencies that a user is having trouble hearing. This feature, called 
equalization control, was rarely available with analog devices. One 
example of this kind of technology is the Senso, a fully digital unit 
that fits completely in the ear and is made by the Danish company 
Widex. A number of other companies also make digital hearing aids, 
including Siemens, a German company, and Telex, based in the United 
States. Settings on digital hearing aids can be adjusted for specific 
environments. Going to a chamber music concert? Select setting No. 
1. Meeting the boss for a business lunch in a noisy restaurant? Select 
setting No. 4. What these settings do is adjust the equalization, 
volume and signal-processing functions. If you cannot hear high frequencies 
well but love chamber music, the appropriate setting would emphasize 
the high frequencies (for the violins) and give you a moderate increase 
in volume. Lunch with the boss would require an emphasis on the middle 
range (for the human voice), a decrease in the high frequencies and 
some form of extraneous noise reduction. In the 1940s, the cost of 
a hearing aid started at about $150, a great expense at the time. 
Today's units can range from $700 for an analog unit worn behind the 
ear to $1,200 for an analog model completely in the ear canal or up 
to $3,000 or more for digital devices worn completely in the canal. 
Several companies are beginning to offer products with greater processing 
power that they say will provide a better match for a user's pattern 
of hearing loss. And, taking a cue from science fiction, cochlear 
implants are beginning to be used. These implants bypass some of the 
faulty nerve circuitry in the cochlea, a spiral-shaped structure in 
the inner ear that contains the cells that transmit nerve impulses 
representing sound toward the brain. That allows some people who are 
deaf or who have severe hearing loss to have some degree of hearing. 
A number of companies, like the Cochlear Corp., have developed cochlear 
implants, which are surgically connected to the cochlea. Researchers 
are also studying the possibility of brain implants or nerve regeneration 
as future remedies for hearing loss. As the American population ages, 
hearing loss afflicts a growing number of people. Although some of 
the causes of hearing loss (loud music and noisy environments) can 
be avoided, some cannot (heredity, accidents, disease and aging). 
Many people try to avoid dealing with the problem, but the evidence 
is clear: hearing loss does not reverse itself and generally gets 
worse. If you think your hearing may be impaired, see an audiologist 
or other doctor. Hearing aids may not give you perfect hearing, but 
at least you'll be able to hear the music. And the children. And the 
car alarms. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>