<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981125.0360 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
For people who need bone-marrow transplants to fight leukemia or other 
deadly diseases, but who lack a compatible marrow donor, doctors are 
salvaging hope from a curious source, one that is normally thrown 
away: blood left in the umbilical cords and placentas of newborn infants. 
In the largest study of placental blood use to date, in 562 patients, 
including more than 400 children, survival rates were similar to those 
in studies using bone marrow from unrelated donors who perfectly matched 
the recipients on tissue typing tests. The procedure worked in many 
cases even when the placental blood was not perfectly matched to the 
patients' tissue. (The researchers referred to it as placental blood, 
but it is widely known as cord blood.) Patients in the new study were 
gravely ill with leukemia, lymphoma, other cancers or genetic diseases, 
and were given cord blood as a last resort because bone marrow donors 
had not been found for them, or because they were considered too sick 
to wait the months it could take to find a marrow donor. The results, 
being published on Thursday in the New England Journal of Medicine, 
were announced on Wednesday by Dr. Pablo Rubinstein, head of immunogenetics 
at the New York Blood Center in Manhattan. The center has been banking 
placental blood since 1993 and provided it to 98 hospitals in the 
United States and overseas that participated in the study. Because 
cord blood is readily available, it could be a huge boon to thousands 
of Americans who need marrow transplants. Moreover, cord blood is 
less likely than bone marrow to transmit infection, and it is collected 
at no risk to the donor. Donors of bone marrow must undergo a surgical 
procedure and anesthesia when their marrow is harvested. Earlier, 
smaller studies had suggested that cord blood might be a possible 
alternative to bone marrow transplants, but researchers said they 
were heartened by Rubinstein's findings because of their scope and 
because patients involved had fared better than might have been expected. 
All had been extremely ill, many in advanced stages of disease after 
long periods of waiting in vain for a bone marrow donor. Still, by 
100 days after cord blood transplantation, 218 of the 562 had died. 
A similar rate would be expected with bone marrow transplanted from 
unrelated donors in such severe cases. Dr. Claude L'Enfant, director 
of the National Heart, Lung and Blood Institute, which funded the 
study but did not take part in it, said in a telephone interview, 
``The prospects are quite fantastic in my opinion. The work from the 
New York Blood Center is really a landmark study.'' But L'Enfant also 
tempered his remarks, adding that cord blood transplants are an emerging 
treatment that must be studied further. Also, he said, for widespread 
use ``You need to have a huge bank of these cells, and that is not 
available at the present time.'' Dr. Robertson Parkman, head of the 
division of research immunology and bone marrow transplantation at 
Children's Hospital in Los Angeles, said, ``This confirms previous 
observations, that degrees of mismatch that would not be tolerated 
with bone marrow transplantation are tolerated.'' Parkman said the 
study also showed that a few ounces of cord blood can sometimes be 
used to treat adults, as opposed to a quart or more used in bone-marrow 
transplants. But the finding was puzzling, because the procedure worked 
in some adults but not others, and Parkman said further research was 
needed to find out why. Bone marrow or cord blood transplants are 
given to patients who have received such high doses of chemotherapy 
and radiation to fight disease that their own bone marrow, which makes 
red and white blood cells, has also been destroyed. Both marrow and 
cord blood teem with special cells that can reconstitute the patient's 
ravaged blood supply and immune system. Those cells, hematopoietic 
stem cells, can give rise to new red and white blood cells and to 
platelets, which are essential for clotting. Although the procedure 
is called a transplant, the marrow or cord blood is really dripped 
into a vein like a tranfusion, and the stem cells find their way to 
the marrow spaces in the patient's bones. Even though people getting 
cord blood are given a smaller volume of blood than those receiving 
marrow, the cord blood works because it is so rich in stem cells and 
those very young cells have more growth potential than those from 
an adult, Rubinstein said. The great advantage of placental blood, 
he said, is that it does not have to be as closely matched to the 
recipient's tissue as bone marrow does. That means it can be used 
to help more people, including members of racial and ethnic minority 
groups who often have trouble finding compatible donors. Less precise 
tissue matches are possible because the cells in cord blood, less 
mature than those in bone marrow from an adult donor, are less likely 
to be rejected by the recipient or to attack the recipient's tissue. 
For a bone marrow transplant from an unrelated donor to succeed, the 
donor and recipient must match on 6 out of 6 genetic traits used in 
tissue typing. But placental blood transplants can work when only 
4 or 5 traits match, and sometimes even 3, though the odds of success 
increase with better matches. Dr. John Wagner, associate director 
of bone marrow transplantation at the University of Minnesota in Minneapolis, 
who treated several patients in the study, said an important finding 
was that three groups of patients did not do well with cord blood, 
and, if they had a choice, might fare better with bone marrow. Those 
patients had chronic myelogenous leukemia, severe aplastic anemia 
and Fanconi's anemia. ``These three diseases have fallen out,'' Wagner 
said. ''Why would that be? Is it peculiar to this group? How does 
it compare to bone marrow transplantation? We know that with chronic 
myelogenous leukemia, results with bone marrow are quite good. This 
is a concern.'' It is a quirk of human biology that makes placental 
blood so rich in stem cells. After several months of pregnancy, stem 
cells, which have been residing in the fetus' liver, begin cascading 
into the bloodstream and migrating to the bone marrow. At birth the 
baby's blood, and therefore the placenta and umbilical cord, are still 
full of stem cells. Within about 24 hours, most of the stem cells 
vanish from the baby's blood. It might seem wasteful, a biological 
mistake even, for such precious cells to accumulate in tissues that 
are lost to the baby. In fact, Rubinstein said, doctors used to think 
babies needed the blood that was left in the placenta and cord, and 
would try to let that blood drain into the infant, either by elevating 
the placenta or lowering the infant below the level of the delivery 
table, before the cord was cut. But gradually it became apparent that 
the procedure, called placental tranfusion, could backfire. The extra 
volume of blood forced into the baby caused heart problems in some 
infants, and the excess of red cells sometimes led to jaundice. Nature 
had apparently anticipated losses through the placenta and provided 
fetuses with blood to spare. About 30 years ago, Rubinstein said, 
placental transfusions were halted. Another curiosity, he said, is 
that although scientists revere what they call ``true stem cells,'' 
those that can recreate the entire blood supply and immune system, 
nobody has ever seen one. Researchers know that there are stem cells 
in cord blood and bone marrow, but they cannot identify just which 
cells they are.``We may have seen it but don't know it,'' Rubinstein 
said. ``We infer and know they exist from very good data.'' Similarly, 
scientists do not know precisely how stem cells manage to create new 
blood cells and yet maintain a population of stem cells. Of the 5,500 
people in North America who received bone marrow from donors in 1997, 
60 percent to 70 percent had matches in their own families, and the 
rest found unrelated donors, according to the International Bone Marrow 
Transplant Registry, a Milwaukee based group that keeps statistics 
on the procedure. Figures were not available on how many patients 
failed to find marrow donors, but that had to be the case for at least 
228, the number who received cord blood in 1997. Dr. Craig Howe, chief 
executive officer of the National Marrow Donor Program, a Minneapolis 
based registry that helps people who need bone marrow to find matching 
donors, said that the program would also begin to help patients find 
cord blood matches sometime next year. And other institutions are 
also establishing cord blood banks, including the National Institutes 
of Health, Mount Sinai Medical Center in New York, the University 
of Colorado in Denver and Cardinal Glennon Hospital in St. Louis. 
Companies have also sprung up to offer private cord-blood banking 
to expectant parents, on the remote chance that their child or someone 
else in the family might one day need a stem-cell transplant. It is 
a trend that makes many scientists uncomfortable, partly because it 
limits public access to cord blood. But many couples seem interested: 
in just three years, one private firm in California has banked 10,000 
samples, more than the New York Blood Center has stored in nearly 
six years. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>