<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981125.0341 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
During the spring primary elections in Chicago in 1928, candidates 
were machine-gunned and bombs at polling places terrorized voters. 
Desperate to prevent political violence in the November election, 
the head of the Crime Commission went to the city's most powerful 
gangster, Al Capone, to plead for help. Capone, amused and flattered, 
delivered. With his cooperation, all known local gunmen of his and 
rival gangs were rounded up on Election Eve. Violence was suspended 
long enough for peaceful citizens to vote; ``not one election fraud,'' 
marveled the anti-crime chief at the display of Capone's power. In 
Russia today, organized gangs of criminals are gunning down reform 
candidates, honest officeholders and political journalists. The country 
is out of the government's control, and nowhere is political crime 
more violent than in St. Petersburg, heart of Russia's democratic 
reform. In the run-up to local elections, Galina Starovoitova, Russia's 
leading female advocate of democracy, was murdered by a pair of assassins. 
Weapons made in America and Italy were left at the scene. Her press 
aide, also shot, was able to call police and is under heavy guard 
as a witness. The funeral this week brought together the splintered 
reformers for the first time since the murder last year of St. Petersburg's 
deputy mayor. Former Prime Minister Yegor Gaidar stood with the Yabloko 
Party leader, Grigory Yavlinsky, to hear their onetime ally Anatoly 
Chubais hurl defiance at the intimidators. The newspaper Izvestia 
charged that ``not one high-profile contract killing has been solved. 
Nazis, multiplying like plague-ridden rats, encounter no rebuke.'' 
Another paper, Trud, published a list of unsolved murders beneath 
the headline ``Under personal control of the president'' _ deriding 
Boris Yeltsin's usual assumption of command followed by no action. 
The FSB (formerly the KGB) is supposedly investigating. But the oligarch 
Boris Berezovsky, surrounded by former FSB goons, charged recently 
that the FSB had ordered his murder; that organization counter-charged 
that the former goons now around Berezovsky had been involved in contract 
killings. Yeltsin _ always dying, never dead _ has all but abdicated 
rule to Yevgeny Primakov. That prime minister cannot be bothered with 
political crime; he is too busy denouncing America and Britain for 
daring to threaten Saddam Hussein, and sending new reactors and technicians 
to help Iran become a nuclear power despite feeble Clinton protests. 
(That's the old spymaster's way of thanking the U.S. for supplying 
thousands of tons of free grain to starving Russians this winter.) 
How can we help the embattled reformers in Russia? Certainly not by 
pouring more monetary aid down its banking system's drain. In Washington 
this week, Vladimir Gusinsky, a media baron supporting democrats in 
next year's Duma elections, denied that Russia's nouveau riche spirited 
some $66 billion out of the country in the last four years. But not 
even an oligarch thinks an infusion of Western money would fix the 
anarchy in which assassins thrive. Without condescension, we should 
offer to share with the Russians our experience in combating organized 
crime. Our federal agents and big-city cops know how mafias corrupt 
officials, and are wise to the latest computer techniques in moving 
hot money to foreign fronts. Some even remember how to induce rival 
gangs to ``go to the mattresses'' and destroy each other. The point 
to make to those Russian cops struggling to be honest is that only 
a few generations ago America had to break the underworld triangle 
of corrupt politicians, thieving financiers and thugs for hire. We 
learned how to slice through cozy arrangements by using an elite force 
recruited outside the establishment. In 1929, at the behest of a Chicago 
publisher, the newly elected president, Herbert Hoover, sent in a 
team of agents to break up Capone's violent politico-criminal empire. 
Eliot Ness of Cleveland headed an incorruptible force of a dozen ``untouchables.'' 
They nailed Capone not for his murders but on a white-collar charge 
of federal income tax evasion. He died in jail _ ``nutty as a fruitcake,'' 
as a gangland visitor reported. What happened in Chicago 70 years 
ago can happen in St. Petersburg with Russian ``untouchables.'' It 
begins with presidential will. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>