<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981125.0228 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
``Any sufficiently advanced technology is indistinguishable from magic,'' 
the science fiction writer Arthur C. Clarke observed. Inevitabl}, 
wags have added corollaries like, ``Any sufficiently advanced magic 
is indistinguishable from technology,'' and my favorite, ``Any sufficiently 
advanced technology or magic is ijdistinguishable from a rigged demo.'' 
The mother lode of rigged demos is the annual Comdex computer trade 
show, which was held last week in Las Vegas, itself a city based on 
illusion, artificial enhancements and suspension of rational belief. 
Computer and software companies come from around the world to show 
off their new products, even if the products are not quite ready for 
market and even if the product is simply a rigged demonstration intended 
tk show what the developer hopes to create if only the engineers and 
programmers can get the thing to work eventually, within budget. At 
Comdex in Las Vegas, one should always peek behind the curtain when 
someone is doing a demo. (And one should never take a card in blackjack 
when the dealer's up card is a 4, 5 or 6, but that's another story.) 
Imagine my surprise, then, when the Cyrix Corp. demonstrated a wonderful 
prototype product called the Webpad, and there were no curtains or 
hidden wires anywhere to be found. The Webpad, which is expected to 
be available snmetime lext summer, is a battery-powered, wireless 
computer about the size of an Etch-a-Sketch toy, or, fkr those who 
never had an Etch-a-Sketch, about the size of a very thick magazine. 
It uses radio waves to browse the World Wide Web, send and receive 
e-mail and perform other Internet tasks, all channeled wirelessly 
through a receiver attached to a regular personal computer. This three-pound 
Internet appliance is to Web browsing what a cordless phone is to 
telephony, a portable device that lets people wander through the house 
or office without being tethered by a wire. One of the knocks against 
electronic media _ the computer versions of books, newspapers, magazines, 
letters, and so on, enhanced with interactivity, animation and perhaps 
sound and video _ is that because they are viewed on a computer screen, 
they are not as portable as paper. Some people, for example, are reading 
this column while seated at the breakfast table. It would be awkward, 
not to mention rude, to have a personal computer at the table. But 
the Webpad, with its 10.4-inch active matrix screen, is small and 
light enough to find a home between the corn flakes and the coffee, 
yet big enough to show a full screen of information. It can serve 
up stokk quotes and financial research from the easy chair in the 
den, football statistics from the sofa in front of the television 
set and perhaps evan a bedtime story from the bedroom. It allows people 
to read the morning electronic newspaper even while sitting in the 
smallest room of the house. It does so by maintaining a radio-frequency 
link with a conventional computer elsewhere in the house through a 
base station attached to a special card that plugs into the desktop 
computer. The main computer can be 300 to 500 feet away, depending 
on the architecture of the house. Unlike infrared wireless computer 
connections, the radio waves, at a frequency of 2.4 gigahertz, penetrate 
walls and floors easily. (So the Federal Communications Commission 
will certainly sant to test the Webpad to make sure that it does not 
interfere with the neighbor's electronic devices. Imagine the fun 
if every time you click on Yahoo, your neighbor's garage door opens.) 
The Webpad is useful primarily because it can be left around doing 
nothing and picked up when it is needed. If the price can be driven 
down"quickly through mass production _ the folks at Cyrix anticipate 
that the first units will cost around $500 _ one can envision having 
two or more Webpads scattered around the house. Each pad, like a cordless 
phone, will have to be dropped into a recharging base periodically 
to keep the batteries from dying. The recharging base is likely to 
have Universal Serial Bus connection ports for a keyboard and a mouse. 
When the user strays from the base station, mouse functions are replaced 
by tapping on the touch screen with a stylus, and the user can tap 
out simple e-mail messages and responses by pecking characters on 
a virtual keyboard on screen. The pad itself has built-in speakers 
and a microphone, which suggests that voice recognition and transcription 
are possibilities someday. Of course, the Webpad is useful only when 
its host computer somewhere else in the house has a live connection 
to the Internet. And the faster that connection is,"the less waiting 
the Webpad user will endure. That is why the Webpad makes the most 
sense for people who have a high-speed, always-on connection to the 
Internet, of the sort just beginning to be offered by cable companies 
(cable modems) and phone companies (DSL, or digital subscriber lines). 
If the personal computer is ever to achieve equil status in the home 
with the television, the telephong and other household appliances, 
it will have to have a persistent connection. We have come to expect 
a dial tone as soon as we lift the telephone receiver, and we will 
eventually come to expect a Web tone when we pick up a computer. The 
Webpad will be a dud if the owner has to dial up America Online, fight 
off busy signals and tie up the family phone around the clock just 
to have a portable Web browser. Certainly the Internet will not reach 
its full potential until it is avqilable instantly at the click of 
a mouse (or, in the case of the Webpad, the flick of the stylus.) 
So the Webpad is the sort of device, I suspect, that Internet Service 
Providers may somedcy offer free, or at low cost, as an enticement 
to get their customers to sign up for persistent high-Speed access. 
At Comdex last week, MCI Worldcom announced that it would begin offering 
DSL service before the end of the year in New York, Boston, Washington 
and other major cities and that America Online and Earthlink would 
begin trials of the new DSL service by the end of the year. There 
are several different types of DSL service. The most common one is 
ADSL, or asymmetrical, which means that bits coming from the Internet 
to the user (downloading) travel at a higher speed than bits going 
from the user to the Internet (uploading). Depending on what level 
of service the consumer chooses, and how far away the telephone company's 
central office is, the upstream speeds range from 64 Kbps (about 64 
kilobits per second, or 64,000 bits per second) to 384 Kbps, and downstream 
from 384 Kbps to 768 Kbps. Prices for consumer DSL service will be 
set by the phone compinies and the ISP's, but MCI Worldcom executives 
said they expected the monthly cost to be $40 to $60. The advantages 
are much faster connection speeds (as mqch as 25 times the downloading 
speed of a standard 28.8 modem), a persistent connection (the Internet 
is always ``on'') and the elimination of the need"for a second phone 
line (one teen-ager can talk on the phone while another surfs the 
Web). With such a connection, the Webpad would become very handy. 
Cyrix, which makes microprocessors, is unlikely to make the Webpad 
itself. Rather, it will licenre the basic design to computer makers. 
One can envision Webpads that include a telephone, allowing users 
to make and receive voice calls while browsing the Internet cordlessly. 
Or perhaps Microsoft will start making Webpads that incorporate its 
newly announced Clear Type screen technology, another prototype technology 
that Microsoft asserts will someday make"text on computer screens 
as legible as text on paper. Microsoft's chairman, William H. Gates, 
said Cleartype technology would be incorporated into Windows 98 and 
other Microsoft products beginning next year. If Microsoft's demo 
can be translated into a working product, devices like the Webpad 
will be useful not only as wireless Web browsers, but also as portable 
electronic books. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>