<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981125.0292 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
After four months of infighting, bullying and bloodshed, Cambodia 
finally got its new National Assembly on Wednesday, a smiling, bowing 
alliance of men who despise _ and in some cases have tried to kill 
_ each other. It looked the part, all red carpets and roll-calls, 
gently tapping gavels and statesmanlike remarks from deputies in double-breasted 
suits. But the red-carpeted institutions of government are not the 
real arenas of Cambodia's politics, where bitter rivalries seem to 
go on forever and nobody truly concedes defeat. Many foreign analysts, 
their hope for democracy wearing thin, said they feared that Wednesday's 
show of amity would be fleeting. For one thing, the new government 
_ forced together long after the July 26 election by the moral suasion 
of King Norodom Sihanouk _ looks unsettlingly like the last one, which 
broke apart in a violent coup 16 months ago. Once again it is a coalition 
of battlefield enemies from the 1980s: the former communists of Hun 
Sen and the royalists of Prince Norodom Ranariddh, the king's son. 
Once again the two parties share the key ministries of defense and 
interior and split the rest between them. But there is a key difference 
in the new arrangement that could make it more stable: only one man 
is in charge this time, Prime Minister Hun Sen, whose party won the 
most seats in July. Prince Ranariddh, whose party is the junior member 
of the coalition, has been relegated to speaker of the 120-seat National 
Assembly, where the clash of ambitions will be less destabilizing 
than when he shared the premiership with Hun Sen, who ousted him in 
the last coup. In addition, Cambodia has seen two major events in 
recent months that open a new political chapter and offer the possibility 
of substantive work by the government, if it chooses to act. One is 
the collapse of the Khmer Rouge guerrillas, after more than 30 years 
of fighting and mass killings. Their fading as a serious fighting 
force removes an armed threat to stability, and closes an arena of 
competition between the major parties. The communist Khmer Rouge, 
responsible for the deaths of more than a million people when they 
held power from 1975 to 1979, have disintegrated through defections 
over the past two years. Their founder, Pol Pot, died in the jungle 
in April. The second change is the success of Hun Sen's coup in July 
1997, which routed the prince's royalist troops and crippled his political 
party. ``It dismantled their security apparatus, dismantled their 
media outlets, helped exacerbate or even create fissures within the 
party, put the party at a significant disadvantage in the 1998 election 
and contributed immeasurably to the climate of impunity and political 
repression,'' a Western diplomat said of the coup. The country is 
thus governed now by one dominant and feared political and military 
power, recognized by the international community, which will be more 
difficult to challenge. The formation of an elected government _ despite 
the fraud and intimidation that marked the election _ means that Cambodia 
is likely to regain its disputed U.N. seat, win eventual acceptance 
into the Association of South East Asian Nations and see a resumption 
of crucial foreign aid, which was suspended after the coup. It brings 
to Hun Sen the legitimacy he has sought since he was installed as 
prime minister in 1985 by an occupying Vietnamese army and since he 
had to elbow his way into shared leadership with Prince Ranariddh 
in 1993 after losing an election sponsored by the United Nations. 
In the parliament Wednesday, Hun Sen was wreathed in smiles as he 
chatted with Prince Ranariddh and surveyed the balloting that elected 
the prince speaker, as agreed on earlier. ``Dominance plus legitimacy 
in the eyes of the international community _ it's a position they've 
never been in before,'' a foreign diplomat said of Hun Sen's party, 
the Cambodian People's Party. ``In Cambodia now there are no competing 
ideologies, no competing armed forces and no outside interference. 
This obviously increases the chances for stability. And stability 
was one of the fundamentals of the international involvement in the 
Cambodian elections.'' The other fundamental was the fostering of 
democracy in Cambodia, and it is less clear that progress has been 
made in this direction. The election itself, though marked by an outpouring 
of enthusiast voters, was badly flawed by the muscle and manipulation 
of Hun Sen's party. Its outcome was the result of post-election struggles 
as much as of the voting itself. As a lesson in democracy, its message 
to Cambodians may have been that real power does not yet come from 
the ballot box but from feudal chieftains. As if to drive home this 
lesson, soldiers armed with automatic weapons prevented supporters 
from greeting Sam Rainsy, the nation's most prominent dissident, when 
he returned from abroad Tuesday to take up his new seat in the Assembly. 
Soldiers on motorcycles with clubs and electric batons whacked at 
several dozen supporters _ also on motorcycles _ who tried to accompany 
Sam Rainsy's car from the airport. It is not yet clear that the people 
who have won power will use it to address the real issues of poverty, 
economic development, education and health care _ which are among 
the worst in the world. Hun Sen's party has control of what are described 
as the ``money-making ministries'' _ a reference to their potential 
for corruption _ including finance, commerce, construction, industry 
and planning. Prince Ranariddh's party has most of the social portfolios, 
like education, health and rural development. Thus the prince's party 
can make its mark on society and boost its future electoral prospects 
if it succeeds in improving social welfare. But its prospects are 
severely limited: it will depend almost entirely on funds from Hun 
Sen's financial ministries. government in Cambodia has little history 
of seriously addressing issues of national welfare. Government positions 
are seen primarily as good business opportunities, and much of the 
foreign aid is siphoned off in corruption. The political agreement 
that produced Wednesday's coalition includes the formation of several 
new ministries and an entire new branch of government _ a 60-member 
Senate with only vague duties; both are understood to be bargaining 
chips to sweeten the arrangement. ``They are creating more ministries 
to make everybody happy,'' said Son Chhay, one of 15 opposition members 
of parliament who represent the party of Sam Rainsy. ``They are rubbish 
ministries. We see once again that this power-sharing group is only 
interested in power and money. They will not solve social problems. 
All the problems we see now, all the corruption, will not cease.'' 
</TEXT>
</DOC>