<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981125.0253 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Jennifer Rahel Conover of Fort Lauderdale, Fla., found ``the most 
priceless gift'' for her husband, Ted, recently, just by surfing the 
Web, she said. For several years, she had worked through alumni associations, 
the Department of Veterans Affairs and regional newspapers to try 
to find David Granger, a college friend of Conover and a fellow World 
War II veteran. ``I was almost afraid that this Dave Granger, whom 
I'd never met, might have died,'' she said. ``Otherwise I was sure 
someone could have helped me find him.'' Then she typed his name into 
phone directories she found on the Alta Vista and Metacrawler search 
engine sites and found Granger's phone number and address in Mesa, 
Ariz. The old friends hope to meet face to face next year. Granger, 
who lost touch with Conover several years after they graduated from 
the University of Miami, said he felt a sense of ``awe that they could 
find me.'' The Internet is full of stories of people who once were 
lost but now are found: high-school sweethearts reuniting, college 
roommates catching up on old times, people who need transplants finding 
lost blood relatives. With ``people finders,'' the search engines 
that serve as giant phone books, it's easier than ever to find and 
be found, and that's good news. Mostly. But what if you don't want 
to be found? What if a friend you served with in the Pacific was the 
house guest who wouldn't leave? Or your old boyfriend with a drinking 
problem still thinks you are the hero of his own country-and-western 
song? Do people finders interfere with the desire for life, liberty 
and the pursuit of anonymity? The news is mixed. Most people finders 
are no better than telephone books. Sometimes you can't even find 
yourself or people you know. But some can be eerily productive _ and 
potentially damaging. People finders come in a variety of shapes and 
sizes; many of them are found on search engine sites and other Web 
portals. Besides phone numbers, some provide fax numbers and e-mail 
and home-page addresses, and some may eventually offer pager and cellular 
phone numbers. People finders are popular. In September, Switchboard 
logged 6.8 million visitors, Infospace 3.5 million, and Anywho 1.5 
million. These electronic directories can be easier to use than directory 
assistance or the white pages of a phone book, as their databases 
do not require surfers to know the full name of the person they are 
seeking. For example, Anywho lets you type in partial names that begin 
with or end with certain letters or syllables _ or that rhyme with 
certain syllables. Wild-card letters are allowed at Whowhere on Lycos; 
for example, you can type in Franc(star)s if you cannot remember how 
Francis or Frances spells his or her name. That site also provides 
searches for e-mail addresses, government officials and people in 
foreign countries. Some people finders offer lots of bells and whistles. 
Searchers with Java-enabled browsers can type a surname into Whowhere.com 
and see, on a rotating globe, the location of all the Carmen Sandiegos 
in the world. Anywho can connect you directly by phone to a person 
you found in a search (if you use a dial-up Internet connection, you'll 
need a second phone line for the call). But for some people who value 
their privacy, these services may make it difficult to get and stay 
lost. Many sites provide Web surfers with a map to your house and 
listings of nearby neighbors, hotels, restaurants and even post offices. 
(Yahoo's People Search actually puts a big red star on the map in 
front of your house.) That degree of detail is a little alarming if 
there are cyberstalkers who want to know where you live. Conceivably, 
a stalker could get a person's name with a search based on an e-mail 
address, then find where the person lives. Switchboard.com, which 
also includes e-mail addresses in its search results, was the last 
of the people finders to include neighborhood maps, said David Gersh, 
director for business development at the company, in Westborough, 
Mass. ``It was a Catch-22 for us, it honestly was,'' he said. ``We 
were concerned about privacy. Talking to users, we found people were 
split about wanting maps associated with their own house, but they 
definitely wanted maps of other people's houses. It was a competitive 
disadvantage to us not to provide maps.'' The company decided to show 
a person's street but not the exact location of the person's house. 
To test the effectiveness _ and the potential intrusiveness _ of people 
finders, Christopher Dillingham, an adjunct professor of communications 
at the University of Central Florida, tried to find personal information 
on line about his former colleagues at the Deland, Fla., police department. 
He described the search in an article on the Internet. ``Most, if 
not all, state laws make it a crime to maliciously publish an officer's 
address,'' Dillingham said. ``Most states also have confidentiality 
clauses that allow officers exceptions from public record requirements.'' 
But Dillingham was able to find everyone he searched for, including 
five former supervisors, and their addresses, maps to their homes 
and, in some cases, their phone numbers through simple searches on 
American Directory Assistance. Generally, a lot of personal information 
about someone can be made public on line legally _ what's legal can 
vary from state to state. If a phone number is unlisted, Dillingham 
said, there are still many other places, like utility-company and 
delivery-service databases, that may make it available. The majority 
of data searched by the people finders comes from phone books that 
a handful of companies collect and either scan or retype into one 
huge database. Info USA, based in Omaha, has 350 workers who type 
in, verify and update information. It says its database includes 11 
million businesses, and it is compiling a directory of 110 million 
households. (According to updated United States census figures from 
August 1997, the total number of households in the country is 109.8 
million, and many of them have unlisted phone numbers or no phone 
service at all, though others have multiple lines.) The company calls 
all the businesses in its yellow pages at least once a year to verify 
information. The only way an unlisted phone number can get into Internet 
people finders, said Lauren Bigelow, director of content development 
for Alta Vista, is if it was published in an old directory before 
it was unlisted and if that old directory is used as part of the database. 
People with unlisted phone numbers can create an electronic listing 
for themselves on different people finders that simply lists their 
e-mail addresses or business affiliations. But people who want to 
protect their privacy must still search out all the people-finder 
databases they are listed in and ask to be removed, said Susan Scott 
of Truste.org, a group that promotes privacy rights on line and offers 
a seal of approval for Web sites that protect users' privacy. Dillingham 
said people concerned with privacy should use alternate addresses, 
like post office boxes, when filling out any document that is a public 
record, like a driver's license application. They should also tell 
businesses that they do not want their personal information distributed 
or sold, he said. Someone who really does not want to be found can 
get a phone number under another name, he said. While people can remove 
their listings from most people-finder directory pages, public records, 
like bankruptcy filings, are increasingly becoming available on line 
and can be used _ often for a price _ to track down those who may 
leave few other traces. Such public documents record marriages, convictions, 
real estate purchases, bankruptcies and deaths. ``More and more courts 
are putting their records on line so you can go and pull up a claim 
for free,'' said Chris Sherman, a Web search guide at the Mining Co. 
(www.miningco.com), the human-powered search engine site, adding that 
such records can be very easy or very difficult to see, depending 
upon the jurisdiction. He said knowx.com appeared to be the easiest 
site to use for records searches, and added that such searches could 
also be done at subscription databases like Lexis-Nexis (www.lexisnexis.com) 
and West Publishing (www.westpub.com). One site, 1-800-U.S. Search 
(1800ussearch.com), does background checks for $139. Safeguards are 
in place to help keep pranksters from changing other people's listings. 
At Switchboard and Lycos, you can change your listing via e-mail once 
you have a password. Anywho, which powers people finders at the Excite, 
Webcrawler and Infoseek portals, requires you to place a call from 
the number in question to change your directory listing. Switchboard, 
Alta Vista and Lycos offer the electronic equivalent of Caller ID, 
a service called either Knock Knock or Who's There, which allows searchers 
to send queries to people who do not list their e-mail publicly. The 
site acts as the intermediary, relaying a message to the person found, 
who can either refuse the query or respond to it. People concerned 
about their privacy should also be careful about making public postings 
on line that could come back to haunt them, Ms. Scott warned. ``You 
have to be very careful now where you decide to post your personal 
information in a public forum,'' she said, pointing out that bulletin 
boards and chat lines could be searched, even by potential employers. 
``If you were part of a chat room when you were in college, and 10 
years later _ who hasn't changed in that amount of time? _ let's say 
you're going to apply for a job,'' she said. ``It may or may not be 
you, it may be somebody with the same name, or it may be something 
you totally regretted in your life, and you're not the same person 
now.'' Looking to the future, Sean White, chief technology officer 
at Lycos, predicted that directories would focus less on information 
and more on people. ``If I wanted to contact you and you have five 
e-mail addresses,'' he said, ``you would be able to say, `Here's the 
primary one I want this mail going to,' or you could say on a particular 
day, `I'm on vacation, and here's how I want it to be handled.' '' 
The people finder would route your e-mail for you. Sherman, of the 
Mining Co., said there was no good one-stop way to find people on 
line. ``A lot of times, the easiest thing to do is call the reference 
library in whatever city you think the person might be living in,'' 
he said. He is looking forward to the centralization of the portals, 
he said, when the search scene will become more unified. He expects 
to see more consolidation of databases. ``Yahoo bought Four11.com, 
and Lycos bought Whowhere,'' he said. ``Hopefully, they'll all have 
an agreement, and form one standard or directory.'' In Florida, the 
Conovers are looking forward to meeting Granger. ``Ted has talked 
about him for years, and I have done my best to locate him for the 
last five or six years,'' Ms. Conover said. ``I'd almost given up.'' 
</TEXT>
</DOC>