<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981125.0379 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
As the House Judiciary Committee moves into the final stages of its 
inquiry, Rep. Henry Hyde's senior staff is beginning to draw up three 
articles of impeachment against President Clinton. A senior Republican 
official of the committee said Wednesday that the drafting was in 
its ``very early stages'' and that any proposals would have to be 
circulated for approval to the committee's 21 Republican members. 
But the three articles that are being considered would allege perjury, 
obstruction of justice and witness tampering, and, on the basis of 
the president's repeated assertion of legal privileges, abuse of power. 
Hyde, R-Ill., who is chairman of the committee, is overseeing the 
work, which is being done by David Schippers, the investigative counsel 
for the panel's majority, and Thomas Mooney, the committee's staff 
director. As a young House aide to moderate Republicans 24 years ago, 
Mooney helped draw up the articles of impeachment that led to Richard 
M. Nixon's resignation in the Watergate scandal. The committee official 
who spoke of the drafting Wednesday, on the condition of anonymity, 
said that as part of the process, aides were looking at the report 
sent the committee by Kenneth Starr, the independent counsel, as well 
as the Watergate articles of impeachment and impeachment cases against 
three federal judges. The committee staff is not preparing any version 
of a censure resolution, even though many in the House believe that 
censure could win approval on the House floor and that impeachment 
cannot. While there have been routine contacts between the committee 
and the Republican leadership, Republicans say there is little if 
any coordination of a common strategy. Intent on finishing work soon, 
Hyde sent a letter to the White House on Wednesday threatening to 
subpoena the president if he did not respond by Monday to 81 questions 
sent to him by the committee three weeks ago. White House officials 
say the president will respond on Friday. Hyde may also ask his committee 
on Tuesday, after a hearing that day into the consequences of perjury, 
to subpoena additional witnesses, a Republican committee aide said. 
And he may soon seek a vote to release documents held under seal in 
additional boxes that Starr has sent the committee in recent weeks. 
The Judiciary Committee is moving steadily along the path toward recommending 
impeachment even though moderate Republicans outside the committee 
and some experienced House Republican aides say they think a floor 
vote on even a single count of perjury would be too close to call. 
Any article beyond perjury would be ``doomed,'' said one senior House 
Republican aide. Because Rep. Robert Livingston, the incoming speaker, 
has said any lawmaker's vote on impeachment will be a vote of conscience, 
Republican leaders are not conducting formal counts by the whip, the 
leadership member who keeps such tabs. That makes House vote estimates 
more fluid than usual. But Republicans outside the committee say they 
expect 15 to 20 of their members to defect, even on a perjury count. 
That means that five to 10 Democrats would have to vote for impeachment 
for it to prevail. (The House, where terms expire on Jan. 3, now has 
228 Republicans, 206 Democrats and 1 independent, who usually votes 
with the Democrats.) The chance that enough Democrats would break 
ranks to create a majority for impeachment diminished this week when 
Rep. Paul McHale of Pennsylvania, Clinton's most outspoken Democratic 
critic, called for him to be censured instead. The political arithmetic 
is fueling further calls, particularly from Democrats but from some 
Republicans too, for censure rather than impeachment, and, although 
Livingston has indicated that censure is not his first choice, he 
has left the possibility open. But Rep. Tom DeLay, the majority whip, 
said on CNN Wednesday that he wanted an impeachment vote and would 
fight censure. Other Republicans say their party is in a no-win situation, 
whether it pushes through impeachment on a near-party-line vote or 
else fails on impeachment and does nothing. ``The worst thing this 
Congress or any Congress can do is impeach a president on a straight 
party-line vote,'' said Ken Johnson, a spokesman for Rep. W.J. ``Billy'' 
Tauzin, R-La. ``It will effectively kill any hopes of reaching bipartisan 
compromises on saving Social Security, protecting Medicare and cutting 
taxes, and there are some people who think those issues are more important 
than burning the president at the stake.'' This unease among Republicans 
and the uncertainty of the vote counts pose tactical problems for 
the Judiciary Committee, whose Republicans are determined to move 
forward with impeachment on the ground that Clinton's efforts to cover 
up his relationship with Monica Lewinsky undermined the nation's system 
of justice. If, for example, committee Republicans decide to approve 
three articles of impeachment, they must decide whether to wrap the 
articles into one resolution, knowing this would almost guarantee 
defeat on the floor. An alternative would be to send each of the three 
counts to the floor, in hopes that one would be approved. In 1974, 
the three articles of impeachment against Nixon were reported out 
of committee on three separate days, each as a separate resolution 
ending ``Richard M. Nixon by such conduct warrants impeachment and 
trial, and removal from office.'' Two other proposed articles of impeachment 
were defeated in committee. An impeachment resolution could also be 
drafted in a way that would allow lawmakers on the floor to seek separate 
votes on each individual count. A senior Republican aide, outside 
the committee said, ``I think they know their strongest case is perjury. 
If they were not to report out a stand-alone article on perjury, it 
would be a mistake.'' Nicole R. Nason, a committee counsel, said, 
``It is premature to say exactly what a resolution of articles of 
impeachment would look like.'' She said, ``Each article of impeachment 
must stand on its own merit so at the appropriate time the members 
will have an opportunity to review and debate the text.'' Because 
the stakes are so high, Republicans and Democrats alike say the committee's 
actual voting on articles of impeachment _ expected toward the end 
of the week of Dec. 7 _ could take several days and likely will include 
scores of amendments. The Democrats will offer at least one censure 
motion in committee although they expect to lose. Republicans say 
it is Schippers, the Republican's chief investigative counsel, who 
is most intent on a third article on abuse of power. But they say 
it is not clear that all Republicans on the committee will support 
that charge or a count on obstruction of justice. ``Both of those 
counts are very iffy,'' said an aide to one committee Republican. 
He said a few Republicans have concerns about those counts because 
the committee never questioned any major witnesses. The Republicans' 
deliberations are also likely to be affected by how Clinton answers 
the 81 questions asking whether he admits or denies dozens of points 
in Starr's impeachment report to Congress. A number of the questions 
ask Clinton to admit or deny he gave ``false and misleading'' statements 
under oath in January and in August. In his letter to the president, 
Hyde said that ``despite repeated requests for more than a month, 
the White House has yet to provide the committee with any materials 
that tend to exonerate you or even dispute the evidence submitted'' 
by Starr. He said that if the president did not reply by Monday, he 
would urge the committee to issue a subpoena to Clinton. Hyde also 
offered the president or his attorneys the chance to appear before 
the committee to defend him. White House officials said Clinton will 
submit his response on Friday. Aides involved in preparing the president's 
response said Clinton will not admit to perjury or other offenses, 
but will largely restate the answers to similar questions raised at 
his January deposition in a sexual harassment suit by Paula Jones 
and in his August grand jury testimony. The president's reply, which 
takes up about 20 typewritten pages, is ``legalistic and breaks no 
new ground,'' said a senior White House official who has seen a draft. 
Another official familiar with the document said not a single answer 
is a simple admission or denial. He called the answers, ``long, explanatory, 
contextual and legalistic.'' The Democrats too sent out letters on 
Wednesday. Rep. John Conyers, D-Mich., asked Starr to answer numerous 
questions under oath including whether he knew while he was testifying 
before the committee and citing Samuel Dash as his ethics adviser 
that Dash was resigning. And Rep. Jerrold Nadler, D-N.Y., asked Attorney 
General Janet Reno to investigate whether Starr in House testimony 
disclosed the contents of sealed court documents. He cited Starr's 
statements that questions about Ms. Lewinsky's right to counsel had 
been litigated. Starr's office could not be reached for comment late 
Wednesday afternoon. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>