<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981125.0389 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Prosecutors are at a sharp disadvantage in the first-degree premeditated 
murder case they filed against Dr. Jack Kevorkian Wednesday because 
a jury might find it easy to sympathize with the suffering of the 
terminally ill, experts in criminal law said. Law professors and experienced 
defense lawyers said Kevorkian, who has escaped numerous prosecutions, 
could again argue that the law is out of step with society's desire 
to help ease the pain of terminally ill people. Whether assisted suicide, 
or euthanasia, is morally right or wrong, several of the experts say, 
jurors are often uncomfortable applying existing laws to such cases. 
``The law of murder was not drafted with these sorts of cases in mind,'' 
said Franklin Zimring, a professor of criminal law at the law school 
at the University of California at Berkeley. That would give Kevorkian 
an advantage over prosecutors in a trial in the televised death that 
Kevorkian has described as his first euthanasia, legal experts said. 
Kevorkian appears to be acknowledging that he intentionally caused 
the death of Thomas Youk, a 52-year-old man suffering from Lou Gehrig's 
disease, whose final moments were shown on ``60 Minutes'' Sunday. 
Several lawyers said that constitutes murder under the law. But they 
said that, in a courtroom, the issues would be far more complex. For 
example, they said, to find premeditated murder jurors generally must 
conclude that the killer acted with malice aforethought, which is 
defined as ``disregard of human life.'' Mark Biros, a former prosecutor 
who is now at the law firm of Proskauer Rose in Washington, said, 
``Dr. Kevorkian turns that whole concept on its head because he says, 
`Look, I have total regard for life,''' with his assertion that he 
is helping to ease pain. That argument, lawyers said, would not likely 
get far with a judge. But jurors might be attracted to such a claim 
because of their empathy with the victims of serious illnesses. Similarly, 
legal experts said, the courts are likely to be hostile to any claim 
that Youk gave his permission to be killed. Courts and legislatures 
have said that they cannot permit people to approve their own deaths 
because that would open a Pandora's Box of potential abuses. But jurors 
might be swayed by assertions that justice demands that a suffering 
person be in control over his or her death, said Robert Lawry, a criminal 
law professor at Case Western Reserve University School of Law in 
Cleveland. If Kevorkian were convicted of murder he could be sentenced 
to life in prison. The severe sentence, some lawyers said, could help 
Kevorkian fight the case. Even people who disapprove of euthanasia, 
these lawyers said, could say that it would be irrational to impose 
on a mercy killer the same sentence that would be imposed on cold-blooded 
killers. Kevorkian's strength in court in the past has often come 
from such sympathies. He was acquitted in three trials involving five 
deaths, one case against him ended in a mistrial, a judge threw out 
a murder charge in 1990 and another murder case was dropped in 1992. 
Michigan's new law against assisted suicide went to effect just before 
Youk's death. That, some lawyers said, could strengthen the prosecutor's 
hand. In addition, in the previous cases, Kevorkian merely helped 
someone commit suicide. In the current case, Kevorkian is believed 
to have injected Youk with a fatal solution. By challenging the Michigan 
prosecutors to charge him with murder, Kevorkian appeared to be preparing 
to make a plea to have jurors approve of his euthanasia even though 
the law does not permit it, lawyers said. Lawyers are generally not 
permitted to urge jurors to disregard the law. But in cases raising 
grave issues, it is common for lawyers to argue that the jurors must 
make a statement on behalf of society. Benjamin Brafman, a New York 
defense lawyer, said that in a case like the one in Michigan where 
the dying man's family seemed to approve of his decision, it might 
be tempting for jurors to refuse to convict. Brafman handled a New 
York case in 1995 in which a book editor, George Delury, acknowledged 
he had assisted in the death of his wife, who was suffering from multiple 
sclerosis. In that case, the woman's family protested. Delury pleaded 
guilty to attempted manslaughter and served four months in prison. 
But in cases like Kevorkian's, Brafman said, ``Jurors listen to the 
law but they conclude that there is no victim and the person was suffering. 
So they say, `Who has been harmed?''' 
</TEXT>
</DOC>