<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981125.0209 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Here is the recipe I followed last Thanksgiving, when it was my turn 
to cook the turkey: After ordering a freshly killed bird that weighed 
slightly more than a Chevy Geo, I phoned my husband at work. In the 
course of a completely innocuous conversation, I may have casually 
reminded him that the last fowl I roasted (in 1989) had turned out 
slightly dry, not unlike sand. So once again, my husband cooked the 
turkey. I highly recommend this method. This year, my husband informed 
me that after nine years, he was too wily to fall for the same trick, 
so I devised an even easier recipe: go to a friend's house for dinner. 
I was at peace with this decision until last week, when an e-mail 
message from my brother announced plans to come to town the day after 
Thanksgiving to begin, as he charmingly described it, ``scarfing down 
tons of your leftovers.'' That prompted inevitable fantasies of some 
of the homey dishes I most like to cook _ tetrazzinis, curries, soups. 
The only problem? Each required, as a main ingredient, the picked-over 
remains of a ravaged turkey. And since everyone knows that the only 
(legal) way to gain possession of a valuable carcass is to roast your 
own bird, I was backed into a corner. So I needed a recipe of a wholly 
different nature, a set of foolproof instructions for cooking turkey. 
What I really needed, of course, was to consult my grandmother. Aided 
by her enviable technique, dozens of perfect turkeys emerged triumphantly 
from a Depression-era oven whose finicky pilot light had to be ignited 
with a match. But my grandmother died in 1980, so I turned instead 
to the Internet for help, even as part of me wondered whether it was 
absurd to expect new technology to provide the old-fashioned, Norman 
Rockwell-flavored comfort I sought. Was I betraying the memory of 
my grandmother stirring gravy with a low-resolution wooden spoon? 
Luckily, before I could get really worked up, I was seduced by more 
than a dozen tantalizing recipes that I found on food.epicurious.com 
and www.cooking.com. I flirted with various possibilities: creating 
a ``maple-brined wood-smoked grilled turkey,'' or invoking the herb 
rub, or even soaking my trussed victim in a salted-water bath. So 
much choice _ that was my problem. I had found a cacophony of competing 
advice. If I had had all the time in the world, I would have loved 
to prepare a dozen test turkeys, refining a final recipe from the 
best aspects of each technique. But with only a few days before my 
brother's threatened arrival, I needed consensus. I needed advice 
as unequivocal as the instructions on my grandmother's recipes for 
devil's food cake or short-rib soup. I needed, in short, a virtual 
grandmother, a turkey sim. I ended up at www.butterball.com instead. 
In my experience on line, most search-engine queries garner responses 
that seem semi-useful, or kind of informative or some other frustrating 
shade of gray. The Butterball people, however, provide answers that 
are unquestionably black-and-white: roast all turkeys in an open pan. 
Always rub the skin with oil, not butter. Cook until the internal 
temperature of the thigh reaches 180 degrees Fahrenheit. While that 
should have been a relief to me, a lot of the suggestions ran counter 
to the most basic turkey truths I have always embraced. So, joining 
the ranks of more than 1,600 other hesitant chefs who sent e-mail 
to the Butterball experts in the past year, I typed: ``Could I use 
butter? Is there any reason not to use butter?'' Within two hours, 
I received an answer: ``Oil or shortening is preferred to butter or 
margarine because butter and margarine contain milk solids that can 
burn as the turkey roasts.'' It sounded reasonable _ even if the e-mail 
went on to push a $3.50 turkey-cooking video. I ignored that part. 
In rapid-fire succession, I sent other questions: Would the recipe 
work on a non-Butterball bird? Does Butterball sell any all-natural 
birds? In what part of the thigh should I stick the meat thermometer? 
I received answers (yes, yes, thickest), each in less than 12 hours 
and each recommending the purchase of the instructional video. Even 
my grandmother could not have sounded more sure of herself. I printed 
out Butterball's instructions, went downstairs to the kitchen and 
got to work. Three hours after the turkey went into the oven, I pulled 
it out. It tasted ... dry. Not unlike plaster. Had technology let 
me down? At first, I thought so, because when I go on line, I have 
high expectations. On the surface, I might be in search of a turkey 
recipe. But deep down, I am looking for a transformative experience. 
It reminds me of the time when I was a little girl and found a yellowed 
copy of a 1930s science fiction novel in my grandmother's basement. 
On the cover was an imagined city where people curiously clad in bubble 
helmets traveled on free-floating escalators to onion-shaped towers. 
The specifics of the scene weren't important; the promise was. But 
again and again, the Internet reminds me that it is instead just another 
tool in the arsenal I use to navigate my everyday life. It can't solve 
my turkey problems single-handedly. On the other hand, the Internet 
no longer seems an intimidating, unknown destination. It makes some 
commonplace tasks slightly easier. I would rather exchange e-mail 
at my leisure with Butterball's turkey experts than risk being put 
on hold on the company's toll-free telephone help line, for instance. 
The next day, when I went back on line to look for a new tetrazzini 
recipe, the quest felt no more or less ordinary than flipping through 
a file of my grandmother's old recipes. I realized, as I wrapped the 
carcass for the freezer, that there was a comfort to that. e-mail 
address: Slatalla(at)nytimes.com 
</TEXT>
</DOC>