<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981125.0210 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
The hurried scribbles on miserly scraps of notebook paper are treasures, 
passed from hand to grimy hand at school bus stops, soccer practice 
and sleepovers. To the uninitiated their contents are unintelligible: 
``C-left, c-right, repeated four times during game play,'' goes one 
making the rounds lately. But to young game players, these hieroglyphics 
are prized codes, sometimes known as cheats, that unlock hidden secrets 
in the Byzantine digital world of computer and video games. Cheats 
can make onscreen characters invincible (the so-called ``God mode''), 
arm players with unlimited ammunition and allow entry into concealed 
bonus levels or unexpected scenes. Some codes are just goofy _ letting 
a player drive a race car upside down, for example, or giving a basketball 
player a big head. The buried treasures the codes unearth are intentionally 
hidden in the games, an historical sideshow that has now become part 
of the main event of game play. The scramble by game aficionados to 
be first to crack the cheats of a newly released game is an exhilarating 
undercurrent that helps propel retail video-game sales, expected to 
reach a record $6.3 billion this year. ``People want to win,'' explained 
Al Amaloo, of Munster, Ind., a code-cracker for the search engine 
miningco.com. ``They don't want to admit their $49.95 purchase got 
the best of them.'' In the cheat above, the commands _ ``C-left, C-right'' 
and so on _ refer to buttons on the control panel for a Nintendo 64 
game. The player pushes the buttons in the sequence described, and 
the hidden feature is revealed. In this case, the keystrokes are supposed 
enable a fish-eye view of the game Glover. Cheats on other games require 
a similar manipulation of the controls. Cheats were originally created 
purely for the internal use of game companies. They were intended 
as back doors allowing programmers to skip through the games' increasingly 
difficult levels when testing for software bugs. Players normally 
cannot progress from one game level to the next without achieving 
a series of goals. Now, an entire subculture exists around these games-within-games. 
And a host of hidden codes has been created by game manufacturers 
expressly to assist frustrated, impatient or just plain indolent players. 
They are a godsend to neophytes and the parents of young players reduced 
to tears by the layer upon layer of variables in the latest games. 
Cheat areas are among the more popular portions of Internet game sites, 
both those run by the manufacturers and those created by the players. 
Among the better-known sites are: www.gamesdomain.com and www.avault.com. 
But many suggestions posted by visitors turn out to be wrong. So some 
sites employ code-crackers to seek out and authenticate cheats. Some 
companies have turned to the public interest in hidden codes as a 
way of making money. At one pay-per-clue site run by Pinnacle Infotainment 
Inc., (www.progame.com/hotline.htm), players can buy a pre-paid phone 
card to get online help and access to an archive of 1,000 cheat codes. 
Or they can dial a ``900'' number. The cost ranges between 89 cents 
and $1.49 a minute. Magazines like the 116-page Tips &AMP; Tricks, 
and publishers such as Prima Publishing, both of Los Angeles, specialize 
in issuing manuals devoted to the subculture. Often, they work in 
collaboration with the game industry, so that the publications are 
timed to coincide with game release dates. ``Cheats are a bonus,'' 
Amaloo said. ``Like getting an uncut movie. You're getting extra entertainment 
from your purchase.'' Among game developers there is disagreement 
over whether the proliferation of the secret codes spoils a game or 
increases its longevity. It is a question of increasing importance 
as the demographics of the market shift. The primary age of video 
game players in the U.S. used to be between six and fourteen. Now, 
with the growing popularity of advanced video games like Sony's Playstation 
and Nintendo 64, the age of the average player has gone up. No one 
knows how older players will feel about the culture of code-breaking 
that has grown around many games. As a result, Nintendo is attempting 
a nuanced shift. Instead of rewarding players with hidden tricks for 
simply having learned what the cheats are, Nintendo now ties perks 
to performance. In Goldeneye, Nintendo's hugely successful spy game 
released last year, cheat codes embedded in every level must be earned 
by players who want to activate hidden features like the ability to 
change a character's appearance or abilities. ``Its a powerful distinction,'' 
said Ken Lobb, Goldeneye's producer. ``Instead of the traditional 
cheat _ `I'm stuck. I don't want to die.' _ going out and acquiring 
the codes is the game within the game. In another Nintendo 64 name, 
Banjo-Kazooie, which is published by Rareware Ltd. of England, the 
cheat code was purposely made complex so it would go undetected by 
game players, Amaloo said. ``Some codes spoil a game; there's no sense 
of accomplishment,'' he said. While finding cheats may be a condoned 
among console game players, a very different kind of cheat has been 
finding its way into online computer games. Instead of simply exploiting 
existing back doors, gamers are hacking into the game code and creating 
their own cheats. Sites that host games forced to install filters 
on their servers to disconnect players that have hacked into the game 
code, modifying characters and functions with cheats. ``Gamers want 
to have an edge, said Laura Miele, vice president of marketing for 
Westwood Studios Inc., a Las Vegas game maker behind titles like Red 
Alert and Command and Conquer. ``It's an `I got you' mentality of 
one-up-manship. We believe its detrimental to the game.'' While Westwood's 
programmers assist hint-guide publishers, the company does not intentionally 
build cheat codes into its games. The company makes it's stand on 
legal grounds, not moral ones. ``It's a matter of copyright protection 
from potential knock-offs,'' Ms. Miele said. Blizzard Entertainment 
Inc. of Irvine, Calif, has learned the hard way that cheats sometimes 
used in online games can be bad for business. Recently, Blizzard had 
to contend with a backlash from angry customers who quit playing its 
CD-rom game Diablo on line after some players figured out how to rewrite 
code to increase their characters' powers. Blizzard scurried to fix 
the software by issuing online patches, and had to take potential 
cheats into account before designing the sequel, Amaloo said. At Pinnacle 
Infotainment, of Encinitas, Calif., the main business is selling replacement 
game instructions to independent video-game retailers. But Pinnacle 
owner Earl Beutler begun exploring the cheat-sales niche when he stumbled 
upon his 12-year-old son, Bryce, using trial-and-error to figure out 
how to play borrowed games. Now, Bryce, in addition to filling his 
after-school time with tennis and karate, is putting in a few hours 
each week on the Pinnacle payroll. His job is to troll for code gossip 
on Internet game sites, in chat rooms, in messages left by Usenet 
visitors and among his friends. He tests his finds on rented games. 
``Codes are increasing in complexity,'' Bryce said. ``They now include 
allowing players to add UFOs and (to) reverse directions.'' Bryce 
is one of a handful of game-players Pinnacle employs to provide its 
content. Said Don A. Grammer, Pinnacles general manager: ``Kids are 
really the best source.'' 
</TEXT>
</DOC>