<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981125.0223 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Snow skiing in cyberspace has certain advantages over the traditional 
winter pastime of sliding down a powdery slope that may be booby-trapped 
with moguls, rocks and ice. Carving turns among the hundreds of Internet 
sites that are devoted to the sport is no more chilly than room temperature, 
and unlike waiting in most chairlift lines, downloading a Web page 
can take just a few seconds. On-line ski information includes equipment 
reviews, resort news, club announcements and ski-area jobs. As can 
be expected, interest in ski sites on line seems to increase sharply 
as temperatures drop in the fall, ski Web site operators say. Some 
skiing fanatics, like Eric Winkelman, a financial consultant and investor 
from Glen Arbor, Mich., visit the sites even when the slopes are covered 
with summer flowers. He spends between one and two hours a day on 
his computer to feed his ``skiing addiction,'' reading ski travel 
articles and gear analysis, he said. Ken Payne, general manager of 
the Times-Mirror Interzine mountain group, whose sites include Skinet.com 
and Snowboarding.com, said the winter sports sites got 10 times as 
many hits in summer as in winter. ``It's a vicarious substitute for 
not being on the hill and making turns,'' Winkelman said of his forays 
on the Web. ``It's a way to keep your mind involved in the sport after 
April or May. It makes the pain of not skiing that much more easier 
to take.'' To some, skiing is as much a social event as a sport. Indeed, 
many skiers communicate with one another in dozens of online chat 
rooms and bulletin boards, which range in content from hopeful (``a 
snowy winter predicted'') to critical (``skiing is too expensive''). 
Anyone who is concerned about sensory deprivation while scrolling 
through ski sites need not worry. Web pages are typically garnished 
with images of skiers gliding through waist-deep powder, plunging 
down perilous chutes and spinning in the air. The text is often just 
as adventurous. Reflecting the surfer attitude that some skiers have 
adopted, one site recently referred to some of its amateur contributors 
as ``righteous'' and another directed readers to a fitness article 
with the line, ``Are you fit enough to be phat?'' Do not expect that 
adventurous attitude to translate into much critical writing. On many 
sites, feature stories, especially about ski resorts, read as if they 
had been written by a publicist. People who are looking for practical 
information about skiing have no shortage of choices. For example, 
www.skimaps.com features hundreds of trail maps (though many are slightly 
unfocused), and www.skicentral.com, perhaps the most complete links 
directory on the Web, offers access to hundreds of resorts' Web sites. 
WWW.SKINET.COM Scrolling through what this site has to offer is like 
riding every run at Aspen, given its scope and the quantity of information 
to digest. In addition to original ski news, travel articles and resort 
information, it offers online versions of the sport's two most popular 
magazines, Ski and Skiing. Over all, the site is probably the most 
comprehensive ski destination on line. It is a good starting place 
for those wishing to sample what the Web has to offer on the sport. 
The Frequently Asked Questions section is particularly strong, with 
suggestions on how often skis should be waxed, when to purchase a 
new pair of skis and how long poles should be. Even experienced skiers 
can learn something. The content includes the newsy (like information 
on the recent fires at Vail) and the statistical (lift-ticket prices 
for nearly 800 hills). Some content is relatively commercial, like 
lists of dates and locations for ski shows and hotel packages. The 
magazines in the Newsstand tend to include features that are longer 
and less time-sensitive. For example, a recent story in Ski magazine 
focused on how nonskiers could occupy their time while vacationing 
at a ski resort. Another recent story in Ski was about a company that 
uses Global Positioning System transmitters to keep track of where 
skiers are, how fast they are going and how much vertical drop they 
cover each day. ``Ski braggarts beware,'' the article said. Ski and 
Skiing look similar on the Web, with stories about travel, gear and 
health. One difference is that the online version of Skiing offers 
a column in which an expert answers readers' questions about things 
like how to remove a lift ticket off one's jacket easily. But don't 
cancel your subscriptions to Ski and Skiing just yet. On-line readers 
have access to only a limited number of articles, which have already 
been in print for at least a month. WWW.COMPLETE-SKIER.COM England 
may not be blessed with the world's best ski resorts, but it is home 
to one of the best ski instruction sites on line. It also includes 
news, instructional articles and a search engine for looking up resort 
information. The Complete Skier, based in London, offers detailed 
advice on how to slide downhill with aplomb, teaching maneuvers like 
the basics of a wedge turn or the proper navigation of moguls. The 
site says its pages ``describe all the skills alpine skiers need to 
tackle the slopes with confidence.'' For the most part, it lives up 
to that claim. A department devoted to teaching skiers how to use 
ski poles (``the most misunderstood and misused piece of equipment''), 
for example, runs for two pages. Step-by-step photographs are accompanied 
by often insightful explanations ( ``imagine you are holding the steering 
wheel of a bus''). A particularly welcome feature is a section for 
intermediate skiers, who do not get much attention on the Internet. 
The lessons include swing turns and the tuck position. Much of the 
site is actually an annotated, online version of ``The Complete Skier,'' 
a 332-page book published by BBC Books, and the book is advertised 
throughout the site with no concession to subtlety. Aside from instruction, 
there are general tips on fitness and skiing with kids (``there is 
no reason why children should not start skiing as soon as they can 
walk properly''). Other features include ski news, ``best of'' travel 
lists, job listings, snow reports and links to online magazines. Over 
all, the site is a good stop for people who are looking for coaching 
but are unwilling to sign up for ski lessons. But there is no guarantee 
that improving your technique is any easier by way of the Internet 
than with a live teacher. WWW.HYPERSKI.COM There are few references 
to snowy weather or slushy conditions at this site. Every day, it 
seems, brings blue skies, trackless powder and a helicopter waiting 
to take skiers back to the top of the mountain. Hyperski, a monthly 
online magazine for skiing and snowboarding, offers articles geared 
toward accomplished skiers and their less experienced admirers. In 
a recent issue, stories focused on the Jackson Hole ski resort in 
Wyoming, the coming World Cup racing season and whether skiers need 
to ingest electrolytes (in sports drinks) to avoid fatigue. A story 
about budget helicopter skiing in Alaska perhaps best reflected the 
overall testosterone-rich tone of the site. In it, the author told 
of jumping off cornices and hiking along ridges. ``Dan launched off 
a drift and came down leaning too far forward,'' the author wrote 
about a skiing companion. ``Faceplant followed by a roll, and he just 
kept on trucking. Said he hardly even felt it.'' One departure from 
this theme is an article by Warren Miller, a filmmaker and skiing 
humorist. Miller poked fun at the inflated language that you can find 
in some ski resort brochures, like a claim of a ``hot-water swimming 
pool adjacent to lodge.'' ``Reality will reveal a Jacuzzi large enough 
for a cocker spaniel to swim laps in,'' Miller said. ``But unless 
you get into the hot water within 30 minutes of when they remove the 
cover, there isn't any hot water.'' For consumers, the site offers 
an archive of mostly useful articles about ski equipment. Examples 
include ``Parabolic Skis _ a Professional's Evaluation,'' ``Choosing 
Recreational Skis for Kids'' and ``Ten Commandments of Boot Fitting'' 
(``Try ski boots on with ski socks. No cotton.''). People who are 
looking for information to help them decide which ski resort to visit 
may find that the resort section is more convenient than most. It 
offers not only links to snow and weather reports but also travel 
articles previously presented on the site to give a better sense of 
a resort's atmosphere. While Hyperski boasts that it is ``becoming 
the most comprehensive ski magazine on line,'' the reality is more 
modest. Nevertheless, the site does offer an interesting assortment 
of features. WWW.GOSKI.COM This site has built its reputation by providing 
a timely inventory of ski conditions at nearly 2,000 resorts around 
the world. But after browsing through the weather and snow-depth reports, 
visitors will find a large quantity of news and information on resorts 
and gear that is difficult to find elsewhere. Much of that information 
comes from readers, who send in reviews about ski equipment and travel 
destinations. These comments, which seem generally well informed, 
are among the few critical opinions on line about the ski industry. 
In a review of the Hunter Mountain resort in New York, for example, 
a writer said: ``Hunter is no good because the lift tickets cost $42. 
The park has terribly long lift lines and is solid ice by the end 
of the day. Other than that, the skiing is fairly good.'' The news 
department also offers some interesting reading, including ``Facts 
on Snow Fatalities'' and ``Avalanche Information Center.'' Fear not, 
however; the site reports that bicycling and swimming are by far more 
dangerous than snow skiing. For those seeking even more intellectual 
material, there is a series of articles titled ``Everything You Ever 
Wanted to Know About Skiing the World.'' It contains stories about 
skiing trends and history, from the debut of the sport 4,000 years 
ago to the prediction that resort towns may prohibit cars in the future. 
The rest of the site offers fairly traditional articles about ski 
resorts and equipment advice. One departure is a section called People, 
in which a writer addresses the ``Truth About the French'' (``no one 
has a more undeserved reputation about their character'') and provides 
a list of useful French phrases. The writing at Go Ski is among the 
best found at ski sites on line. The site also does a worthy job of 
reporting material that is beyond the typical fare of most of its 
competitors. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>