<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981125.0214 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
A recent survey of homeowners found that there are more than 35 million 
fireplaces in homes throughout the United States, and that each year 
homeowners light more than one billion fires in those fireplaces. 
These statistics are not surprising; just picture the cozy comfort 
of a crackling fire in the living room fireplace on a cold winter 
night. But while fireplaces may be romantic, they are not efficient. 
Ninety percent of the heat created in the fireplace escapes up the 
chimney. The fire also pulls additional air, 5 to 10 times the amount 
required for combustion, from the room. Can anything be done to improve 
the efficiency of the average home fireplace? One possibility is to 
add inserts that, in effect convert the fireplace into a stove. Wood-burning 
inserts fit in the fireplace and use the existing chimney (fitted 
with a flexible metal liner) to exhaust smoke and combustion gases. 
They have faceplates with metal or glass doors that fit across the 
fireplace opening to enclose the fire. The heart of the unit is a 
heat exchanger that pulls in cool air from the room, warms it, then 
blows it back. Controls allow the user to adjust the level of air 
going directly into the firebox and regulate the intensity of the 
fire. Another type of insert is an enclosed, gas-fired unit. It is 
completely sealed, so fresh air for the fire is drawn in through a 
chimney tube while combustion gases are expelled through a parallel 
tube. It also has a heat exchanger to circulate warm air into the 
living room. This unit does not burn wood; the fire comes from ignited 
natural gas that burns around artificial logs. Even though the inserts 
are efficient as heating units, they do detract from the charm of 
the fireplace. In addition, these modifications can be expensive and 
may not be worth the cost and bother if you only use the fireplace 
occasionally. In that case, there are still some things that you can 
do to make your fireplace a little more efficient. Adding glass doors 
to the face of the fireplace can help conserve room heat at night 
after the fire has died down. The doors should be kept open when the 
fire is burning; otherwise they will prevent heat from radiating into 
the room. Whenever possible burn hot, blazing fires, not low, smoldering 
ones. Hot fires burn the wood gases more completely and heat the fireplace 
bricks so they reflect more heat into the room. Most people have a 
raised grate in their fireplace. The old-fashioned andirons are better 
because they allow the burning logs to fall onto the hot bed of coals 
and burn more efficiently. Be sure to inspect and clean the fireplace 
and chimney every year. Ideally this should be done in the spring, 
so if you discover damage, like cracked flue tiles, there will be 
plenty of time for repair work. Look into the chimney again in the 
fall to make sure that squirrels or birds haven't made a nest there; 
installing a chimney cap is a good way of preventing unwanted intruders 
from nesting in the flue. Also take the time to carefully inspect 
the damper, the hinged metal plate that swings down to close the flue 
opening. Dampers in new fireplaces are made to fit carefully when 
closed so they keep cold air coming down the chimney from entering 
the house. Over time, a damper may rust and deteriorate so it no longer 
makes an effective barrier against the cold air. A defective damper 
should be replaced. Also consider installing a chimney-top damper. 
It will help to cut heat loss when you are not using your fireplace. 
When you are ready to make a fire, start with a bed of four or five 
crumbled newspaper balls. Lay finger-thick kindling in a grid pattern 
on top of these. The fire will need oxygen as it burns so keep the 
newspaper and kindling layers loose so air can circulate. Finally, 
place three logs across the andirons. It may be tempting to start 
with only one log and add others as each is burned, but a full fire 
with three logs burns more efficiently producing more heat per log. 
Before starting the fire, make sure the damper is fully open, then 
heat the air in the flue to create a stronger draft. To heat the chimney 
air, hold a burning torch made of rolled up newspaper directly under 
the damper for a few seconds. Use the torch to light the newspaper 
bed below the logs. Once the fire is roaring, close the damper as 
far as it will go without restricting the flow of smoke up the chimney. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>