<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981125.0431 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Asserting that ``it was best for all concerned to put the matter behind 
us,'' the Mets announced Wednesday that they had settled a sexual 
harassment claim involving General Manager Steve Phillips and a former 
employee who worked in the team's minor-league offices in Port St. 
Lucie, Fla. In a three-paragraph release faxed to news organizations 
Wednesday afternoon, Dave Howard, the Mets' senior vice president, 
said that under terms of the settlement, no lawsuit will be filed 
against Phillips or the Mets. ``While the organization's position 
has not changed, we felt it was best for all concerned to put the 
matter behind us,'' Howard said. At the same time, Dominic Barbara, 
one of two lawyers representing the woman, issued a one-paragraph 
statement from his Long Island law office that said his client's ``contemplated 
claim'' against the Mets and Phillips had been resolved. Terms of 
the settlement were not disclosed and neither side would comment further 
on a matter. The ripple effect from the claim reached far beyond the 
baseball field, going into the private lives of Phillips' family. 
He admitted to a consensual sexual relationship with the woman, as 
well as admitting to other affairs. The matter began on Nov. 8 when 
Phillips, 35, who had deftly handled the signing of Mike Piazza to 
a long-term contract only two weeks before, announced he was taking 
a leave of absence to deal with an allegation of sexual harassment. 
Coming as it did, on the eve of important general managers' meetings, 
Phillips' departure appeared to catch many by surprise. The club, 
reeling from the sting of the harassment claim and the embarrassing 
public admissions by Phillips of his affairs, called on Frank Cashen, 
who was the team's general manager from 1980 to 1991, to serve on 
an interim basis. From the beginning, the Mets stood by Phillips. 
Team officials said they had investigated the allegations and found 
there was a consensual sexual relationship between Phillips and the 
woman, but nothing that constituted harassment. The team's owners, 
Fred Wilpon and Nelson Doubleday, refused to fire Phillips. During 
his absence, Phillips underwent counseling. Bobby Bonilla, the former 
Met, was signed by Cashen to a three-year deal on Nov. 10. Six days 
later _ an absence of eight days in all _ Phillips was back on the 
job. At a news conference at Shea Stadium to announce his return, 
a remorseful Phillips was confronted by Barbara, who said he represented 
a former Mets employee who intended to sue Phillips for sexual harassment. 
But there were indications that Barbara, a lawyer whose clients have 
included Joey Buttafuoco and Jessica Hahn, was not looking for a legal 
battle, at one point telling reporters, ``I will vigorously fight 
for my client, but I believe Mr. Phillips is very sincere in what 
he's saying.'' Reached by telephone Wednesday, Howard, the team's 
vice president of business and legal affairs, said discussions between 
the parties were fairly brief and that a resolution came together 
fairly quickly and was settled late Tuesday night. Those familiar 
with the case said the parties had been discussing a possible settlement 
for several days and said the woman had indicated that she would be 
willing to settle for a sum of money. Neither Barbara nor Steve Malove, 
a Miami-based lawyer also representing the woman, could be reached 
by telephone Wednesday to comment on the matter. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>