<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981125.0346 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
The International Monetary Fund agreed Wednesday to resume assistance 
to Pakistan, which had been cut off earlier this year after it detonated 
nuclear devices. The agreement, announced in Islamabad, followed a 
decision by the United States to support the fund's resumption of 
aid to Pakistan, which has been on the verge of defaulting on its 
international debts. It came a week before Prime Minister Nawaz Sharif 
is to meet with President Clinton in Washington. The deal, which requires 
approval by the fund's board, will unlock up to $1.3 billion in aid 
that will be paid in installments starting as early as next month. 
Pakistan's government and fund officials said the deal should enable 
the country to continue making payments on its $32 billion foreign 
debt and avoid falling further into poverty at a time when much of 
Asia has been battered by financial turmoil. Officials at the fund's 
headquarters in Washington said the agreement called for the reactivation 
of an existing loan program that was suspended last spring after Pakistan 
responded to nuclear tests by India with detonations of its own devices. 
Fund officials declined to provide further details of the pact. But 
officials from Pakistan's finance ministry told a news conference 
in Islamabad that the government had agreed to a series of economic 
steps to open up the IMF financing. It agreed to increase the sales 
tax to raise revenues, to make unspecified spending cuts to reduce 
the budget deficit and to other measures to fight corruption and strengthen 
the banking system. Officials also suggested that the fund would support 
Pakistan's efforts to reschedule payment terms for some of its short-term 
loans from foreign governments and banks. Pakistan said it also expected 
aid from the World Bank and the Asian Development Bank. Fund officials 
said the negotiations got a boost earlier this week when Pakistan 
agreed to back down from demands it had made to privately owned power 
companies to renegotiate electricity purchase agreements at lower 
rates. Since the tests last spring, the United States, which sees 
the rivalry between Pakistan and India as the world's most dangerous 
arms race, has pressed the two countries to limit their nuclear weapons 
programs. The leaders of both countries said at the United Nations 
in September that they would put a moratorium on further tests and 
comply with the Comprehensive Test Ban Treaty by September 1999. But 
despite pressure from Washington and the U.N. Security Council, neither 
India nor Pakistan has promised to forgo deployment of nuclear weapons 
or join a moratorium on the future production of fissile material 
for warheads. As a result, Washington has kept some sanctions in place, 
including trade restrictions imposed last week on India and Pakistan. 
The restrictions apply to 300 companies and government agencies in 
the two countries that are involved in nuclear, missile and military 
programs, and in effect bar sales to them by any U.S. company. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>