<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981125.0392 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Eight years ago Apple Computer and IBM undertook a common software 
and computer chip development effort to challenge Microsoft Corp.'s 
dominance of personal computing and remake the computing industry 
at home and in the workplace. Three years later the alliance was in 
a shambles, beset by internal turmoil and ignored by the market. Indeed, 
during the past decade the failure of large corporate technology alliances 
seems to be the rule rather than the exception. However, for a number 
of reasons, the three-way alliance between America Online, Sun Microsystems 
and Netscape Communications may succeed in having an impact on Microsoft 
where other attempts have failed. The difference this time, say industry 
executives, is that the new alliance may soon become a force in an 
area precisely where Microsoft has failed: the media-rich world beyond 
the personal computer. At its heart the vision underlying the America 
Online-Sun alliance is a bet on a new computing model that will reach 
the majority of the American people who do not surf the World Wide 
Web and are unlikely ever to become personal computer users. The wager 
is that the array of popular consumer brands that America Online has 
marshaled will finally give Sun's Java programming language a crucial 
advantage in a world of consumer-oriented computing gadgets ranging 
from cell phones to wireless personal digital assistants to kitchen 
information appliances. ``The 1990s were the bell-the-Microsoft-cat 
decade,'' said Michael Schrage, a research associate at the Massachusetts 
Institute of Technology Media Laboratory. ``The previous efforts failed 
because they were about technology and not business models. The question 
today is which companies have done a good job defining a new business 
model?'' In the past, Microsoft dismissed the attacks without breaking 
stride. In the personal computer market it continued to fine-tune 
a business model based on monopoly control of the Windows operating 
system, which runs on ever-cheaper personal computers. More recently 
Microsoft has attempted to use its power in the personal computer 
industry to leverage itself into new markets that it has hoped would 
grow with the same speed as the personal computer. In 1992, for example, 
it attempted to entice the cable industry into supporting a new venture 
dubbed Cablesoft that would extend the PC industry model of a proprietary 
operating system and cheap hardware into the living room. That effort 
failed because there has been little demand for interactive television. 
More recently, Microsoft acquired WebTV, an Internet TV start-up, 
but has not been able to reach a mass audience with that effort either. 
Although Microsoft executives have said they would use the new alliance 
as grounds for ending the federal government's antitrust case now 
under way in Washington, they have otherwise been unusually silent 
about the new American Online-Sun venture. A Microsoft spokeswoman 
said the company was searching for a successor to Pete Higgins, the 
recently departed vice president who has headed the company's struggling 
interactive media business, and it was likely that Microsoft's strategy 
would be made clear when Higgins' successor was named. Microsoft's 
most immediate vulnerability is to the programming and content centered 
successes of America Online. ``This potentially has a massive impact 
on Microsoft,'' said James Moore, president of Geopartners, a Cambridge, 
Mass., consulting firm. ``The ability to deliver software to consumers 
and transaction processing oriented electronic commerce is precisely 
where Microsoft is most vulnerable.'' America Online has already given 
a small hint of the potential power of its brand on the Internet in 
the recent release of a new version of its ICQ chat software. Originally 
available as a small application permitting friends to keep in instantaneous 
contact via the Web, ICQ will increasingly be used by AOL as a portal 
to the entire world of its content and as a simple means of delivering 
software to personal computer users. ``The sun never sets on the AOL 
empire,'' said Nat Goldhaber, chairman and founder of Cybergold, a 
Berkeley, Calif.-based electronic commerce company that has a partnership 
agreement with America Online. ``Eighty percent of the Net looks at 
something owned by AOL every day.'' A second point of potential vulnerability 
will be Microsoft's continued ability to get its vast customer base 
to upgrade to new versions of Office and Windows. That will be tempered 
if innovation moves to the new consumer-oriented devices that will 
sell for far less than even today's $1,000 personal computers. ``Windows 
has maxed out and this is a fundamental weakness that Microsoft has,'' 
said Mitchell Kertzman, chief executive and president of Network Computer 
Inc. ``What happens when Windows isn't driving innovation in industry 
any more? In the future new devices are going to be the drivers of 
innovation in both software and hardware.'' 
</TEXT>
</DOC>