<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981125.0434 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
In Maryland, Ruthann Aron was known for her take-no-prisoners approach 
to business and politics. On Monday, the state where she was once 
viewed as a rising political star took her prisoner. Ms. Aron, 55, 
who ran unsuccessfully in Maryland's Republican primary for the United 
States Senate in 1994, was sentenced to three years in the Montgomery 
County Detention Center for trying to hire a hit man in June 1997 
to kill her husband and a Baltimore lawyer who once testified against 
her. The prosecution, in her second trial in the case, said Ms. Aron 
was a calculating killer who sought to arrange the killings to protect 
her political career. Ms. Aron's lawyers argued that she had a history 
of mental illness, including bipolar and borderline personality disorders. 
They said she sought out a hit man after a breakdown when her emotionally 
abusive husband, Dr. Barry Aron, a urologist, threatened to leave 
her. While the state conceded her mental problems, prosecutors argued 
that her husband's intention to divorce her would have been humiliating 
on the eve of a contemplated campaign for a seat on the Montgomery 
County Council. The state also contended that Ms. Aron held the lawyer, 
Arthur G. Kahn, responsible for disclosing her past legal problems 
and ruining her bid for the Senate nomination. Judge Vincent E. Ferretti 
Jr. ruled that she must continue to see her private psychiatrist while 
in the county jail and undergo psychiatric treatment during her five 
years of supervised probation. Ms. Aron, an affluent developer in 
Potomac, cultivated a tough and tenacious image in her career as a 
developer and later as a politician. Her personality, her troubled 
marriage and her political ambitions were central issues in her trials. 
The first ended in a hung jury; Ms. Aron entered a no-contest plea 
before the jury began deliberating in her second trial. ``My mind 
did blow; I did crack up,'' Ms. Aron told the court on Monday in her 
first public account of ordering the killings. She went on to apologize 
to her adult children, saying, ``Dana and Josh, I'm sorry from the 
bottom of my heart, I'd rather be dead than to bring you to this day.'' 
The defense lawyer, Barry Helfand, originally proposed that Ms. Aron 
spend one year in a private New York psychiatric hospital at her expense, 
though state guidelines recommend a term of 8 to 18 years. Ms. Aron, 
who was arrested in June 1997, was sentenced to five years for soliciting 
a hit man to kill Aron, her husband of 31 years. Ferretti suspended 
all but 18 months of that sentence. For soliciting the killing of 
Kahn, Ms. Aron received a 10-year sentence with all but 35 months 
suspended and credit for 17 months she has already served, for a balance 
of 18 months. She will also serve five years' probation. Kahn represented 
Ms. Aron's business partners in a lawsuit against her in 1984. In 
1996, he testified against Ms. Aron in a defamation suit that she 
brought against her political rival, William E. Brock III, who defeated 
her in the Senate primary. In the final week of the campaign, Brock 
ran television and radio advertisements saying that Ms. Aron had ``trouble 
obeying the law.'' Ms. Aron lost the suit. Stephen Friedman, Barry 
Aron's lawyer, said the sentence was fair. ``The judge literally carved 
out a compromise,'' Friedman said. ``Ruthann Aron needs treatment, 
but she also needs punishment.'' Joyce Lyons Terhes, the state Republican 
Party chairwoman, said: ``I have always known Ruthann to be very strong-willed, 
very determined and very aggressive. Sometimes, if you're like that, 
it can consume you.'' 
</TEXT>
</DOC>