<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981125.0260 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Manhattan is transformed. The potholes are gone, as are the cabdrivers 
who don't know that the Bronx is up and the Battery's down. Nobody 
is trying to sweep the place clean of corruption or sin. The women 
are free and easily available. The Coney Island cooch shows still 
feature girls who can pick up hand-kerchiefs with their teeth. The 
eccentrics are benign and even the bores walk in grace, which makes 
them good company. Manhattan is an uproarious, singing, dancing time-out 
city, where nothing is impossible and the future is without limits, 
at least for a single day. That is something of the effect of George 
C. Wolfe's exhilarating new production of ``On the Town'' at the Gershwin 
Theater. If you don't leave this show with an enhanced awareness of 
the meaning of joy, take out your cell phone immediately: beep your 
therapist. ``On the Town'' is the seminal 1944 musical that, arriving 
the year after ``Oklahoma!,'' demonstrated that ``new'' in the American 
musical theater need not mean simply pastoral. Here is a love letter 
to Manhattan as the biggest, craziest beehive on earth. More important, 
``On the Town'' introduced Broadway to the prodigious talents of Leonard 
Bernstein, the composer; Betty Comden and Adolph Green, who wrote 
the book and lyrics, and Jerome Robbins as a choreographer, rather 
than as the dancer he was in several Broadway shows before he joined 
Ballet Theater. The original collaborators, led by the director George 
Abbott, took only six months to get ``On the Town'' written and on 
its feet, using as their inspiration the Robbins-Bernstein ballet, 
``Fancy Free.'' This revival has been somewhat longer en route, beginning 
with the Joseph Papp Public Theater production in Central Park in 
the summer of 1997, which received mixed reviews. The initial intention 
had been to transfer the Central Park production to Broadway intact. 
When the principal Broadway producers withdrew, Wolfe, the Public 
Theater's producer as well as the show's director, decided that the 
Public would go it alone. A risky decision, considering the reported 
$5 million budget. Since then, a couple of choreographers have come 
and gone, and several of the principals have been replaced. During 
the preview period, there were the usual downbeat rumors attending 
any new production that elects to take its shakedown cruise in the 
middle of Times Square. Then, 10 days before the scheduled Nov. 19 
opening, the first night was put off three days. At the same time, 
it was announced that Joey McKneely, who received a Tony nomination 
as the choreographer of ``The Life,'' was being brought in to fine 
tune the major dance routines designed by Keith Young, the show's 
choreographer of record, who is making his Broadway debut with ``On 
the Town.'' You might think the coroner should be called. Not at all. 
The news this morning: Wolfe has, indeed, worked a miracle. He has 
located the essence of the show that eluded him in the park, and cast 
it with spirited young performers who can sing, dance and levitate 
at will. ``On the Town'' is on its way. Not in a very long time have 
you heard a score as richly complex and romantic, combined with a 
book and lyrics that are so gloriously bright, witty and off-the-wall. 
If you think you know the show because you have seen the 1949 movie, 
directed by Stanley Donen and Gene Kelly, you are in for a major surprise. 
All that you probably remember about the movie is the opening number 
in which Kelly, Frank Sinatra and Jules Munshin sing Bernstein's ebullient 
``New York, New York'' while capering across the Brooklyn Bridge, 
atop the Empire State Building and around Rockefeller Center and other 
postcard sites. It's a superb bit of filmmaking, but after that, the 
film is very different from the show. Because Louis B. Mayer, the 
MGM studio head, thought the original score either too esoteric or 
too ``suggestive'' (a favorite adjective of the Legion of Decency, 
the Roman Catholic censorship group), the only other Bernstein music 
is essentially used for background. Discarded by Hollywood are the 
rambunctious comedy numbers and some of the most beautiful and haunting 
melodies Bernstein ever composed, among them: ``Lucky to Be Me,'' 
``Lonely Town'' and ``Some Other Time.'' ``On the Town'' is a mysteriously 
bewitching show, originally conceived and staged in its own time and 
place, about three wildly energized sailors unleashed in wartime New 
York on a 24-hour pass. Wolfe has made no attempt to update the material 
or give it the benefit of hindsight. Yet it plays today as if it had 
been written last week, not as a piece of nostalgia but as living 
literature. The show is dated by its wartime period, but its blithe 
manners, which are those of a cockeyed fable, are timeless. That it 
can still refresh, surprise and bring you close to tears (both of 
helpless laughter and sweet melancholy) is because it's so resolute 
in the way it avoids kitsch. For each of the three sailors at the 
heart of the adventure, a lifetime is compressed into this single 
day, no encounter is by chance and every connection has meaning. At 
the beginning of the show, Gabey, Chip and Ozzie emerge, as if uncaged, 
into the intoxicating light of New York; at the end, they disappear 
back into their ship. Blackout. The end. Maybe curtains. Nothing of 
this sort is ever acknowledged overtly, certainly not by the sailors 
themselves. They are too intent on seeing the sights and meeting women 
as quickly as possible to worry about what comes after. They have 
no pasts that are recollected and no futures that are foreseen. They 
exist entirely in the present tense, unencumbered. The unspeakable 
is obliquely defined in the gorgeous score, in lyrics that can be 
elegantly discreet (listen to ``Some Other Time'') and in the choreography. 
But, except for one brief, quite lovely pas de deux and a more extended, 
less successful dreamlike ballet, the dances are more intent on expressing 
soaring spirits than anything remotely resembling angst. Gabey (Perry 
Laylon Ojeda) is the romantic one. He falls obsessively in love almost 
as soon as he touches land. The woman: Miss Turnstiles, nee Ivy Smith 
(Tai Jimenez), the celebrated (he assumes) subway girl-of-the-month, 
whose poster he sees. In this show in which miracles never cease, 
he finds her at Carnegie Hall. Chip (Jesse Tyler Ferguson), a skinny, 
red-headed fellow with a bendable frame, is more or less captured 
by the robustly proportioned Hildy Esterhazy (Lea DeLaria), who drives 
a cab. He wants to visit the Hippodrome and buy a ticket to ``Tobacco 
Road,'' because that is what his father did in 1934, though both landmarks 
have now vanished. Hildy's purpose is seduction; they can talk later. 
Ozzie (Robert Montano), who has gone to the American Museum of Natural 
History thinking it was the Museum of Modern Art, finds his soul mate 
in Claire DeLoone (Sarah Knowlton). She is an anthropologist drawn 
to him initially because he looks so much like the prehistoric man 
that is her life's study. Both Ozzie and Claire share a weakness: 
each seethes with sexual desires they can't easily suppress. Ms. DeLaria, 
the discovery of the show's Central Park production, is bigger and 
better than ever on Broadway, where, three times at the performance 
I caught, she came close to arresting the show and leaving the audience 
numb with pleasure: in ``Come Up to My Place'' and ``I Can Cook Too,'' 
both sung to the elusive Chip, and as one member of the quartet that 
tears up the stage in Act II with ``Ya Got Me,'' in which the friends 
attempt to cheer Gabey, whose Ivy has somehow been misplaced. Ms. 
DeLaria is a big, assertive stage personality with the implacable 
presence of the young Ethel Merman. She can sing sweetly, she can 
scat and she can belt in a way to test the capacity of most sound 
amplification systems. She is also genuinely funny. She would seem 
to be every inch and ounce a star. The other members of the sextet 
of leading performers are also immensely appealing: Ferguson, who 
is sly, knowing and very funny as Ms. DeLaria's cooperative victim; 
the lantern-jawed Montano and the sweet-voiced, model-pretty Ms. Knowlton; 
and Ojeda, who delivers two of the show's best numbers (``Lonely Town'' 
and ``Lucky to Be Me'') and Ms. Jimenez, a former principal dancer 
with the Dance Theater of Harlem and a charmer as Ivy Smith. Note 
also the splendid Mary Testa, who appears as Ivy's heavy-drinking, 
quite severe vocal coach, and Jonathan Freeman as Claire DeLoone's 
mild-mannered fiance, a judge. He trails Claire through much of the 
show, patiently picking up the nightclub tabs left by her and her 
new-found pals. When, as it must, the worm turns, it's deliciously 
expressed in the convoluted lyrics of a quintessential Comden and 
Green comedy number, ``I Understand.'' The choreography is a vast 
improvement over what was seen in the park, where the high point of 
one number was the sight of Miss Turnstiles being pushed around the 
stage as she huddled on a footstool. The dancers now dance. They fill 
the stage with movement that soars, though without affecting the mind 
or emotions. Robbins's ballet was not only the inspiration for the 
show; he was also an integral part of the team that put it together. 
I didn't see the 1944 production, but I can't imagine that his artistry 
could be duplicated by anyone else. The Bernstein-Robbins-Comden and 
Green collaboration was something very special. The most spectacular 
asset of Wolfe's Delacorte production was the park itself and the 
New York skyline, which dominated Adrianne Lobel's set design. At 
the sun's setting on a soft summer night, ``On the Town'' seemed to 
have come home. There is no way to reproduce that feeling in a theater, 
even one as vast as the Gershwin. The show looks good and moves efficiently 
without ever astonishing the eye, which Paul Tazewell's costumes often 
do. The Gershwin's sound system is something else. It is, of course, 
a necessity, but it is also a compromise. One can recognize good voices 
from bad and, when seated in the orchestra, one has no trouble telling 
which members of the cast are singing. That is a definite plus. Yet 
a price is paid: the voices take on a metallic, bionic edge. The fact 
that a new choreographer was working on the dances, virtually right 
up until the opening night, explains, I assume, a certain looseness 
in the show's pacing. This, I also assume, will be corrected as the 
run progresses. And progress it should. ``On the Town'' has become 
a classic, but it clearly hasn't grown old. As it celebrates a very 
particular time and the marvelous muddles of its exuberantly inchoate 
characters, it also celebrates life itself. Sometimes, a day is all 
there is. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>