<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981125.0230 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
``It's never too late to have a happy childhood!'' suggests a colorful 
magazine advertisement from Lionel, the world's best-known manufacturer 
of toy trains. And between Thanksgiving and Christmas, tens of thousands 
of relatively inexpensive electric train sets will be bought by parents 
and grandparents, ostensibly for boys and girls who will never see 
an actual New York Central steam engine belching black smoke. But 
in a sign of the times, in addition to starter sets for children age 
8 and older that cost as little as $100, the really big kids (read: 
grown-ups) will also be carrying home Christmas locomotives in a wide 
range of prices that are so accurately detailed and so crammed with 
high-tech electronics and sound systems that their realism is nothing 
short of amazing. Some of those engines cost as much as $1,500, and 
that may not include any rolling stock. This year's train purchasers 
will probably be people who remember the mythical holiday mornings 
when father and son played engineer on a circle of track running around 
the Christmas tree, uncoupling and coupling the boxcars and caboose 
and dumping a flatcar load of logs on a make-believe siding. Lionel 
obliges this nostalgia with engines and freight or passenger cars 
that have changed little since the 1940s. The trains still run on 
two-and-one-quarter-inch-wide, three-rail ``O gauge'' track that was 
adopted back in 1915, the middle rail providing the AC power. The 
locomotives and cars are large and substantial, perfect for small 
and careless hands, unlike the small model trains that run on HO (half-O) 
tracks. The steamers smoke when you squirt an oily concoction down 
the stack, and a simulated air whistle (or electronic horn in the 
case of a diesel) sounds when you push a button on the transformer. 
But the venerable toy-train maker, which was founded in 1900 by a 
24-year-old named Joshua Lionel Cowen, has some serious competition 
these days. An upstart company, MTH Electric Trains, says it has captured 
50 percent of the $100 million O-gauge market since 1993 by making 
more prototypical trains, and Lionel has had to fight back. One of 
the ways to fight is with technology. And Lionel has responded with 
a digital attack, in terms of sound, special effects and a computerized 
command center that allows much more control of what the trains do 
and how many trains you can run at once. Traditional toy-train controllers 
use variations in the power supplied to the track for limited control 
of a locomotive. Increase the power and the train speeds up; decrease 
the power and the train slows down; interrupt the power and the engine 
changes direction. No longer. In 1995 Lionel introduced the Trainmaster 
Command Control System, which turns the entire track layout into an 
antenna for a hand-held remote control that looks just like a television 
remote-control device. Digital signals that tell a train what to do 
are transmitted from the controller to a base unit, sent over the 
tracks and picked up by a receiver in the engine. The system, which 
uses five microprocessors, enables an operator to run two or more 
trains independently of each other as well as control such things 
as couplers, ``animated'' cars (a giraffe's head pops up and down 
in a hole in the roof, for example), switches and a variety of layout 
accessories. At least two competitors have adopted the Lionel train-control 
system. Lionel has also introduced a microprocessor-controlled motor 
that promises smoother running at low speeds and more power for hauling 
a long freight train than with its legendary Pullmor motor. And then 
there are the special effects, which are optional in some midpriced 
trains. Steam locomotives, for example, come with microprocessor-controlled, 
CD-quality digital sound: authentic whistles and bells; steam puffing 
and smoke chuffing that is synchronized to the speed of the engine; 
squealing brakes on curves; radio chatter between engineers and train 
dispatchers and freight yard or passenger station effects, including 
the conductor's ``All aboard!'' All of the audio effects are squeezed 
onto a tiny ROM (read-only memory) chip that holds about 20 seconds 
of sound. Two separate boards are used, one for the ROM and microprocessor, 
the other for the amplifier and power supply. In the case of steam 
locomotives, the sound system is placed in the spacious tender, which 
on real trains was filled with coal and water. The latest innovation 
is infrared communication between the main control board in the locomotive 
and the sound system. Microprocessors are also found in railcars and 
trackside operating accessories. The newest version of Lionel's classic 
Aquarium Car, which also has a radio receiver controlled by the remote 
device, features singing whales swimming past back-lit rippled-glass 
tank windows and the sound of sloshing water when the car is in motion. 
``I really got a kick out of it and so did my kids,'' wrote Martin 
Eibeck, a Pittsburgh toy train hobbyist on Compuserve's Train Net 
forum. Lionel is not alone in producing computerized devices that 
delight kids of all ages. MTH offers a 1950s drive-in with a Chevy 
and a Thunderbird that pull up and are served by roller-skating carhops. 
With real diner sound, of course. ``Technology has been the savior 
of toy trains,'' said Brad Fisher, a train enthusiast in Bellefonte, 
Pa. ``If there is going to be a future to this hobby, we need to draw 
in younger participants. Look at their entertainment choices: video 
games, computers, digital music. The modern sound systems have had 
the greatest impact. They make today's trains seem so real.'' However, 
not everyone is enthralled with all the new technology. ``I get a 
bit annoyed with the constant chuffing sounds and the whine of the 
diesels,'' said Roger Fry of Bedford, Texas ``I either turn the volume 
down or put it to sleep.'' Opinions also differ on the prodigious 
smoke output. ``Too much of a good thing,'' said Joe Marchione of 
Absecon, N.J. ``It's great if you have a wide-open space, but in my 
train room, you need oxygen after two minutes.'' One thing is for 
sure: these are definitely not your grandfather's toy trains. History 
doesn't record when a toy train first ran on a track around a gaily 
decorated fir tree in an American living room, a scene that soon became 
engraved in our holiday tradition. But it probably happened in the 
early 1890s and the brightly painted tinplate locomotive, imported 
from Germany or England, would have been powered by a clockwork motor 
or even live steam. In 1896, a now-forgotten electrical supply company 
in Ohio name Carlisle &AMP; Finch became the first U.S. electric-train 
maker when it sold a polished-brass trolley powered by wet-cell batteries. 
That toy may have inspired young Joshua Lionel Cowen, who was mechanically 
inclined and fascinated by the world's newest marvel _ electricity. 
In 1901 he produced an open-top, battery-operated railcar that he 
sold to New York City merchants as window dressing. His idea: the 
circling train, carrying small items of merchandise, would bring customers 
into the store. It did, but a lot of them wanted one of the electrical 
toys for themselves. And a railroad empire _ the Lionel Lines _ was 
born. In a few years, Lionel's rather crude toy trains were being 
powered by transformers that converted 120-volt household current 
to a safe 16 volts, and while the company experimented with an electronic-control 
system after World War II, the technology to run electric trains didn't 
really change much until the Trainmaster Command Control was introduced. 
More realistic, die-cast steam locomotives appeared in the late 1930s, 
but prototypical detail was slow to come to O-gauge trains until the 
early 1990s, when a Lionel consultant named Mike Wolf began to develop 
very realistic trains. Wolf went on to found MTH (for Mike's Train 
House). The variety of O-gauge trains that are available today from 
Lionel, MTH and other manufacturers like K-Line, Williams, Weaver 
and Atlas is unprecedented. They range from a 32-inch-long model of 
the most powerful steam engine ever built _ a 24-wheel monster (the 
Yellowstone) that hauled ore from Minnesota iron mines to the port 
of Duluth _ to the gas-powered doodlebug that carried passengers and 
freight on little-used branch lines back in the 1920s. In fact, Chris 
Smithson, a spokesman for MTH Electric Trains in Columbia, Md., said 
that Wolf wants the company to produce replicas of every steam engine, 
every diesel, every freight car ever made. And Bob Grubba, director 
of engineering for Lionel Corp. in Chesterfield, Mich., said that 
a dozen or so newly tooled locomotives would be on the shelves in 
his company's familiar orange-and-blue boxes over the next year. MTH 
even makes a New York City subway train that rattles over the D Line 
from 205th Street in the Bronx to Coney Island in Brooklyn, with the 
speaker blaring as it announces stops at Yankee Stadium, Columbus 
Circle, Rockefeller Center, Times Square, Herald Square, Chinatown 
and Prospect Park. Bruce Brown, a toy train hobbyist in Falls Church, 
Va., told cyberengineers on Compuserve's Train Net forum that the 
sound effects ``brought back fond, almost tearful memories'' for his 
wife, a New Yorker. But MTH's MTA set could be improved, Brown said, 
by covering the sides of the four cars with graffiti. Smithson said 
that MTH tries to find the builder's blueprint for all of its locomotives. 
``Diesel manufacturers like General Electric are still in business, 
but a lot of steam-engine blueprints are out there, too,'' he said. 
``And if the actual engine exists, we'll go out and take pictures.'' 
Some details like steam pipes will be three-dimensional on the high-end 
scale-size models, which are 1/48th actual size, but will be molded 
into the cast-aluminum boiler or plastic shell of semiscale locomotives 
in the less expensive Rail King line. But Lionel has also introduced 
a locomotive called the Phantom whose futuristic profile and Halloweenish 
sounds will never be seen or heard on a real railroad. The model has 
created a lot of controversy on toy train discussion groups. Traditionalists 
hate it. Kids love it and demand one of their own. Like MTH, Lionel 
is going for sound verisimilitude. Recently Grubba was packing up 
his digital recording equipment for a field trip in the South to capture 
the sounds of real locomotives for the next generation of Lionel trains. 
``The Tennessee Valley Authority has a Fairbanks-Morse Trainmaster,'' 
he said. ``There aren't many of those left running. Then there's a 
Hudson in Chattanooga.'' The genuine locomotive sounds and other effects 
will be mixed at the state-of-the-art California studio of the singer 
Neil Young, an investor in the latest reincarnation of Lionel, which 
has had several owners in recent decades. But he's not the first hugely 
popular vocalist to be a toy-train enthusiast. Frank Sinatra built 
a full-size version of a plastic Lionel freight station on his Palm 
Springs estate to house an elaborate 12-by-24-foot layout and cabinets 
full of trains from early tin-plate to modern days. You could say 
he was the chairman of the board of his own railroad. Some high-tech 
trains and their features: NEW YORK CENTRAL HUDSON with Vanderbilt 
tender, digital sound, smoke, electrocouplers, command control and 
a four-car set of heavyweight passenger cars, from Lionel: $1,499.90. 
SOUTHERN PACIFIC GS-4 DAYLIGHT steam locomotive with digital sound, 
smoke, remote-controlled couplers and a five-car streamlined passenger 
set, from MTH: $1.249.90. SOUTHERN PACIFIC SD-40 DIESEL with four 
loaded coal cars and a bay-window caboose, all with the weathered 
Warhorse look; digital sound, and command control, from Lionel: $899.95. 
UNION PACIFIC VERANDA gas-turbine engine with die-cast tender, four 
flywheel-equipped motors, two operating smoke systems, digital sound 
effects and lighted cab interior, from MTH: $699.95. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>