<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981125.0344 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Don't look for elves in the full-price stores this year. Building 
on a trend that started a few years ago, discount merchandisers are 
winning the nation's shopping wars, cashing in on consumers' growing 
appetite for bargains. And they are likely to keep their edge right 
through the Christmas and Hanukkah frenzy, at the expense of old-line 
department stores and some specialty chains. ``Price seems to be the 
only thing that people are responding to,'' said Thomas Burns, senior 
vice president at the Doneger Group, a retail consulting company. 
From all indications, shoppers are not planning to spend less this 
year, despite the whipsawing of the stock market and fears that the 
economy may be slowing. But they are trying to stretch what they spend 
a little further, and they are changing the mix, often buying smaller, 
inexpensive items coupled with a few big-ticket purchases. Anne-Marie 
Kern, armed with shopping list and credit cards, often heads first 
for the Prime Outlets at Kenosha mall in Wisconsin, halfway between 
Milwaukee and Chicago on Lake Michigan. This year, Ms. Kern, a sports 
marketing executive in Chicago, picked up a pair of insulated ski 
gloves there for her brother, along with some cookware and holiday 
wreaths. She saved about $50, she said, making the hour's drive worth 
the effort. ``It helps with the budget,'' she said, adding that she 
will buy gifts for herself later, when the post-holiday sales are 
in full swing. Shoppers like Ms. Kern have already given discounters 
a lift. Through August, Commerce Department data show, sales in discount 
department stores rose 9.8 percent from the corresponding period last 
year, compared with a 3.5 percent gain for conventional department 
stores and a 1.2 percent decline for chain stores, including specialty 
retailers like Ann Taylor, the Gap, Barnes &AMP; Noble, Abercrombie 
&AMP; Fitch and Toys ``R'' Us. Three leading discounters, Wal-Mart, 
Kmart and Target, dominate the field, accounting for 75 percent of 
total sales. ``I think it's going to be a very promotional season,'' 
Burns said. ``Some of the sales are breaking even sooner than ever, 
even before the decorations are up.'' Why is discounting the nation's 
hottest retail story? Mainly it is because more and more discount 
chains are transforming themselves into one-stop shopping meccas. 
By expanding product offerings and adding services, they can now fill 
all manner of customer needs. These days, ``a higher-income consumer 
who may shop at a Nordstrom will also shop at a Target for basic needs,'' 
said Richard Church, an analyst at Salomon Smith Barney. ``People 
have gradually realized that for certain types of merchandise, you 
don't need to spend full retail price,'' Church added. Shopping at 
discount stores for some basic items also ``frees up a few more discretionary 
dollars that they can spend in other areas.'' Available products run 
the gamut from the old standbys _ health, beauty and personal care 
products, plus a smattering of small appliances and toys _ to food 
and other grocery items, as well as an expanded selection of toys, 
sporting goods, linens, housewares, electronics and auto care items. 
Some even offer their own store-brand labels and other merchandise 
they sell exclusively, plus services like banking, vision care, shoe 
repair and photography. Convenience and pricing make discounters popular 
not just with lower-income customers, analysts say, but also with 
a growing number of older, generally thrifty shoppers. And the discounters' 
efforts to add to the number of trendy products lining their shelves, 
like fluted goblets, candles and aromatherapy oils, is also helping 
them attract customers. On her first trip last week to the Target 
store in the Palisades Center mall, which opened in February in West 
Nyack, N.Y., Debbie Carilli, of Larchmont, quickly loaded her cart 
with a trove of holiday gift items. These included a gold-painted 
basket, red and green plaid placemats, candleholders, several rolls 
of gift wrap and blue dessert plates and matching mugs, decorated 
with snowmen. ``I came for the dishes,'' said Ms. Carilli, who had 
received a flyer in the mail. She has tried other shopping methods 
in past years, like buying prewrapped gifts and using personal shoppers, 
but at Target she said, ``The value was great.'' And she happily confided 
the prices she was about to pay. The plates and a portable vacuum 
cleaner she was buying for herself. But the basket, an unexpected 
find, and the placemats would be included in a gift of pasta and other 
cooking items that she was putting together for her father-in-law. 
The store's mix of such small items fit well with Ms. Carilli's plans 
to buy ``lots of little things'' to create more personal gifts this 
year. And she said that after going to Target, the first discount 
store she had ever shopped in, she would definitely be back. Discounters 
are also benefiting from a shift in spending, analysts say. Consumers 
are laying out less on clothing, and the most sought-after gifts are 
toys, like the latest Holiday Barbie, Furby or Teletubbies. The newest 
Nintendo and Play Station game disks are popular, and cellular phones, 
Palm Pilots or other consumer electronic devices top many must-have 
lists. As John McCormack of New Hyde Park, N.Y., watched his 6-year-old 
grandson, Neil Francis of Pearl River, try out the latest Nintendo 
game in Target's electronics department, his wife, Eileen, was a few 
feet away trying on a sweater. She had already bought a horse-riding 
Barbie as a gift for Neil's 7-year-old cousin. ``You're just overwhelmed 
by the amount of stuff they have for children,'' McCormack said of 
the store, adding that he and his wife had been discount shoppers 
for years. Although they have not reined in their spending as a result 
of the stock market's gyrations this year, he said: ``We like the 
discount stores. I think the prices are better. We definitely buy 
clothing in the department stores, but buy most other items in discount 
stores.'' Sales at stores open more than a year, considered the best 
gauge of a retailer's strength, fell 1 percent at department stores 
in the third quarter but rose 7.2 percent for discounters, according 
to Salomon Smith Barney. Although discounters' growth may be slowing 
_ in the first quarter, sales rose an even stronger 8.2 percent _ 
the convenience offered by their vast array of merchandise will help 
them continue to gain ground against traditional department stores, 
said Dan Barry, an analyst at Merrill Lynch. Although the end of the 
year is a big season for discounters, many do not rely heavily on 
the last-minute shopping spree to clinch the year's fortunes. But 
for department stores and other mall-based chains, Christmas often 
means the difference between ending the year with a substantial profit 
and ending with a loss. Moreover, despite the crowds that 11th-hour 
shopping promises, many consumers are more than willing to wait out 
department store executives in anticipation of those final, alluring 
markdowns. Federated Department Stores, a leading chain, takes in 
about 60 percent of its revenues in the fourth quarter, Church of 
Salomon Smith Barney said. By comparison, Target, which is owned by 
Dayton Hudson Corp., makes about 39 percent and Wal-Mart about 33 
percent. Wal-Mart is anticipating about a 5 percent increase in sales 
in the fourth quarter, said Michael Maher, a spokesman. ``Right now, 
we're on track for another record quarter.'' The addition of grocery 
products in Wal-Mart's ``superstores'' has drawn customers in more 
often throughout the year, reducing its reliance on holiday shopping, 
analysts said. In an effort to lift holiday sales, this season Wal-Mart's 
trademark greeters will also offer young children suggestions of inexpensive 
gifts they can buy for family and friends. In late December, Wal-Mart 
will also offer a gift package linked to the movie ``Prince of Egypt.'' 
At Kmart, which relies heavily on promotions to bring in customers 
and makes about half its sales in the fourth quarter, the holiday 
season takes on added importance. ``It's critical,'' said Robert Burton, 
Kmart's vice president for investor relations. ``It's a tremendous 
source of the year's profitability,'' he said, adding that the company 
was ``cautiously optimistic,'' expecting comparable-store sales to 
increase 3 to 5 percent. Target anticipates a 4 to 6 percent increase 
in the quarter, a spokeswoman said. The chain continues to distinguish 
itself from competitors and attract more affluent shoppers than most 
discounters, analysts say, by focusing on stocking a number of trendy 
items popular with consumers. ``We have a trend department, so you'll 
see the latest apparel trends, such as cargo pants,'' said Susan Eich, 
a spokeswoman. ``We also have the silver influence in everything from 
candlesticks, charger plates to jewelry.'' And these days, most shoppers 
crossing the threshold of a discount store do not leave emptyhanded. 
Anna Filomio and Laura Cimini, neighbors from Hawthorne, N.Y., sat 
in the Palisades Center mall's main food court, with the day's haul 
of toys, books and housewares overflowing the chairs next to them. 
``The key is to find something cost-effective that looks like more 
than you paid for it, so they're not going to stick it in a closet,'' 
Ms. Cimini said. Both women said they planned to buy a mix of small 
items, mainly from discount stores, along with a few more expensive 
gifts like American Girl collector dolls. Despite the discount stores' 
array of merchandise and toys, one item still eluded the two women. 
``We've been looking all over for Spice Girl accessories,'' Ms. Cimini 
said. ``By nature, the joy of shopping is to get the best price,'' 
Ms. Cimini said of their visit to the discount stores. ``To beat the 
system,'' Ms. Filomio added. ``That,'' Ms. Cimini said, ``feels great 
to think you've got a deal.'' 
</TEXT>
</DOC>