<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981125.0363 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
The House of Lords on Wednesday rejected Gen. Augusto Pinochet's claim 
of immunity from arrest, committing him to remain in custody here 
while Spain seeks his extradition on charges of genocide and terrorism. 
In tersely worded verdicts, the five law lords who make up England's 
highest court ruled 3-2 that crimes like hostage-taking and torture 
are not protected by sovereign immunity because they cannot be considered 
functional acts of a head of state. With the immunity issue settled, 
the focus shifts to Home Secretary Jack Straw, who has until Dec. 
2 to decide whether to allow the Spanish extradition request to be 
answered by the courts. The government has remained publicly aloof 
so far, saying the case is a matter for the courts to decide. But 
Straw, a key member of the Cabinet, now has the power either to let 
the case go forward or allow Pinochet to leave Britain on grounds 
of ill health or compassion. Wednesday's ruling overturned the judgment 
of the High Court on Oct. 28 that Pinochet, the onetime Chilean dictator, 
could not be arrested because he is a former head of state and enjoys 
the protection of the State Immunity Act of 1978. But the High Court 
said he had to stay in England while the Crown Prosecution Service, 
on behalf of the Spanish authorities, appealed the decision. The surprise 
arrest of Pinochet took place on Oct. 16 in response to a request 
from a Spanish judge that he be held in London for extradition to 
Madrid. One of the five judges, Lord Nicholls, expressing Wednesday's 
majority view, told the House: ``International law has made plain 
that certain types of conduct, including torture and hostage-taking, 
are not acceptable conduct on the part of anyone. This applies as 
much to heads of state, or even more so, as it does to everyone else. 
The contrary conclusion would make a mockery of international law.'' 
Wednesday's decision marked a potentially significant broadening of 
the powers of prosecutors under international law and new human rights 
covenants for pursuing people across national borders with allegations 
of crimes against humanity. Opponents of the reasoning behind Wednesday's 
finding have said prosecutors could apply it to people like Queen 
Elizabeth II, for past British actions in Ireland, and President Clinton, 
for the bombing of Iraq. At a news conference in Parliament, Geoffrey 
Bindman, a lawyer representing Amnesty International and the families 
of victims of the Pinochet regime, called Wednesday's ruling ``the 
most important case in human rights law this century.'' ``The significance 
of this case will extend to all repressive regimes where the heads 
of state seek to assert the freedom to travel around the world living 
in luxury on the proceeds of their crimes,'' he said. The first two 
judges to speak Wednesday upheld the earlier High Court decision, 
raising the prospect among the hundreds of thousands of people watching 
the event on television that Pinochet would be flying home Wednesday 
afternoon on the Chilean Air Force jet that has been parked at a suburban 
military field for the past month. But the next three judges disagreed, 
setting off gasps in the jammed public gallery and jubilant cheering 
and embracing among the Chilean exiles gathered on the street outside 
Parliament. Pinochet, who turned 83 on Wednesday, was appointed senator 
for life in March when he stepped down as Army commander, largely 
for the purpose of giving him immunity from prosecution in Chile. 
There was no word from the hospital in North London where he has remained 
under police guard, recuperating from back surgery last month. In 
his only comment since his arrest, he issued a statement on Nov. 8 
saying he was ``hurt and bewildered'' by his detention in England, 
a country whose institutions he always admired, and would fight the 
extradition order ``with all my spirit.'' While a group of 100 Chilean 
exiles and other Pinochet opponents danced and chanted joyously at 
the gates to the hospital, the ambulance that was expected to transport 
the general to Brize Norton Royal Air Force base in Oxfordshire, where 
a plane waited to take him to Chile, drove off empty. Two warrants 
for the general's arrest and extradition from the Spanish judge, Baltasar 
Garzon, allege that during the 17 years Pinochet ruled Chile, he intentionally 
inflicted severe pain or suffering, took hostages, conspired to kill 
enemies and conducted a ruthless systematic purge of political opponents 
that resulted in 3,178 murders or ``disappearances.'' Bow Street Magistrates 
Court in London has set a Dec. 2 deadline by which Straw must make 
his decision and Pinochet must attend a hearing, which would be his 
first appearance since his arrest. Former Prime Minister Margaret 
Thatcher Wednesday urged Straw to allow Pinochet to leave England 
because of his poor health. She has lobbied for the general's release, 
saying the British should be grateful to him for his support during 
the Falkland Islands War in 1982. ``The senator is old, frail and 
sick, and on compassionate grounds alone should be allowed to return 
to Chile,'' she said Wednesday moments after the law lords' ruling 
became known. In the House of Commons on Wednesday afternoon, William 
Hague, the Conservative leader, also called on Straw to let the general 
go and end what he called ``a huge diplomatic embarrassment for this 
country.'' ``It's damaging relations with Chile, a long-standing ally 
of our country, and causing instability in a country that is now democratic,'' 
Hague said. The British government has said the Pinochet proceeding 
is a matter for the judicial authorities here and in Spain. One official, 
Trade and Industry Minister Peter Mandelson, said last month that 
extending compassion to Pinochet would be a ``gut wrenching'' experience 
for those who remembered the events in Chile after the military coup 
of 1973. Most of the statements from human rights groups Wednesday 
specifically called on Straw to resist entreaties to interfere. David 
Bull, director of Amnesty International U.K., said: ``It is vital 
now that justice is done. This decision has opened the way for that 
justice. We must send a message to the Home Secretary that he must 
not overturn the will of the highest court in the land.'' Pinochet, 
a self-declared Anglophile, had made a number of visits here in recent 
years without incident. He arrived this time on Sept. 21 and was treated 
as a VIP by the Foreign Office. He had tea with Mrs. Thatcher in her 
home and gave a long interview to The New Yorker magazine in which 
he proclaimed his love of England. But he suffered back pains during 
the flight from Chile, and a doctor recommended immediate surgery. 
The operation took place on Oct. 9 and the general was recuperating 
when he was arrested. He has remained under police guard, in keeping 
with the High Court's direction that he remain in England while the 
appeal was being heard. Pinochet has not been seen in public since 
his arrest. In the statement issued Nov. 8, he said the peaceful future 
of countries that had experienced internal conflict lay in ``reconciliation,'' 
and argued that ``in Chile, as elsewhere, recrimination is the enemy 
of reconciliation.'' He cited Spain, South Africa and Northern Ireland 
as positive examples where ``wise decisions have been made not to 
revisit the past.'' ``The opening up of old wounds, bringing back 
into debate issues where the true facts have long since been forgotten, 
serves no purpose,'' he added. Reports about what occurred in Chile 
were ``a travesty of the truth,'' he contended, and as a result, he 
had become the victim of ``spurious attempts by foreign prosecutors 
to convict me on unproven charges.'' 
</TEXT>
</DOC>