<DOC>
<DOCNO> PRI19981125.2000.1258 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
The NBA lockout has forced NBC to change its Christmas Day programming. 
Instead of Patrick Ewing blocking shots, Jimmy Stewart will be saving 
his bank again. That's right. The NBA double header has been canceled 
to be replaced by "It's a Wonderful Life." It's most certainly not 
been wonderful for basketball fans around the world as Clark Boyd 
reports. It's p.m. We're in row 18, seat 6 at the Fleet Center, the 
home of the Boston Celtics pro basketball team. In an hour, this seat 
would be at center court for an NBA game, but tonight, it's at center 
ice instead. A crowd of about 25 people is watching girl's ice hockey. 
Welcome to day one 148 of the NBA lockout. As players and management 
continue to argue over things like hard and soft salary caps, 22 days 
of the 1998-'99 season have been lost. That adds up to 156 games, 
hundreds of millions of dollars in player's salaries and team revenues 
and countless long faces on pro-hoops fans. But if you think their 
only pouting in Peoria, think again. Over the last ten or 20 years, 
the NBA has become incredibly popular around the world. Terry Lyons 
is the NBA's vice president for international marketing. We're on 
TV in close to 200 countries around the world. Basketball's played 
in about 199 countries by both men and women, so the sport enjoys 
tremendous popularity. And I think to the fans and the participants 
of the game around the world, they look to the NBA as the very best 
in basketball. And, Lyon says, the very best in basketball is exactly 
what caught the world's attention six years ago when the Dream Team 
wowed them in Barcelona. Since I would say the '92 Olympics, we've 
really, you know, just had an unbelievable growth period. We have 
offices in Hong Kong, in Melbourne, Australia, up in Toronto for Canada. 
We have offices in Europe, in Paris, in London, in Barcelona, an office 
dedicated to Japan and Tokyo, an office dedicated to Latin America 
that's based in Miami, and an office based right in Mexico City. That 
kind of global full court press is designed to do one thing: market 
the NBA's product. That product revolves around high flying personalities 
like Charles Barkley, Patrick Ewing, and of course, Michael Jordan, 
who are paid outrageous sums of money to put a ball through an iron 
hoop. Rick Burton, who teaches sports marketing at the University 
of Oregon, says that the NBA's overseas fans are turning a curious 
eye on the lock out. I think the rest of the world finds us, if not 
amusing, then find us quite strange that we operate the way we do, 
that sometimes when we have the best of everything, even still we 
shut that down and demand more. So they don't understand when we say, 
"No, we refuse to play at all unless you pay me more millions or you 
give me a greater percentage of the basketball-related income." And 
so they look at it, I think, with a curiosity which is, "I thought 
you people love to play this game. You know, why are you refusing 
to play?" And, Burton says, it's not hard for foreign fans to find 
another team, even another sport to cheer for. Internationally, I'm 
sure that if there's no American basketball being played, that they'll 
follow a little more closely their own basketball, or they'll follow 
rugby, or they'll follow cricket, and they'll follow the games that 
are being played. Is that a grilled chicken burger? yes. Any sauce 
at all with the nuggets? One Australian who misses the NBA is Cameron 
Laird, mild-mannered McDonald's manager by day, rabid for Portland 
Trailblazers fan by night. Laird might not understand what a salary 
cap is, but he does know who really loses when players and management 
don't see eye to eye. In the end, it's the people who watch the games, 
the fans, that really are the losers in the whole scene. So that's 
the whole thing I think fans. There's nothing they can do about it. 
And it's as if the players and the owners don't really care about 
the fans. That sense of being left out in the cold is echoed by hoops 
fans in Canada. Jack Scott is a Vancouver businessman who happily 
shells out $2400 U.S. dollars a year for front-row tickets to watch 
his beloved Grizzlies. For Scott, an NBA contest is more than just 
a game. Oh, it's the event. It really is - It's wonderful. It's wonderful 
to go to a game, the atmosphere, the excitement. You go there and 
it's like going back to summer camp sort of thing. You go back and 
you renew all your old friendships and it's just wonderful. I love 
the event. I love the whole - the atmosphere and the hoopla, and of 
course, the basketball. How can you argue with that? But does the 
prospect of a shortened season make a die hard fan like Jack Scott 
consider giving up his tickets? Oh, no, I like the game too much. 
I still want to see some basketball. And I would really - It'd probably 
tick me off if they trashed the whole the season. But look on the 
bright side. Without basketball in their way, the NBA's hot shots 
can get down to serious work. Dennis Rodman can figure out where his 
9-1/2 day marriage went wrong. And Shaquille O'Neal can spend some 
time perfecting his rhymes. For THE WORLD, this is sports. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>