<DOC>
<DOCNO> PRI19981125.2000.0667 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
This is Alejandro Martins in the Chilean capital, Santiago. Here, 
too, there were hundreds of people in the streets celebrating today's 
news from London to the chant of Es Criminale Es Stanley Carsay, "The 
criminal is in jail." Among those gathered at a central square in 
Santiago where many young Chileans, like 20-year-old student Ladios 
Broska, who was not even born when General Pinochet came to power. 
Well, this is an historic day for us. We are celebrating here that 
Pinochet will be judged in Europe. We would hope that he would be 
judged here in Chile but it's - There is a political structure doesn't 
permit that, so we hope that in Spain, the Judge Garcone will judge 
him there. But General Pinochet's legal troubles in Britain underscore 
how deeply polarized Chilean society still is. While those celebrations 
were taking place in central Santiago, the mood was very different 
at the headquarters of the Pinochet Foundation. Hundreds of supporters 
of the general were following the announcement live from London on 
huge screens. As the verdict was announced, dismay changed into frustration 
and anger. Many journalists were kicked and punched by supporters 
of the general, angry at what they described as bias coverage against 
Pinochet. Marinas Martinez is a member of the Pinochet Foundation. 
She says she can understand why people are frustrated. I am sad. I 
have sad in my heart because I am a Chilean. I born in Chile. I feel 
like I been hurt by the world. Demonstrations continue in several 
parts of Santiago, and there is a heavy police presence on the street. 
Such scenes are likely to continue until a final decision is made 
in Pinochet's fate. For right-wing Senator Evelyn Matai, today's decision 
will only deepen divisions in Chile and create further unrest. She 
says what Chile needs is not to reopen the wounds of the past but 
to move forward. People who are now 25 years of age have not been 
born when the military government came into power. They never knew 
Allende. And so it is very unjust with people who had nothing to do 
with and who really need a future to just keep hanging on something 
that happened 35 years ago or 30 years ago. I think it is absolutely 
not just with this younger generation. We have to look to the future. 
But many think moving forward is not possible unless Chile faces the 
one issue that was swept under the carpet to insure a peaceful transition 
to democracy a decade ago, human rights violations. A thousand people 
remained disappeared and knowing what happened to them is crucial 
for leading human rights lawyer, Ernan Montellegre. One cannot look 
at these things only of things of the past, because the disappeared 
people are disappeared today. And today is present, it's not past. 
They are disappeared today, and to this moment, for example, everybody 
that is speaking either from the left or from the right agrees that 
the first thing that we all do Chile in order to reconciliate is that 
we must find the people that have disappeared. And the persons that 
were involved in this criminal acts have to say where those remains 
are. It may well take more than truth or even justice to bring about 
reconciliation in Chile. According to Senator Matai, it will take 
decades for Chile's wounds to heal. I think reconciliation will take 
20, 30, or 40 years. For instance, nobody asks the Palestinians to 
love the Israelis nor the Israelis to love the Palestinians. What 
we are trying to do now is the same as in the Middle East. They're 
trying to work a future together where there will be no more killings 
and where the hatred will slowly start to subside. But nobody asks 
them to be reconciliated now. That will take generations. While General 
Pinochet's fate remains in British hands, people on both sides of 
the issue here agree that the hardest task of all is up to Chileans 
themselves. They are the ones who will have to find a formula that 
will permit this bitterly divided country to overcome its past. For 
THE WORLD, this is Alejandro Martins in Santiago, Chile. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>