<DOC>
<DOCNO> PRI19981125.2000.2999 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
This is THE WORLD. I'm Lisa Mullins. No one complained last summer 
when Puff Daddy sampled Led Zeppelin for his hit, "Come With Me." 
After all, imitation is the sincerest of flattery, especially when 
the royalties get paid. But when musicians sample traditional folk 
music, songs, and chants, they're wandering into uncharted territory. 
THE WORLD's Renata Wong reports on a legal battle between a German 
pop band and an elderly Taiwanese beetle nut farmer over royalties, 
recognition, and respect. This is the voice of 79-year-old Guo Non, 
an Armese tribal man who lives in the hills of southeastern Taiwan. 
Desong, as his people know him, has spent his life toiling in the 
fields and to relieve the routine of carrying buckets of water and 
pulling weeds, he sings tribal chants that he learned as a child from 
the village elders. Today, his songs are symbols of the fast eroding 
Armese culture. His deep, melodic voice has attracted scholars from 
near and far who visit to tape his singing so that one day when he 
is gone, the music of his people will be remembered. But it came as 
a surprise to the singer three years ago when a friend brought over 
a commercially produced CD had that Desong's voice on it. It had become 
part of an international hit single for German pop band, Enigma. The 
track, "Return to Innocence," sat on "Billboard" magazine's international 
charts for 32 straight weeks between 1994 and '95. But Enigma's producer, 
Michael Katu, has never thanked Desong nor did he mention the tribal 
singer on the CD cover. When I first heard my voice on the metal disc, 
I was so happy. I couldn't imagine that the people all around the 
world could hear my music, the music of the Armese tribe. But then 
I realized that Enigma had never mentioned my name. He didn't even 
give me any respect. Our tribe doesn't have a written language. All 
we have are these chants. I just want the world to know this music 
comes from us. "Return to Innocence" made millions of dollars for 
Enigma and its record company, Capital EMI. The record company later 
sold the chant to the International Olympic Committee, which used 
it in advertisements for the Olympic Games of 1996 and '97. Desong 
has never seen any of the estimated $40 million made by these various 
productions. Anthony Sieger, a musicologist with the Smithsonian Institute, 
says that while aboriginal chants have been recorded by scholars for 
years, a contentious legal problem has emerged due to the recent commercialization 
of such music. Aboriginal chants are increasingly being used in popular 
music partly because of the technology of sampling and partly because 
I think as listeners become more sophisticated and more interested 
in different sounds, the musicians themselves are reaching out and 
pulling in some of these remarkably beautiful sounds that are found 
around the world being performed by what used to be very remote groups. 
Guo filed suit last December against both EMI and the International 
Olympic Committee claiming they profited from an unlicensed recording 
without prior consent. But the record companies are fighting the suit 
claiming they did nothing wrong. Enigma's production company had acquired 
the recording from a museum collection in France for $3,000. Sources 
say EMI intends to argue that since the Armese chant was written hundreds 
of years ago and merely performed by Desong, he deserves no copyright 
protection, since the music belongs in the public domain. But the 
singer's lawyer, Juong Sho Wan, says EMI is missing the point. EMI 
doesn't understand that we're not fighting for composition rights 
but arrangement rights. It's true he didn't write the song, but over 
the years, he changed it substantially. For instance, some parts are 
quicker than others and some parts are higher pitched than in the 
original version's to add melody. We intend to prove this should the 
case go to trial. We're not fighting for composition rights. What 
he deserves are both arrangement and performance rights. Lawyers representing 
EMI had no comment on the pending case, but for its part, the International 
Olympic Committee is not too worried. IOC lawyer Craig Henshall says 
the committee used the recording based on a license which EMI claimed 
to be valid. Henshall says the real battle is therefore between EMI 
and the tribal singer. If it turns out that the recording company 
properly did have the copyright, then there's no issue for the IOC. 
If it turns out that the Guo had some rights, then the IOC will make 
proper amends. And then, of course, turn around and look to the recording 
company to make amends to it because the warranty to the IOC about 
copyright ownership was not accurate. But we don't know that right 
now. Desong's lawyers say EMI had offered some compensation but not 
enough to placate the tribal singer. Guo's lawyer, Juong Sho Wan, 
also says that more than money is at stake. The crux of the dispute 
lies with Enigma and EMI, who failed to respect this man's rights. 
They think he should be thankful for having a song on their album, 
but this is wrong. Aborigines might be ignored and looked down upon 
by many people in this world, but they have rights just like anybody 
else. It's simple. If you use a person's music, you must respect him. 
There are less than a hundred thousand Armese living today on Taiwan, 
since Chinese began to move on to the island some 400 years ago. Indigenous 
cultures have been giving way to the larger Chinese population. Most 
Armese tribal children grow up without learning how to speak their 
native tongue. Like minority groups the world over, they're obliged 
to learn the language of the dominant culture. Guo says this is why 
he's sparring with the big record company to hold on to what's left 
of his way of life. For THE WORLD, this is Renata Wong reporting. 
The voice of Guo Non takes us out today. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>