<DOC>
<DOCNO> PRI19981125.2000.2368 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
For more than 50 years, the Canadian Red Cross was the soul manager 
of the nation's blood supply, but that arrangement came to an end 
after thousands of Canadians were infected in the 1980s by blood transfusions 
tainted with Hepatitis C and the AIDS virus. The Canadian Red Cross 
has sought bankruptcy protection in the face of millions of dollars 
in lawsuits. And other agencies are taking over the management of 
blood. THE WORLD's Phillip Sporer reports on one such agency in Quebec. 
Blood donation used to be a simple process in Quebec. You walked into 
a Red Cross office, were asked about your general state of health, 
and then you gave your pint. These days, though, the process of donating 
blood is more complex. To give blood, you'll need to answer a lengthy 
sent of questions, including explicit inquiries into your sexual and 
social activities. Once completed, you move on to another detailed 
questionnaire to fill out in private. That's when if you're an at-risk 
donor, you can discretely opt out of the process all together. These 
precautions are part of Quebec's new blood agency known as Ema Quebec, 
which is now responsible for the collection and testing of donated 
blood throughout the province. That would be a centrifuge. We're spinning 
down some blood samples because the technician is doing a cross match. 
In labs such as this one at the Royal Victoria Hospital in Montreal, 
state-of-the-art technology tests blood safety. Dr. Gwendolyn Spurrel, 
the lab's director, says that more than ever, such safety is the responsibility 
of blood donors and receivers. Physicians have behaved in a very paternalistic 
way. They have said to a patient, you know, "You're sick. I'm making 
the decision. I'm hanging this unit of blood and you don't have anything 
to say about it." Whereas now, they're more likely to go to the patient 
and say, "We would like you to agree to receive this treatment." There's 
awareness of the requirement for consent because of the legal battles 
that have been fought over blood transfusions. Such legal battles 
have made many Quebec citizens wary of their province's blood safety. 
It's a perception that Dr. Frothsene DeCaree hopes to change. It's 
a very important to say to the system in 98 is extremely safe. DeCaree, 
an ex-Red Cross regional director, now heads Ema Quebec. She's proud 
of the fact that the Canadian government credited Ema Quebec as the 
province's blood agency. I think that in Canada at this time, it is 
recognized that the risk for contracting AIDS through a transfusion 
is in the order of one in 900,000. That means that we're doing everything 
that is in the book and more to make sure that the health and the 
life of Canadians is, you know, into good hands. But not everyone 
shares DeCaree's view, particularly Canada's hemophiliacs. In the 
1980s, 800 hemophiliacs were infected with the HIV virus during Red 
Cross blood scandals. As chairman of the blood committee for the Canadian 
Hemophiliac Society, David Page says that the only way to prevent 
such disasters from reoccurring is by strengthening early warning 
systems, such as Canada's health protection branch. In Canada, historically, 
this group has been under funded and under resourced in terms of competence, 
and they haven't been able to do their job. Or if they've done their 
job, it's been long after the fact. We want them to be the watchdog 
over the system. Coming up on this week's program, a breakthrough 
on Hepatitis C. Ontario prepares to pay. You'll hear details from 
the Ontario government and the... Throughout the 1980s, Canada's Federal 
Department of Health, known as Health Canada, closely monitored the 
country's blood scandals. Today, through it's health protection unit, 
the organization regulates Ema Quebec's operation. Blood regulator 
Peter Gant says that today, new measures are in place to insure a 
safe blood supply. In addition to inspecting all blood centers in 
Canada once every year, we also supplement that by in fact going into 
blood centers and having unannounced inspections. We send our inspectors 
to blood centers, and then we basically assess the quality of the 
product. In the spring of next year, Ema Quebec will face a new challenge 
when, for the first time, Quebec's 125 hospitals will have to pay 
for their blood products. That worries David Page from the Canadian 
Hemophiliac Society. Page says that in a time of government cutbacks 
and fixed budgets, such a policy is likely to pressure hospitals to 
use less blood. We know that the cost of blood products will go up 
as innovations are made. Then hospitals who pay for these will be 
given a dilemma. What do they cut? Do they cut the quantity of blood 
being used, you know, and ration it? Or do they cut on the quality 
of the blood products being purchased and choose products that are 
substantially less safe? That is a major concern. We don't know how 
it's going to work. As Quebecers go to the polls in the provincial 
election on Monday, politicians have promised to add billions of dollars 
to the province's health care system. Election promises aside, Canada's 
past blood scandals will continue to remind Quebec's government and 
citizens that a safe blood supply depends on both awareness and vigilance. 
For THE WORLD, this is Phillip Sporer in Montreal. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>