<DOC>
<DOCNO> PRI19981125.2000.0373 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
While Augusto Pinochet ruled Chile from 1973 to 1990, his security 
forces killed at least 3,000 people and tortured many more. Today, 
Britain's highest court increased the chance of the former dictator 
will stand trial for those crimes. A five-judge tribunal of the House 
of Lords decided that General Pinochet does not have immunity from 
arrest and will therefore remain in custody while Spain tries to get 
him extradited. In a moment, our correspondent in Santiago tells us 
about the reaction in Chile. But first, we turn to THE WORLD's Alan 
Dow in London for this report on today's ruling. In Britain's House 
of Lord's, the decision was not unanimous. The first two lords to 
speak agreed with the lower court ruling that as a former head of 
state, Augusto Pinochet was immune from prosecution and should be 
released. But then two others said Pinochet's former presidential 
status had little bearing on the case. The cliffhanging fifth and 
deciding vote was cast by Lord Hoffman. My lords, I've had the advantage 
of reading in draft the speeches of my noble and venerate friends, 
Lord Nichols of Clerkenhere, and Lord Stane. I agree with them that 
Senator Pinochet does not have immunity from prosecution, and I too 
would therefore allow the appeal. On the streets of London, champagne 
and tears flowed as anti-Pinochet crowds erupted in cheers while grim-faced 
supporters of the former dictator made sober telephone calls back 
home. As for Pinochet, his reaction isn't known. He's said to be still 
recovering from the back surgery he came to Britain for last month. 
And the Chilean presidential waiting to whisk the former dictator 
back to South America will sit idle for the foreseeable future. There's 
no question today's decision by the House of Lords is groundbreaking, 
according Jeffrey Robertson, an expert in the international law. I 
think this decision shows the way the law is moving in many countries. 
The precedence are moving towards a situation where you simply can't 
get away with - in future, with crimes against humanity unless at 
least you stay home with the amnesty that you've extracted from the 
government. But some people in Britain have denounced today's decision. 
Conservative M.P. John Wilkinson says the British government should 
free Pinochet and keep its nose out of Chile's business. Chile has 
been a model in its transition to democracy and its economic progress. 
Chile faced civil war. That caused the coup d'etat and the repression 
which very sadly followed. But since then, those sad events have put 
been behind Chile, and Chile has made progress. By and large, Chile 
has moved forward. The on the street's now a great antipathy to Spain 
and to Britain, and I don't think the democratic process will be advanced 
in Chile by this. But in Spain where judges want Pinochet to face 
charges of murder, torture, and genocide, news that the extradition 
is proceeding was greeted with celebration. Well, if the official 
is confirmed is really very good news, important step against impunity, 
and we hope that affairs will continue and we can obtain the truth 
and justice in Chile and in the world also. I am. We are very, very, 
very happy. For the time being, General Pinochet will remain in London 
and there's still a chance he won't be extradited. Britain's Home 
Secretary Jack Straw has the final say, as international law expert 
Jeffrey Robertson explains. The decision facing the Home Secretary 
is, as a matter of law, whether to let the extradition process go 
ahead. It's not really to exercise compassion or wisdom. He has to 
decide whether the law should take its course, and that will mean 
extradition hearings in which General Pinochet will be given full 
opportunity to contest the Spanish charges and only if ordered by 
a judge with all the appeal rights and so would he be sent to Spain. 
So it's not a case of putting him on the next plane to Spain. I do 
think that this Home Secretary who was after all a student leader 
himself in the early 1970s, late '60s where many of his kind were 
being tortured and killed by the general's forces in Chile would be 
seem to be betraying human rights if you intervened in the legal process. 
Britain's Home Secretary has one week to make the final decision regarding 
Pinochet. Whatever the outcome, this process has raised fundamental 
questions about international law, whom it covers, and who enforces 
it. For THE WORLD, I'm Alan Dow in London. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>