<DOC>
<DOCNO> PRI19981125.2000.2025 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Former Chilean dictator Augusto Pinochet is not the only man at the 
heart of a European rowl over extradition. Kurdish chief Abdullah 
Urjalon has instigated a tug of war between Turkey, which considers 
him a terrorist, and Italy, which has Urjalon and refuses to hand 
him over. Italian Constitution bars the extradition of suspects to 
countries that, like Turkey, have the death penalty. But there may 
be a way out of the argument between the two NATO allies. THE WORLD's 
Andrew North has the story. If you listen to the Turkish government, 
Kurdish separatist leader Abudallah Urjalon is to Turkey what Osama 
bin Laden is to America: public enemy number one. Ancura says Urjalon's 
Kurdistan Workers Party is responsible for the deaths of 30,000 people 
during its 14-year campaign for independence from Turkey. But Koni 
Zoolum of the American Kurdish Information Network says Urjalon no 
longer advocates violence. Today, he's asking for negotiations with 
the Turks. He's asking Europe to intervene, to have Turkey change 
its Constitution and to accommodate the Kurds. Abdullah Urjalon, as 
leader and founder of the PKK, the Kurdish Workers Party, is together 
with Aguzman of the Shining Path in Peru, the "most successful" and 
blood terrorist of this century, excepting for heads of state like 
Hitler, Mao, Stalin, and so on. That record says Michael Radu, of 
the Philadelphia based Foreign Policy Research Institute means Turkey 
has good reason to want the PKK leader's extradition. Rome's decision 
not to fulfill Ancura's wishes has infuriated Turkey. Ozdan Sanberg, 
one of Ancura's senior ambassadors in Europe, says Rome is being selective 
in its interpretation of extradition laws. We have full respect of 
the consideration of our Italian friends, but there are also special 
conventions covering international terrorism at the European level. 
For instance, the European convention of the suppression of terrorism, 
it is explicit both Turkey and Italy are parties to this convention. 
In response to Rome's refusal to hand over Urjalon, many Turks are 
boycotting Italian goods. But both sides are now looking to Germany 
to provide a way out. Bonn has a long-standing warrant out for Urjalon's 
arrest on charges of inciting attacks against Turks in Germany. And 
the hope is that German prosecutors will now make an official request 
for the PKK leader's extradition. State Department spokesman James 
Rubin has suggested that the Clinton administration also favors this 
option. We are working closely with Italy, Germany, and Turkey to 
review the full range of options with the goal very simply and very 
clearly that this terrorist, Urjalon, needs to be brought to justice. 
The U.S. government has labeled the PKK as a terrorist organization, 
but that's not its only interest in this dispute. The U.S. has a great 
deal at stake here. Mike Amatay, director of the Washington Kurdish 
Institute. The U.S. is very much interested in maintaining a stable 
and democratic Turkey. But Mike Amatay says in giving its unequivocal 
support that calls for Urjalon's prosecution, the Clinton administration 
is, in effect, backing Turkey's hard line policies against this Kurdish 
minority. The U.S., the sort of blanket support enables the Turkish 
military to justify its dominance in the political situation and so 
the U.S. really needs to take a more sophisticated, I think, broader 
view of what's going on in the region. However, those who want to 
see the PKK leader go on trial may already have missed their chance. 
The German government has indicated that its reluctant to extradite 
Urjalon for fear of provoking violence among its Kurdish population. 
But today, Urjalon's Italian lawyer said the Kurdish leader is willing 
to stand trial in a country that could assure him a fair reading. 
Urjalon's attorney said his client is sure he'll be able to demonstrate 
that he's not guilty of any terrorist act. For THE WORLD, I'm Andrew 
North. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>