<DOC>
<DOCNO> PRI19981125.2000.2691 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Don't mess with atoris. Who knows? That just might become the British 
Conservative Party's slogan after its leader goes on a fact-finding 
mission to Texas next year. William Hague intends to visit the Lone 
Star state to meet with Governor George W. Bush. The reason? To figure 
out how to win elections with that brand of what Bush and his brother, 
Florida Governor Jeb Bush, called compassionate conservatism. Joining 
us to talk about what Texans could teach Brits about politics is radio 
talk show host and celebrated Texan, Jim Hightower. Hello, Lisa. Governor 
George W. Bush won, as we know now, by a landslide in this reelection 
bid. What can he teach British conservatives? Well, "Shrub," as we 
call him here in Texas, or "Little George," has managed to get very, 
very good public relations around the country by essentially being 
a nice guy. However, the real lesson that George Bush teaches to politicians 
is you can win without actually having much in the way of a vote. 
Only 26 percent of the people turned out to vote, so there's not exactly 
a wild excitement for Mr. Bush. He's not exactly a thrill on a stick. 
Well, I'm sure that Mr. Hague would actually be happy to find that 
out, because that makes the stakes a little bit easier. That may be 
the case, you know, what with the British lordships and all disappearing, 
he's got to find some way, I guess, to try to get an election possibility. 
He's certainly not your typical swaggering Texan either, and he clearly 
thinks that George W. Bush has a lot to offer. I'd like to play a 
little clip so we can acquaint you with him a little bit more. He 
is the head of the British Conservative Party. He is distinctly uncharismatic, 
and here's a bit of what he sounds like. The Labor Party are now engaged 
on trying to turn the House of Lords into a house of cronies, into 
a sort of millennium QUANGO for the year 2000. My guess is, Jim Hightower, 
that he's not going to get very far in Texas if he continues to use 
words like QUANGO. Yeah, he's going to have to work in a few bubbas. 
Yeah, bubba. QUANGO, by the way, means quasi autonomous nongovernmental 
organization in case you... Oh, very good, I'm glad to have that acronym 
spelled out for us here. In Texas, people really like politics with 
the hair still on it. They like the tub thumping and the good phrases 
and the heated campaigns. We're a state that has invented some 24 
different hot sauces to put on our breakfast eggs, for example. So 
we're not a culture that is middle of the road or moderate. We really 
like our peppers hot, our love affairs hot, and our politics hot. 
Do you think it would help William Hague to maybe put on the ten gallon 
hat and cowboy boots? You know, you really got to look good in those. 
And I'm not sure that the British stiff upper lip is going to be improved 
by a hat. Jim Hightower is a radio talk show host and author of the 
book, "There's Nothin' in the Middle of the Road but Yellow Stripes 
and Dead Armadillos." Jim Hightower, thank you. Thank you, Lisa, enjoyed 
it. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>