<DOC>
<DOCNO> VOA19981125.0500.2702 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Gambling is one of the fastest-growing industries in the United States. 
For most participants, it's a harmless recreational activity, but 
Jane Hughes reports, it can ruin the lives of a small minority of 
players. This is what Harrah's Cherokee Casino in Cherokee, North 
Carolina, sounds like 24 hours a day. Gambling, also known as gaming 
and wagering, is now a national industry. Twenty years ago, Nevada 
was the only state with casinos, while a few northeastern states offered 
lotteries. Now all but two of the 50 U.S. states offer some form of 
gambling. In fact, Tim O'Brien, author of "Bad Bet," a 1998 book on 
gambling in America, says that by the year 2000 90 percent of Americans 
will live within 200 miles, just over 300 kilometers, of a casino. 
With the expansion of the gaming industry has come an increase in 
gambling problems. Carol O'Hare says she got hooked pretty quickly 
in Nevada casinos. Within two years, I was at -- I can -- what I would 
call obsessed. I really didn't make decisions other than, "When will 
I gamble?", "How will I gamble?", "Where I am going to get the money 
to gamble?", "Where will I get the money to cover what I gambled last 
night?" The gaming industry points out that most gamblers wager within 
their budgets and do it just for fun. however, about 20 percent of 
gamblers lose about 80 percent of the money, and within this core 
group, you find the compulsive gambler. Last year, the Harvard Medical 
School published a study indicating that about 1 percent of the adult 
population and 6 percent of young people are active compulsive gamblers. 
The same study found that about 3 percent of adults and 15 percent 
of young people are problem gamblers. That is people who regularly 
bet beyond their means but are not addicted. It used to be that compulsive 
gamblers were middle-aged men, but now with video slot machines and 
video poker, the experts are finding that women are slightly edging 
out men as gambling addicts. Studies show that most female compulsive 
gamblers are trying to escape from their problems by turning to fast-paced, 
repetitive games. Carol O'Hare says her goal was to be as far removed 
from reality as she could be. She got there. Financially, it got bad 
enough that I lost everything I had and anything that I could get 
you to give me. It was kind of like I'd get the paycheck and "I'm 
just going to go unwind for a couple of hours," and then next thing 
I know I'm trying to figure out how to feed three children on $20. 
Dr. Rob Hunter who has treated compulsive gamblers for more than a 
decade says more than half of the compulsive gamblers he treats are 
women like Carol O'Hare trying to escape reality and not having fun 
doing it. Most, he says, are hooked on video poker where you get a 
new hand of cards with each pull of the lever every three or four 
seconds. They're numbing themselves. They describe almost a narcotic 
effect from the machines. Video poker is to gambling what crack is 
to cocaine. Carol O'Hare says she became so miserable that she actually 
considered suicide, but a friend persuaded her to attend a meeting 
of Gamblers' Anonymous. She started going weekly and found that talking 
with other compulsive gamblers changed her life for the better. She 
now gives lectures across the country that she hopes will alert other 
people to the hidden danger of gambling addiction. I'm Jane Hughes. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>