<DOC>
<DOCNO> VOA19981125.1600.0400 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
General Pinochet's son bitterly condemned the British ruling as a 
sadistic blow against the former Chilean strongman on his 83rd birthday. 
Relatives of those killed or abducted during the Pinochet administration, 
as we have said, expressed jubilation. Police in Santiago are reinforcing 
security around the British and Spanish embassies. Jonathan Franklin 
is a reporter in Santiago, and he tells Bill Rodgers about an outpouring 
of emotion in the Chilean capital. In Santiago right now, you have 
several protest marches crisscrossing the downtown area, maybe 500 
apiece. These are people in favor of the decision, who are happy that 
Pinochet is going to remain outside the country. And you have supporters 
of the general in shock. They're -- people have fainted, attacked 
foreign journalists. And the Chileans on the right wing especially 
are feeling that their -- their national identity, their Chileanness 
is under attack and, therefore, they are venting their rage at anything 
non-Chilean. Expectations were high that the House of Lords would 
rule and make a decision in favor of General Pinochet. Is that why 
there is such great shock there? Yes. Here in Chile, there was an 
overwhelming sense that, one way or another, Pinochet would be coming 
back to Chile today, whether it was for judicial orders or the Chilean 
politicians making some agreement or some sort of "arreglo", as they 
say in Spanish, a fix-it, and the surprise here was universal, regardless 
of people's political orientation. Have the pro-Pinochet forces said 
anything about what their plans are for the future in the coming hours? 
First of all, a pro-Pinochet group called "Popsi & Libertad," which 
is Country in Freedom, tried to organize a caravan, but police immediately 
confiscated their flags and issued strict warnings that they would 
not be allowed to demonstrate. And the pro-Pinochet people have demanded 
that the government send a top-level commission to England. And President 
Frei has just announced that he will be sending Foreign Minister Insulza 
to England and Spain tomorrow. Has the Frei government said anything 
else in reaction to this decision? They've called on the Chilean public 
to recognize that they have made an all-out effort to free the general 
and that any groups that try to pressure them will not only be severely 
repressed by the police but will also be working against the objective, 
which is to show the world that Chile can be stable and democratic 
and organized in their response to this. Frei was very specific in 
saying that, if there's lots of attacks on embassies, that will actually 
undercut the ability of the Chilean government to make arguments abroad. 
When demonstrations seem to reach a critical mass, which is either 
a thousand people or within four blocks of the presidential palace, 
the water cans are immediately employed, and the groups are broken 
into smaller clusters, and there are barricades throughout the downtown 
area, barricades, that is, by the police. Reporter Jonathan Franklin 
is in Santiago, Chile. He spoke with Bill Rodgers. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>