<DOC>
<DOCNO> VOA19981125.1600.0779 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
In U.S. news, Vice President Al Gore got a big political boost this 
week. Attorney General Janet Reno decided not to seek the appointment 
of an independent counsel to probe Mr. Gore's fund-raising efforts 
during the 1996 presidential campaign. The announcement strengthens 
the vice president's claim to be the front-running Democratic Party 
candidate in the year 2000 presidential race. National Correspondent 
Jim Malone reports. Miss Reno concluded there was insufficient evidence 
that the vice president lied last year when investigators questioned 
him in connection with Democratic fund-raising tactics during the 
1996 election campaign. At issue was whether the vice president knew 
that some of the money he raised during the campaign was improperly 
diverted by Democratic Party officials. Mr. Gore raised what is known 
as soft money, political contributions intended for party-building 
activities, like get-out-the-vote drives. Instead, much of the money 
he raised was spent directly on the Clinton/Gore reelection effort 
in apparent violation of federal campaign laws. Gore aides were said 
to be very happy with the Reno announcement, and political analysts 
say the attorney general's decision to clear the vice president makes 
him the unquestioned front runner for the Democratic presidential 
nomination in 2000. By avoiding an independent counsel, Al Gore took 
a giant step towards locking up the Democratic nomination in the year 
2000, even though that campaign is still a year away. American University 
History Professor Allan Lichtman says the Reno decision is likely 
to make potential Democratic candidates think twice about challenging 
Al Gore for the party's presidential nomination. Right now, there 
is nobody in the Democratic Party with the charisma, the issues, or 
the money who appears able to mount a major challenge at Al Gore. 
Had there been an independent counsel appointed, though, then all 
bets would have been off because who knows what an independent counsel 
might have done or when the independent counsel might have done it, 
and it would have been very risky then for the Democrats to nominate 
Al Gore and, lo' and behold, to get a referral from an independent 
counsel. Having dodged this bullet of an independent counsel, Gore 
is 90 percent of the way home to the Democratic presidential nomination. 
But while Al Gore may be home free on the issue of an independent 
counsel, Attorney General Reno still has two more opportunities to 
seek the appointment of a special prosecutor to probe Democratic campaign 
finance violations in 1996. By next Monday, Miss Reno must decide 
whether an independent counsel is warranted in the case of fund-raising 
activities by former White House deputy chief of staff Harold Ickes. 
And by December 7th, Miss Reno must decide whether to proceed with 
a special prosecutor investigation of President Clinton in connection 
with a questionable television ad campaign launched by the Democrats 
during the 1996 election cycle. Republicans were disappointed by the 
Reno decision and vow to keep pressure on the attorney general who 
has repeatedly declined to support the appointment of an independent 
counsel to probe campaign fund-raising over the past two years. Jim 
Malone, VOA News, Washington. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>