<DOC>
<DOCNO> VOA19981125.1600.2697 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
As are most large cities, Tokyo is struggling to cope with the vast 
amount of garbage generated by its residents. So, as in many communities, 
the Japanese capital began a program to recycle some of that garbage, 
and as have many communities, it has had mixed success in convincing 
residents hat trash can be a resource. From Tokyo, Amy Bickers has 
an update on Japan's recycling efforts. In Japan, landfills for garbage 
are nearly filled to capacity, and the widespread burning of rubbish, 
including plastic waste, has caused worrisome air and soil contamination. 
Still, Japan continues to incinerate or burn almost all of the 50 
million tons of garbage its residents throw out every year. In June 
of 1997, Tokyo's metropolitan government took action to combat this 
enormous problem. It began an experiment in garbage collection in 
nine of the city's wards. Collection of burnable trash was cut from 
three times a week to twice a week, and at least one collection per 
day was established every week for picking up recyclable items, such 
as cans, bottles, and paper products. The recycling rate in those 
wards surged 20 percent and soon regular pickups for recyclable trash 
were set up in every one of Tokyo's 23 wards. Tokyo secretary Iotoshita 
applauds the program. She says she separates her trash, what can be 
burned from what can be recycled, and in her company, they use recycled 
paper and are trying to reduce the overall amount of paper used. In 
the last year, many other Japanese cities have followed Tokyo's lead. 
About two-thirds of the nation's municipal governments have started 
recycling programs. But getting everyone to participate remains a 
challenge. Most people in Japan still do not separate their trash. 
Jerry Rodriguez, a Tokyo-based environmental scientist with the United 
Nations, says the Japanese government needs to educate consumers on 
why sorting garbage is important. What strikes me the most is probably 
the lack of basic discussion. So there are a lot of -- a lot of issues 
that have to be discussed, but I don't think they have been discussed 
well enough, and a lot of people are actually hungry for information, 
and I think that that's one issue that has to be addressed. Myumie 
Tackahashie, a Tokyo resident who's involved with environmental issues, 
believes officials are moving too quickly and confusing people. "The 
Japanese government is bombarding citizens with too many laws on the 
environment," she says. "The government itself should create a better 
recycling system and invest the money that's needed." Hirosho Konai, 
a lawyer who works in Tokyo and lives in nearby Yokohama also says 
the government should streamline recycling methods. "The government 
should modernize the system," he says. "Japanese citizens are making 
an effort, but until there's a better method of separating the garbage, 
it's impossible to improve the situation." One Tokyo neighborhood 
has come up with a unique method to encourage residents to separate 
their trash. Shopkeepers in the vicinity of Waseda University have 
set up recycling machines. They spew coupons for use in local shops 
when plastic bottles, cans, and other recyclable goods are fed into 
them. Residents, especially children, collect the recyclable materials 
from around the neighborhood, eager for the coupons. And there has 
been an unexpected boon to local shopkeepers. They say they've seen 
a huge surge in sales since the recycling machines were set up. Amy 
Bickers for VOA News, Tokyo. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>