<DOC>
<DOCNO> VOA19981125.0500.1333 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Children rule at the box office as the big-screen adaptation of a 
televised cartoon show makes a big debut. It's in first place in the 
lineup of the most popular films in North America this week. Alan 
Silverman has the top five list, starting with the teenage thriller 
at number five. It's happening again. "I Still Know What You Did Last 
Summer" follows in the bloody footsteps of last year's horror adventure 
about a group of teens who think they've accidentally killed a man. 
The vindictive victim returns to menace Jennifer Love Hewitt who survived 
the first film, but audiences aren't back for the sequel. "I Still 
Know What You Did Last Summer" plunges to fifth place. The chart doesn't 
hold much better news for matinee idol Brat Pitt whose latest tumbles 
to number four. You're dead. yes. You're not dead. You're just a kid 
in a suit. The suit came with the body I took. "Meet Joe Black," adapted 
from 1934's "Death Takes a Holiday," stars handsome Pitt as the Grim 
Reaper who takes some time off from his deathly duties to spend some 
quality time on earth. But "Meet Joe Black" is dying at the box office. 
The romantic drama ends up in fourth place. The top film for the past 
two weeks drops to number three this year. It is imperative. Allow 
me to be your waterboy. I can't hire you. I can't hire anybody. We're 
the poorest football... You do not have to pay me. I will do it for 
free. Comic actor Adam Sandler stars in "The Waterboy" as a slow-witted 
but good-hearted assistant for a college football team, the waterboy, 
who overcomes the taunts of insensitive players to become a star on 
the field and find love off the field. "The Waterboy" stays afloat 
in third place, pushed down by a pair of new entries. Why are they 
after me? I don't know, and I don't want to know. "Enemy of the State" 
enters the chart at number two. The political thriller directed by 
Tony Scott stars Will Smith as a Washington attorney accidentally 
caught up in a secret plot. I guess the thing that was most frightening 
about being the lead in this film was no bells and whistles, you know. 
I'm used to having some aliens and some spaceships and some explosions, 
you know, and basically the message to the audience in a film like 
that is not just "Come see Will Smith," but "Come see Will Smith, 
and come see all this other stuff, too," whereas with a film like 
"Enemy of the State," it's really -- basically, I'm saying to the 
audience, "Come see me act." I run in my drawers a little bit, but, 
you know, the real -- the bulk of the movie is basically performance 
driven. "Enemy of the State" makes a strong debut in second place, 
but the thought-provoking drama falls far short of the kid-stuff comedy 
that takes over at number one. Hang on to your diapies, babies! We're 
going in. That's Tommy Pickles. He's the bravest baby I ever knowed. 
Those irascible rascals from the popular cable TV cartoon show, "The 
Rugrats," bring their antics to a feature film. "Rugrats" is an endearing 
nickname for infants and toddlers who scamper across the floor like 
curious rodents, and "The Rugrats Movie" follows Tommy, Angelica, 
and little baby Dill Pickles, their friends Phil and Lil DeVille and, 
of course, Chuckie Finster on a hilarious adventure adapted from the 
Nickelodeon cable channel program and co-directed by Norton Virgien. 
Personally, I think the se -- one of the secrets to "Rugrats"' success 
is that the parents like to sit down and watch it with their kids. 
So I think already the parents are fans of "Rugrats" to a surprising 
degree, and in the future, we try to keep that up and maybe go a little 
further. We have some satiric material that's specifically there for 
the parents. We just eat and sleep and play. That's how we make the 
most of each and every day. The movie's music is by Mark Mothersbaugh 
who reunited his former band mates of the alternative rock group Devo 
for the soundtrack. "The Rugrats Movie" comes from Paramount Pictures 
and the cartoon creators at Klasky/Csupo Studio co-founded by Arlene 
Klasky and Hungarian-born Gabor Csupo. Its stunning opening weekend 
of $28 million in ticket sales is all the more remarkable because 
most of them were reduced-price children's tickets as youngsters turned 
out in droves for the diminutive, animated TV stars. We're just having 
an adventure. That's all. "The Rugrats Movie" opens up at number one. 
The new most popular movie at North American theaters. Alan Silverman 
for the Voice of America in Hollywood. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>