<DOC>
<DOCNO> VOA19981125.1600.1344 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
The Cherokee Indian Nation was split in two in the 1830s. At that 
time, the U.S. government forced many Cherokee to move from their 
ancestral home in the hills of Western North Carolina to a reservation 
in Oklahoma. Descendants of those who escaped removal are today called 
the Eastern band of the Cherokee Nation. They number approximately 
12,000. In the third part of our five-part series, Roseanne Skerbel 
talks with the principal chief of the tribe. She's a woman with a 
strong sense of past and a vision for the future of her people. Joyce 
Dugan describes her role as principal chief of the Eastern band of 
the Cherokee Nation by what it is not. Many people don't realize the 
magnitude of the position. They sometimes think it's an honorary position, 
that it's just a title, or they equate it to a mayor, and it's not. 
Joyce Dugan is the elected leader of a sovereign nation, integrated 
yet separate from the State of North Carolina and the U.S. government. 
Even though we are still under the United States Constitution, we 
are citizens of this country, we still have autonomy to establish 
our own form of government, to run our own affairs within our lands. 
So how different is living in the Cherokee Nation? It's always been 
well known that we establish our own laws, and sometimes those laws 
conflict with the state laws, for example. So people that move off 
-- on and off of our lands can sometimes be surprised at the laws 
that they encounter here, but we've by and large lived with that, 
and there's been very little controversy. Not unlike a chief executive 
officer of a major corporation, Joyce Dugan runs the tribal government, 
which employs a work force of some 600. We have less to do with the 
counties and the state than we do with the federal government by virtue 
of the trust responsibility the government has for the Indian tribes. 
On any given day, I may have meetings with county, state, or federal 
people, have meetings with my staff, with the tribal council members, 
with constituents. I'm also responsible for implementing the budget 
and also responsible for ensuring that the laws that are passed by 
the tribal council are carried out. That means that the taxes collected 
on Cherokee lands stay on Cherokee lands to run the tribal government, 
to pay the police, the utility company, and schoolteachers. Joyce 
Dugan has lived in the community much of her life, was a teacher and 
the superintendent of schools. She realized long ago that taxes from 
a tourist-based economy only go so far in that the federal government 
only contributes so much. She says it was a practical decision to 
open a multimillion-dollar gambling casino on tribal lands one year 
ago. We almost had to get into this because federal funds continued 
to go down, and we had a plant closing, for example, two years ago, 
and we live in an area that is short of employment opportunities. 
So we looked at it as a means of producing revenue. What you're saying 
is that the gaming has given -- or is giving you some sense of economic 
independence. That as well as employment opportunities, year-round 
employment. In the wintertime, our unemployment rate would go up to 
sometimes 46 percent. Many of our people had to go on welfare during 
the winter months. Joyce Dugan says the tribe has begun to reap benefits 
from the casino that have nothing to do with gambling. Gaming dollars 
have doubled the tax base, built a new child-care center, and funded 
a Cherokee language immersion program. There are also plans for a 
youth center and a dialysis treatment center to assist the one-in-three 
adult Cherokee who suffer from diabetes. Twelve million gaming dollars 
already have been distributed among tribal members, money Joyce Dugan 
says largely has been spent outside of Cherokee. We need clothing 
stores, shoe stores, appliance stores, chain grocery stores so that 
we can keep the money here and it circulates into the community. I 
would like for us to be to the point where we would never have to 
depend on the federal government for any kind of sustenance, and what 
-- many of our people say, "You should never think that they way because 
they owe us. The federal government promised us," and that's true, 
and we will always hold the federal government to that, but in light 
of our history in the past, we can no longer put our faith in it. 
Principal Chief Dugan says what she can put her faith in is her people. 
Her vision for the Eastern band of the Cherokee is a gainfully employed 
community strengthened by a greater sense of pride. She would like 
to lead her people into a new century free of the drug and alcohol 
abuse, teenage pregnancy, and violence that have plagued the Cherokee 
for generations. I'm Roseanne Skerbel. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>