<DOC>
<DOCNO> VOA19981125.0500.0359 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Chinese President Jiang Zemin has arrived in Tokyo, beginning a six-day 
official visit to Japan, the first ever by a Chinese head of state. 
VOA Correspondent Roger Wilkison reports China is seeking an apology 
for Japan's war crimes against the Chinese people and wants Tokyo 
to clarify its stance on Taiwan. Japan has indicated a willingness 
to issue an apology to China for the atrocities that soldiers committed 
there during Tokyo's invasion and occupation of the country during 
the 1930s and 1940s. But the two sides have been unable to agree on 
the exact wording of the apology and how it should be delivered. On 
Tuesday, Japanese Foreign Minister Masahiko Koumura and his Chinese 
counterpart Qian Qichen finally reached a compromise. They agreed 
that Japanese Prime Minister Keizo Obuchi will deliver a clear oral 
apology for Japan's wartime conduct but that the apology will not 
appear in a joint statement to be issued Thursday after Mr. Obuchi 
and Mr. Jiang hold their summit meeting. According to a Japanese foreign 
ministry official, what will appear in that statement is Mr. Obuchi's 
expression of remorse for the damage and suffering Japan inflicted 
on the Chinese people during the wartime years, a fine distinction, 
but diplomatically a meaningful one. China has been insisting on an 
apology similar to the one Japan gave South Korea earlier this month. 
It says China and Japan cannot build a relationship in the coming 
century if Tokyo does not officially acknowledge its past. China has 
cracked down on protests in China about the lack of reparations from 
Japan to Chinese who were victimized during the Japanese occupation. 
Analyst Barry Sautman of Hong Kong's University of Science and Technology 
says China wants to get the apology over with as soon as possible 
so as to defuse the issue within China. The idea behind getting an 
apology, I think, has finally settled the issue within China. Basically, 
any kind of apology that showed deep remorse on the part of the Japanese 
government will be sufficient for Chinese leaders. Then they go back 
home and say, "Well, we were able to get the Japan to show that it's 
genuinely focusing on the issue now and that it's made a clean breast 
of things." Still, not all Japanese believe their country should offer 
an apology to China. Security has been beefed up in Tokyo for Mr. 
Jiang's visit, and police expect right-wing groups to parade through 
the streets with sound trucks loudly protesting any official self-criticism 
regarding Japan's wartime role. On the issue of Taiwan, Beijing has 
been pressing Tokyo to stipulate in the joint statement that it does 
not support the island's independence, the idea of two Chinas, or 
Taiwanese membership in international organizations that require statehood, 
what Beijing calls the three noes. Tokyo has resisted the pressure, 
saying that it has already given such assurances. Professor Sautman 
says he thinks Japan is probably accurate in saying that it has already 
covered that ground. I don't imagine that there will be anything new 
on Taiwan that will develop out of this visit but a recommitment on 
the part of Japan to not back Taiwan independence or support Taiwan's 
efforts to broaden its international base. The Japanese foreign ministry 
official says the joint statement Thursday will emphasize that Japan-Taiwan 
relations are not at a government-to-government level and that Japan 
understands and respects China's position on Taiwan. Roger Wilkison, 
VOA News, Tokyo. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>