<DOC>
<DOCNO> VOA19981125.1600.2366 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Rewriting history is a phenomenon which has plagued many nations. 
Germany is still haunted by details of its Nazi past which continue 
to surface from time to time. In more recent times, countries torn 
by civil wars, such as Rwanda and the former Yugoslavia, are rewriting 
their own versions of their recent bloody pasts. To prevent subjective 
and distorted versions of such recent historic events, the U.S. Institute 
of Peace has been asked by the three factions in Bosnia-Herzegovina 
-- Serb, Croat, and Moslem -- to help them write a common history. 
Neil Kritz of the Institute's Rule of Law Division explains how the 
project came about. Since the time of war at least, there have been 
developed three -- at least three separate versions of history of 
victimization during the war. War crimes officials -- justice officials 
from each of the three ethnic communities came together and, in particular, 
the leaders of the three respective war crimes commissions came together, 
and it was those three individuals who ultimately said at that meeting 
that they, through their work, were in the process of creating three 
conflicting versions of truth and history and that, if they continued 
down that path, they were laying the seeds to ensure that 50 years 
from now their grandchildren would fight the next war over which version 
of reality is authentic and, at that point, they decided that they 
needed to establish a truth and reconciliation commission through 
which Bosnians on all sides would be able to talk victims on all sides 
together, to acknowledge suffering on all sides, to establish one 
consensus without in any way diminishing the horrors of what happened 
on any side. Now this, of course, could start out with everybody feeling 
that they're the victim in this war and that, when this common history 
is decided, their side, as it were, will be vindicated, but what happens 
when the objective history that's being uncovered here points the 
finger at one group more than another? Well, they have each said that 
the -- that there should be an international chairman for the commission 
but, beyond that, all local members who don't represent their respective 
ethnic religious groups but people rather who are simply acknowledged 
for their objective search for the truth. Acknowledged by all three 
parties? Exactly. Which means as a consequence that these individuals 
cannot be simply appointed by the political leaders on any side. They 
need to be people in whom the public has confidence and in whom the 
public has expressed its conf -- the women from Srebrenica need to 
ensure that, if there is a Serb member of the commission, it's someone 
in whom they have trust and confidence. The families from Buvino need 
to know that the Bosnian member is somebody that they believe will 
be objective, et cetera. That could prove to be difficult, if not 
impossible in some cases, could it not? Well, I'm -- they -- someone 
might suggest that, but one of the suggestions that has been made 
is, for example, for the commission to have public hearings that will 
look at what was the role of religious leadership, what was the role 
of the media, what was the role of the intelligentsia, the Academies 
of Science and others, in making it easier for neighbors to do the 
sorts of things that were done to neighbors during this war, to really 
hold up the mirror so that Bosnians can actually try to understand 
how it is they came to do such things to each other. But if I may 
add a skeptical note here as somebody who's spent a lot of time in 
the area, it sounds really good, but I can't imagine that it would 
work. These people have said themselves they need someone to prevent 
them from being their own worst enemies. Well, no, and that's why 
they have said that there needs to be an international chairman, but 
I have really been amazed and, quite frankly, very encouraged. If 
it succeeds, it can create the environment to -- and the climate to 
begin the process of reconciliation, to begin really a long-term dialogue 
on the history of the country, for that matter, to hopefully then 
over a period of time create the climate to push farther back into 
history and to resolve the conflicts with respect to earlier periods 
that have been regularly used to divide people. Neil Kritz of the 
U.S. Institute of Peace in Washington, D.C. Rewriting history was 
the subject examined on today's edition of "Dateline." I'm Susan Clark. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>