<DOC>
<DOCNO> VOA19981125.0500.2330 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
You're listening to VOA News Now. Universal Time. Thank you for joining 
us. I'm Paul Westpheling along with Charlene Porter. Cambodia's new 
political landscape has begun to take shape with the opening of the 
national assembly and the election of -- Wednesday of Prince Norodom 
Sihanouk as its president. As Hugh Watkin reports from Phnom Penh, 
the next step at breaking the nation's political paralysis will be 
the formation of a new coalition government next week. Prince Sihanouk 
won the powerful legislative post of assembly president with 105 votes 
from the 122-seat parliament. The prince was ousted as Cambodia's 
first prime minister in a bloody coup last year by his former coalition 
partner Hun Sen. Wednesday's vote was the result of an agreement by 
the prince to join a new coalition government with Hun Sen's Cambodian 
People's Party, the CPP. Under the agreement, Hun Sen becomes Cambodia's 
sole prime minister. After his election to the national assembly's 
presidency, Prince Sihanouk told reporters he would work hard to ensure 
the new government addressed the myriad social and economic problems 
facing Cambodia, one of Asia's poorest nations. He said he will fulfill 
his duty in bringing about true democracy, openness and transparency 
by allowing all members of parliament to express their opinions openly. 
The CPP's Heng Samrin, a former head of state, and Chea Sim, a former 
justice minister, were elected as vice presidents of the assembly. 
The new government will be sworn in on November 30th. The CPP has 
retained control over the most powerful state institutions, including 
the ministries of finance, foreign affairs, and commerce. Both the 
CPP and Prince Ranariddh's FUNCINPEC Party will nominate deputy prime 
ministers. Leadership of the defense and interior ministries is to 
be shared. Heng Samrin, whose self-named party took 15 seats in the 
election, failed to win any parliamentary positions, but as Cambodia's 
new opposition leader, Mr. Samrin says he will act as the assembly's 
conscience. The outspoken critic of corruption and human rights violations, 
he says his stance will not be determined by personalities or promises, 
but rather by the actions of the new coalition government. Prince 
Sihanouk had been a partner with Heng Samrin in an opposition alliance 
which has frustrated the setting up of the new government. The allies 
had refused to join in a coalition with the CPP which narrowly won 
last July's election but failed to gain enough support to set up its 
own government. The opposition alleged the balloting was rigged and 
had been conducted in a climate of fear and violence. But after intense 
international pressure to break the political deadlock, Prince Sihanouk 
managed to extract a number of concessions from his former nemesis 
Hun Sen and abandoned his opposition ally. This is Hugh Watkin for 
VOA News, Phnom Penh. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>