<DOC>
<DOCNO> VOA19981125.0500.2085 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Chinese President Jiang Zemin is in Tokyo. Following a brief summit 
with the Russian leaders in Moscow on Monday, President Jiang flew 
to Russia's Siberia region Tuesday to visit the mayor of the major 
military and scientific industrial city of Novosibirsk. Also included 
in the stop was a nuclear physics institute. As he visited there, 
Mr. Jiang said he does not want Russia's economic crisis to hurt technological 
cooperation between the two countries. He also said Beijing looks 
forward to more cooperation as Russia's scientific community recovers 
from what he terms temporary difficulties caused by Russia's economic 
problems. VOA's Roger Wilkison has been following the Jiang trip. 
Speaking with VOA's Victor Beattie in Washington, Correspondent Wilkison 
says the Chinese leader's visit Monday with President Boris Yeltsin 
was shortened by Mr. Yeltsin's hospitalization for pneumonia. The 
discussions that the Chinese had with Prime Minister Primakov were 
probably aimed at shoring up political and diplomatic ties. The two 
countries agree on a lot of international issues, such as Iraq and 
Yugoslavia. For instance, they want to end the sanctions against Iraq 
as soon as possible, but they do want Iraq to comply with U.N. resolutions. 
The major problem that exists between China and Russia is one of trade. 
The two countries have promised to increase trade to the level of 
$20 billion by the year 2000, but there are no signs that they're 
going to be able to do that, and trade is currently running at around 
$6 billion, primarily because of Russia's economic straits. So I don't 
believe that the summit was as productive as it might have been, and 
I think the -- they are basically treading water. What is the main 
item, if there is one, on the agenda between the leaders of Japan 
and China? Victor, there are two main items. One is an apology that 
Japan is expected to give China for its wartime crimes in China during 
its invasion and occupation there in the 1930s and 1940s, but the 
-- and the other issue is, of course, the question of Taiwan. The 
Chinese will not be getting exactly what they want. They will be getting 
an apology, but it will not be featured -- according to the Japanese 
foreign ministry, it will not be featured in the joint statement that 
will be released after President Jiang's meeting with Prime Minister 
Keizo Obuchi on Thursday. And on the issue of Taiwan, the Japanese 
have been reluctant to go officially as far as President Clinton did 
when he visited China and pledge American adherence to the three noes 
policy. The Japanese say they've already done that, that issue has 
already been addressed, and they are only willing, within the context 
of the joint statement, to say that they understand and respect Beijing's 
claim that Taiwan is Chinese territory, and they will pledge in that 
statement as well that their relations with China -- with Taiwan are 
strictly unofficial, that there are no government-to-government ties. 
Do you see any significance to these two important stops, Moscow and 
Tokyo? The Japanese trip is perhaps a little more significant than 
the Russian trip, which after all is the sixth time that the Russian 
and Chinese leaders have been with each other. In the case of Japan, 
it is the first ever official visit by a Chinese head of state to 
Japan, and so, in that case, it's -- in that regard, it's much more 
significant than the trip to Russia. That is VOA's Roger Wilkison 
in Tokyo speaking with VOA's Victor Beattie. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>