<DOC>
<DOCNO> VOA19981125.1600.2149 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
I'm Tony Riggs along with Erin Brummett, and this is VOA News Now. 
Last month's revelation that Thomas Jefferson, one of America's most 
revered heroes, may have fathered a child with one of his slaves stunned 
many Americans. The biggest shock, however, was to historians who 
were reminded that, even in democracies, history may still require 
some rewriting. Rewriting history is the subject of today's "Dateline" 
which was written and researched by Pamela Taylor and presented by 
Susan Clark. Thomas Jefferson was the author of the Declaration of 
Independence, founder of the University of Virginia, and the third 
president of the United States. Now some new scientific evidence links 
the American hero to a line of descendants from one of his black slaves. 
In the Declaration of Independence, Thomas Jefferson wrote these memorable 
words: "We hold these truths to be self-evident that all men are created 
equal." His ideas of freedom and equality for all men were revolutionary 
ideas more than 200 years ago, and it was upon such revolutionary 
ideas that the United States was founded. And yet the man who wrote 
those words was a slave holder in his native Virginia. For historians, 
it complicates and intensifies some of the paradoxes of Jefferson, 
that he's always been the great American paradox, the author of the 
magic words that begin, "We hold these truths to be self-evident that 
all men are created," and simultaneously the owner of about 200 slaves. 
Now it gets even more complicated because he's also a person who argues 
that blacks and whites cannot live together and that blacks are innately 
inferior and, at the same time, he's engaged in a long-term relationship 
with a person who is black. Joseph Ellis, a professor of history at 
Mount Holyoke College in the State of Massachusetts, says he changed 
his mind after comparing some samples of genetic code known as DNA. 
In fact, he contributed to the article in the scientific magazine 
"Nature," which revealed the DNA link between Jefferson and the Hemings 
descendants. I got it wrong, and that's the reason it's important 
for me to be telling you that this evidence is overwhelming and convincing 
beyond any reasonable doubt that Jefferson had what's almost certainly 
a long-term sexual relationship with his mulatto slave Sally Hemings. 
Professor Ellis said the new evidence is also vindication for African-Americans 
and others who long claimed to be Jefferson descendants on the basis 
of information passed down to them orally for generations. And one 
U.S. historian says the evidence also vindicates her book, "Thomas 
Jefferson and Sally Hemings: An American Controversy," published in 
1977. Annette Gordon-Reed, an associate professor of law at New York 
School of Law, says the evidence was always there of the Jefferson-Hemings 
liaison. One of the things that I found very persuasive was the memoirs 
of Madison Hemings who was the brother of Eston Hemings who told a 
story in 1873 to a journalist about his life at Monticello and said 
that he was the son of Thomas Jefferson and Sally Hemings. The pattern 
of Sally Hemings' conception. She never conceived when Jefferson was 
away, and she always conceived when he came home. So it wasn't a surprise 
to me. Miss Gordon-Reed says people tend to deify their heroes when 
most of them are simply human beings. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>