<DOC>
<DOCNO> ABC19981011.1830.0475 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> CAPTION </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
In Washington today, the fight over the federal budget is getting 
serious. Congress has still not approved 8 of 13 spending bills to 
keep the government going. Congressional negotiators met today with 
the White House chief of staff. The question now is, "who will bend 
first?" Here's ABC's Mike Von Fremd. Ia rare Sunday meeting in the 
cabinet room, the president, flanked by democratic leaders, blasted 
the republican-controlled Congress for failing to pass his budget 
and education package to repair old schools and hire more teachers. 
We are waiting for the republican majority in Congress to bring this 
year's education investment Bill to the floor. The delay must end 
on education. Congress must choose progress over partisanship. The 
president senses he has the upper hand. And by the end of the day, 
republicans say they had reached a deal on the education package and 
negotiations were going well. We made a lot of progress actually today 
and we are going to have one final meeting in the morning and I think 
that will get it done. Three years ago, Newt Gingrich and the republicans 
were blamed for the government shutdown, something they want to avoid 
this time around. It is better for us to stay here and do our jobs. 
And all we'd ask the president is he ought to stay here, too. And 
he ought to cancel his campaign trips. And he ought to be here in 
town doing his job. Mr. president, the republican leaders were saying 
this morning that if you were serious about reaching this budget deal 
that you would stay in Washington instead of going onto fund-raisers 
tomorrow and the following days. I am prepared to do whatever it takes 
to work with them now that they have turned their attention to this 
to get the job done. But in the end, it is their votes. Late today, 
aides say the president canceled his fund-raising trip to Florida 
and he has delayed tomorrow's fund-raiser in New York until late in 
the afternoon. Congress is desperate to go home and campaign, and 
the president wants to help democrats raise money. But with the stakes 
so high, both sides are afraid to leave the bargaining table in Washington. 
Carole? Mike, how close are we to a budget deal? Well, republicans 
are saying that the whole thing will be settled by noon tomorrow. 
Now, snags could obviously develop. But the desire to leave Washington 
and campaign back home is a powerful one. Carole? Thank you, Mike 
Von Fremd at the White House. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>