<DOC>
<DOCNO> ABC19981011.1830.0065 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> CAPTION </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Good evening. I'm Carole Simpson. From time to time, a single crime 
grabs the attention of the whole country. The latest example, the 
beating of a gay college student in Wyoming. 21-year-old Matthew shepard 
remains in critical condition after being left for dead in a field. 
Two men are under arrest. Their girlfriends are also charged as accessories. 
One of those women have told her story to ABC's Lisa Salters. She 
asked that her face not appear on camera. He had blood all over him 
and I asked him what had happened. And he told me that he thought 
maybe he had killed someone. 18-year-old Kristen price described in 
detail the horrible events that night, as they were told to her by 
her live-in boyfriend, 22-year-old Aaron McKinney. McKinney and his 
friend, Russell Henderson, have both been charged with attempted murder 
in the brutal attack against Matthew shepard. Price and her friend, 
chastity pasley, were charged as accessories to the crime. He said 
he did not mean to do that to him. According to price, McProached 
by shepard, who is gay, at a local bar. Offended, they allegedly decided 
to Rob him by also pretending to be gay and luring him to their truck. 
Price says the suspects then drove shepard to an isolated field, tied 
him to a wooden fence, and fractured his skull with a gun. He couldn't 
tell me everything that happened. He just said that yeah he had beat 
him with the butt of the gun. Did he seem upset about it? He was very 
upset. He was crying, and he was throwing up, and all depressed because 
he had hurt someone for -- he didn't know why. He didn't know why 
he had hurt him. He said -- just the thought of a gay guy approaching 
him and humiliating him. Set him off? Yeah, I guess it just set him 
off. McKinney's father says he's embarrassed and ashamed. He's my 
son. I raised him better than that -- or tried to. You know, what 
can you say to Matt's parents? Nothing you can say is going to change 
what's happened. Like Bill McKinney, this small college town is still 
reeling from the tragedy. This morning, at St. Paul's Catholic church, 
father Roger Smith urged the congregation to rise above the ugly cloud 
that has settled over this community. I know that you are very good 
people, but do not minimize hate. As Matthew shepard lies in a Colorado 
hospital bed still connected to a ventilator that doctors say is keeping 
him alive, Kristen price knows that all the well wishes and prayers, 
even her own, may not be enough to save his life. I'm very sorry for 
him. I mean, I wish none of this would have ever happened. And I feel 
sorry for his family, I really do. I mean, they may not think so right 
now, but I do. Lisa Salters, ABC News, laramie, Wyoming. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>