<DOC>
<DOCNO> APW19981011.0530 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Tiger Woods missed a 4-foot putt at the last as the favored Americans 
were upset by Spain in the Dunhill Cup semifinal Sunday. Yet the Spaniards 
succumbed in the final to South Africa, who won the 1 million pound 
(dlrs 1.67 million) championship for the second year in a row. Woods 
squandered a 4-stroke lead after 10 holes to lose to Spain's Santiago 
Luna as the Americans slumped 2-1 in the semifinal after they looked 
on course for an easy win. But Luna couldn't ride his luck in the 
final, losing to South Africa's Retief Goosen by one. Then David Frost 
and Ernie Els, who teamed up with Goosen in last year's triumph, won 
their matches against Miguel Angel Jimenez and Jose Maria Olazabal 
for a 3-0 triumph. For Goosen, who scored a level par 72, it was his 
10th win in a row in Dunhill Cup play while Frost's 4-over 76 was 
enough for a 2-stroke victory over Jimenez. The South Africa victory 
became a sweep when Olazabal produced something rare at the 17th. 
Forced to chip out of the Road Hole Bunker away from the flag, he 
then pitched back into it again and wound up with a double bogey six 
on the way to a round of 77 and a 2-stroke loss to Els. Woods' blunder 
at the last with a playoff in his grasp effectively clinched a semifinal 
victory for the Spaniards with Olazabal three shots clear of Mark 
O'Meara in the last game of the three. John Daly had already beaten 
Jimenez by one stroke in another nail-biting finish but the Americans 
lost 2-1. It was the day the Old Course hit back at Woods after the 
American, with rounds of 66-70-66 on the first three days, seemed 
to have mastered the home of golf with his long shots off the tee 
and his precise approaches to the green. By the time he reached the 
11th, he had only bogeyed two holes throughout the tournament and 
he stood four ahead of Luna with victory seemingly a formality. He 
bogeyed 11 and 12, Luna birdied 12 and Woods' lead had slipped to 
one. When the Spaniard birdied 14, the two were level and the American 
missed a 6-foot putt at 17 to fall behind going to the last. Putting 
for an eagle from just off the green, Woods left his ball only four 
feet from the hole. Luna then handed the American a great chance of 
a playoff when his eagle putt from an almost identical position only 
just made the top of the green and rolled back into the depression 
known as the Valley of Sin. Luna's follow up putt ended three feet 
from the hole and Woods needed to hold his to force a playoff. But 
he slid it wide and three feet past and Luna holed his to clinch an 
upset victory. ``I had a chance but pulled a couple of putts at the 
last two holes,'' Woods said. ``I just didn't hit them the way I liked 
and it wasn't good enough to take it into extra holes. ``I had the 
chance with my putt at the last but I pulled it and gave him the match. 
It was a matter of picking the line and trusting it but I pulled the 
putt.'' Although Daly won, he almost threw his match away too. Daly, 
who was 6-up at the turn but level going to the last, carded 73 to 
beat Jimenez by two for a personal Dunhill Cup record of 8-1 having 
played in the United States' 1993 triumph. ``The most important thing 
was that I won and gave us a chance,'' said Daly, who double bogeyed 
the 17th after taking a penalty drop by the greenside wall, and drove 
to the back of the green at the 354-yard last to wind up with a birdie 
three. ``I drove the green to 20 feet for my eagle at the ninth. That 
put me six ahead and I got real conservative from there. I've done 
that my last two games and that's not my style. You get defensive 
when you're six shots up.'' 
</TEXT>
</DOC>