<DOC>
<DOCNO> APW19981011.0736 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
BELGRADE, Yugoslavia (AP) _ U.S. bombers moved into position for possible 
NATO airstrikes on Yugoslavia and a U.S. envoy accelerated talks with 
President Slobodan Milosevic on Sunday after reporting no change in 
the leader's tough stand on Kosovo. Richard Holbrooke and Milosevic 
talked into the night Sunday, meeting for the sixth time in seven 
days of talks that signaled U.S. determination to solve the standoff 
peacefully. Holbrooke said early Sunday that he would ``continue an 
intense effort to find a peaceful, acceptable, fully verifiable compliance 
system as an alternative to the other choice'' _ meaning the use of 
force. But he also said NATO would meet Monday to authorize action 
if his efforts fails. In Washington, national security adviser Sandy 
Berger told CNN that Milosevic ``is not in compliance as of this point.'' 
``He can come into compliance or he can face military action by NATO'' 
at any time, Berger said. The Americans and Europeans are demanding 
that Milosevic halt the crackdown he launched Feb. 28 against the 
separatist Kosovo Liberation Army. The major obstacle appears to be 
Holbrooke's demand that Milosevic agree to an expanded international 
monitoring mission to verify compliance with demands of the U.N. Security 
Council. Those demands include an immediate cease-fire, a withdrawal 
of special troops in the province, allowing refugees to return home 
and talks with ethnic Albanians on Kosovo's future. Kosovo is a province 
of Serbia, the main republic of Yugoslavia. About 90 percent of its 
2 million people are ethnic Albanian, and most of them want independence 
or substantial self-rule. Meanwhile, journalists heard sporadic gunfire 
Sunday and saw white and gray smoke rising from about six houses in 
the ethnic Albanian village of Makrmalj, about 20 miles (32 kilometers) 
west of Pristina. Ethnic Albanian rebels claimed the activity was 
part of a Serb police operation. Police prevented the journalists 
from getting closer than about a half-mile (half kilometer) from the 
village. The Pentagon is continuing military preparations if Holbrooke's 
mission fails. Six U.S. B-52 bombers arrived in Britain on Sunday 
and a contingent of A-10 anti-tank planes flew from Germany to Italy. 
In Bucharest, the Romanian government agreed to allow NATO to use 
its airspace in ``emergency and unpredictable situations'' if the 
alliance launches airstrikes against Yugoslavia. The positioning of 
more U.S. planes within range and preparing them for attacks were 
clearly designed to convince Milosevic of Washington's resolve to 
force compliance with U.N. demands. After a late-night session with 
Milosevic, an exhausted-looking Holbrooke insisted early Sunday ``nothing 
has changed'' in the Yugoslav leader's stand. Holbrooke called the 
situation ``very serious'' and said he was looking for ``peaceful, 
acceptable'' alternative to the use of force. A statement from Milosevic's 
office, issued after the talks and distributed by the government's 
Tanjug news agency, said all U.N. conditions have been met for a political 
settlement. But Milosevic seemed to be separating U.N. demands from 
the U.S. insistence on verification. Serb sources, speaking on condition 
of anonymity, said Milosevic has refused to budge on a monitoring 
force. Washington is pressing for that because Milosevic has broken 
promises in the past. A source close to Milosevic indicated that he 
was ready to comply with other conditions. International efforts to 
end the seven-month crisis have accelerated following allegations 
that Serb police massacred scores of ethnic Albanian refugees. Concern 
is mounting that winter will bring a humanitarian disaster if thousands 
remain homeless by the first snowfall. The United Nations has condemned 
recent massacres of ethnic Albanians, but has not endorsed airstrikes. 
The U.S. government, however, believes it does not need a new U.N. 
resolution for the attacks. Russia, which fiercely opposes NATO airstrikes, 
called its NATO representative and ambassador to Belgium back to Moscow 
on Sunday for emergency consultations on the potential attacks. ``Everything 
should be done to prevent bombing,'' Dmitry Yakushkin, President Boris 
Yeltsin's spokesman, told reporters. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>