<DOC>
<DOCNO> CNN19981011.1600.0054 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> CAPTION </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
U.S. envoy Richard Holbrooke has completed another day of talks with 
Yugoslav leader Slobodan Milosevic their sixth in seven days. Holbrooke 
is trying to convince Milosevic to stop his military assaults against 
ethnic Albanians in Kosovo. There are no reports of any progress. 
Meanwhile, six American B-52 bombers arrived in Britain today for 
possible NATO military intervention. A senior NAto diplomat says NAto 
members are expected TO issue an activation order tomorrow -- the 
last step before initiating air strikes. In Washington, Senate majority 
leader Trent Lott says patience with Milosevic is wearing thin. The 
problem there is Milosevic refused to be reasonable. We would hope 
that they could come to a diplomatic solution. There's also the humanitarian 
considerations. There are a lot of people up in those mountains. We 
don't want to see the images of people starving freezing to death. 
My problem has been with the timing and the plan. What do they do 
in the aftermath? But I'm not going to do anything to give aid and 
comfort to Milosevic. I don't want to undermine the unity of NATO. 
And if strikes do occur, we'll support or service men and women when 
they take that action. NAto says it has the pieces in place to launch 
air strikes. Mike Hanna takes a look. a change of command ceremony 
at the headquarters of the allied forces in southern Europe. It's 
here in Naples that any strike against President Milosevic's Serb 
regime will be coordinated. And words of warning from NATO's supreme 
commander. President Milosevic is going to have to calculate very 
carefully what the risks will be as he moves ahead. That's the message 
that I would give as a military leader who's very well familiar with 
what the consequences of military action can be. But military action 
originating in Italy first needs to go ahead of a government which 
in recent days has been dealing with a domestic political crisis, 
resulting in a vote of no confidence in prime minister Romano Prodi. 
He's now heading a caretaker government that in the next 48 hours 
is expected to call a vote on whether to back military action in Yugoslavia. 
Until a positive vote is registered, strike aircraft at Italian bases 
like Aviano will not be used in a strike. But NAto sources say this 
would only become a hindrance if the punitive operation was to become 
an extended one. The strike is expected to come from missile cruisers 
at present exercising in international waters or from long-range bombers 
deployed out of bases in Britain. Air support and second-wave strikes 
would originate from carriers like the "USS Eisenhower," part of a 
massive NatO naval force now at full operational readiness, taking 
part in an exercise called "operation dynamic mix" that was organized 
before the Kosovo crisis. The forces needed for an initial strike 
are in place. Plans to deal with virtually any military contingency 
have been drawn up at these headquarters. But now the force commanders 
can only wait on a political decision that must be taken by all 16 
members of NATO. Mike Hanna, CNN, Naples. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>