<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981011.0167 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Almost from the moment that detectives in Switzerland discovered a 
huge, hidden fortune that belonged to Raul Salinas de Gortari, a brother 
of Mexico's former president, Salinas has said the money belonged 
to an investment fund that he had assembled with big Mexican entrepreneurs. 
Now, however, investigators in Switzerland have arrived at a different 
explanation. They say although some of Salinas' millions did come 
from executives, much of that was drug money that he had laundered 
with help from an old friend who is one of Mexico's richest men. In 
a secret report, the Swiss police suggest that the friend, Carlos 
Peralta Quintero, helped hide protection money that they assert drug 
traffickers had paid to Salinas. Salinas is the elder brother of former 
President Carlos Salinas de Gortari. ``The transactions described 
by Carlos Peralta were designed in their entirety for one purpose 
only, namely, the laundering of money,'' the report states. A partial 
copy of the 369-page document was obtained by The New York Times. 
The case was bolstered this month when the Mexican authorities announced 
that they had linked Raul Salinas to an additional $119 million in 
a maze of Mexican and foreign accounts. Officials in Mexico also said 
they will try to interview the witnesses developed by Swiss and American 
investigators, raising the possibility that they might add drug-trafficking 
accusations to the murder and graft charges on which Salinas has been 
jailed there since 1995. But the the investigative report and other 
documents suggest that the Swiss explanation of the money may have 
problems of its own. Peralta, the 46-year-old heir to an industrial 
and telecommunications conglomerate, denied the allegations against 
him as outrageous. And lawyers for Salinas describe the Swiss accusations 
against the industrialist as one of the most obvious fictions among 
what they say are a litany of unsustainable claims against their client. 
``The money of Carlos Peralta is absolutely legitimate,'' Raul Salinas' 
lead attorney, Eduardo Luengo Creel, said in an interview. ``We have 
demonstrated its movement from start to finish. But the stance of 
the Swiss prosecutor and the police is to ignore any evidence that 
contradicts their theory.'' Based on the investigators' report, the 
Swiss authorities are expected to confiscate the more than $100 million 
they have kept frozen in Salinas' 15 accounts there. Once that happens, 
Salinas' lawyers say they will go to the country's Supreme Court to 
sue for its release. The Swiss report quotes a series of witnesses 
who recount meetings at which Raul Salinas and other Mexican politicians 
purportedly cut deals with drug traffickers and picked up suitcases 
filled with cash. Most of those informants appear to be convicted 
drug traffickers themselves or former aides, security guards or associates 
of the Salinas brothers, and nearly all of them are identified only 
by pseudonyms. Although it often refers to appendices that may contain 
further detail, the report itself offers accounts of Salinas' purported 
dealings that are often general and sometimes vague. There is little 
explanation of how he might have exercised influence with police and 
military agencies to allow the smugglers to operate freely. The case 
of Peralta is something of an exception. That part of the report quotes 
a convicted drug trafficker named Marco Enrique Torres as saying he 
gave the industrialist a kilogram package of cocaine _ 2.2 pounds, 
or about $20,000 worth on the New York wholesale market _ as a Christmas 
gift from Raul Salinas in 1993. Torres said he handed the drugs to 
Peralta on Dec. 25 ``in front of the restaurant Casserola at Paseo 
de la Reforma in Mexico City.'' The restaurant, however, is in a different 
part of town. And travel documents provided to the Swiss by Peralta 
appear to show that he was on vacation in Florida from Dec. 19 until 
Dec. 26, when he took off with relatives on a week-long Caribbean 
cruise. A spokesman for the Immigration and Naturalization Service, 
Andrew Lluberes, confirmed that Peralta entered the United States 
on Dec. 19, but said the agency did not record his departure. On the 
Swiss' larger claim, that Raul Salinas gave Peralta $50 million to 
hide the fact that it came from drug traffickers, the Swiss do not 
appear to have any hard evidence. Peralta said that he had loaned 
the money to Salinas for future investments, and the report raises 
a series of doubts about that explanation. For example, it notes that 
a loan agreement was not drawn up until October 1996 _ 2{ years after 
the funds were transferred. The report also says that Salinas, Peralta 
and the other businessmen who supposedly joined the investment fund 
never discussed what investments they would make. It also says that 
Salinas' wife once told a Swiss banker her husband got the money by 
selling stock in Peralta's cellular-telephone company, Grupo Iusacell. 
Whatever investments Salinas might have planned, the report states, 
he gave about $10 million of the Peralta money to his own wife as 
a wedding present. ``The transactions in the loan/investment business 
of Carlos Peralta make no economic sense and cannot be reconstructed 
in any logical way,'' the report states. Nonetheless, the report takes 
no note of the roughly 500 pages of documentation that Peralta's lawyers 
presented to the Swiss authorities. Among other things, that evidence 
indicates that Peralta received the $50 million he sent to Salinas 
from the sale of Iusacell stock to Bell Atlantic Corp., and that he 
paid about $10 million in taxes on the money in Mexico. The man who 
led the Swiss police investigation, Valentin Roschacher, said in a 
telephone interview that Peralta's information was effectively irrelevant 
because he was not a focus of the inquiry. In order to confiscate 
the frozen funds, Roschacher added, Swiss law requires only that the 
authorities demonstrate that Salinas received drug bribes adding up 
to more than the amount in his accounts. The report includes what 
it calls ``a cautious estimate'' that Salinas earned at least $500 
million from drug traffickers. But the Swiss offer no proof that Salinas 
transferred any money to Peralta in the first place. In fact, the 
only evidence that he might have been the original source of the $50 
million comes in the statements of four witnesses. One of those is 
Torres, whom both Peralta and Salinas deny ever having met. The other 
three, all of whom are identified by aliases, appear to be former 
bodyguards or associates. They are quoted as saying that they heard 
either directly or second-hand that Salinas planned to invest or did 
invest some drug money in Peralta's cellular-telephone empire. ``That 
is all a terrible lie,'' Peralta said. ``We were going to make investments 
to take advantage of the good connections, the good relations that 
Raul Salinas was going to have when his brother left the presidency.'' 
Traditionally in Mexico, the presidents and their families continue 
to have some power. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>