<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981011.0129 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
The federal government and the Microsoft Corp. may be nearing a historic 
antitrust showdown. But Microsoft co-founder Bill Gates has largely 
disengaged himself from the company's legal defense to concentrate 
on new ways to extend the world's largest independent software company's 
influence into the next century. And instead of a corporation struggling 
to stay a step ahead of technological obsolescence _ the argument 
with which he has tended to rebut his antimonopolist critics in recent 
years _ Gates boasts in a recent memo to his staff that Microsoft's 
position in the computer industry is stronger than it has ever been. 
In fact, the memo contends, one of the company's biggest challenges 
will be finding ways to continue motivating employees who in many 
cases are so wealthy from their Microsoft stock that they no longer 
have an economic need to work. The 14-page, single-spaced memo _ whose 
title, ``The Era Ahead'' evokes his 1995 best-selling book, ``The 
Road Ahead'' _ spells out the main opportunities and threats that 
Gates sees for Microsoft in the next five years. Still, in many ways, 
the future according to Bill Gates looks very much like the present. 
The personal computer, in his view, will remain the main business 
and technology platform from which Microsoft stretches upward toward 
the province of big mainframe systems, while reaching downward into 
the realm of hand-held consumer-electronics devices. And the Internet 
will continue to provide the ties that bind these various products 
into a Microsoftian whole _ but only, the memo warns, if the company 
continues to ward off the threats posed by the perceived nemeses of 
IBM, Netscape Communications, Oracle and Sun Microsystems, all of 
which the memo cites by name. Distributed within the company in early 
September, the memo was supplied to The New York Times last week by 
Microsoft on the condition that it not be quoted directly. Gates declined 
to be interviewed for this article. The memo's release, presumably, 
was meant to demonstrate that he is concentrating on Microsoft the 
business enterprise even while the Justice Department is intent on 
exposing Microsoft as a marauding monopolist. Yet the memo implicitly 
also provides further indication that Gates, who is 42 and possibly 
the world's richest man, is withdrawing from operational management 
of Microsoft to return to his programmer-geek roots and become the 
company's chief technologist. It is a personal and professional transition 
that became evident in July when he gave the position of president 
to his longtime friend and colleague, Steven Ballmer, who now shares 
most day-to-day responsibilities with the company's chief operating 
officer, Robert Herbold. ``This is vintage Microsoft and vintage Bill 
Gates,'' Herbold said in an interview last week. ``It's all about 
the core issue for Microsoft, which is developing product.'' Herbold 
said that the responsibilities Gates had turned over include mundane 
tasks like the mid-year review of the budget. ``Guess what,'' Herbold 
said drily. ``Steve Ballmer and I can handle that.'' Before July, 
according to colleagues of Gates who spoke on condition of anonymity, 
he had been showing signs of increasing job stress, as Microsoft's 
battles with the Justice Department and several state attorneys general 
appeared to overshadow the company's focus on product development 
and marketing. In a get-away-from-it-all restorative he prescribed 
for himself, Gates, after deputizing Ballmer, took a summer vacation 
with friends, including Warren Buffett and William Randolph Hearst 
III, that also included pure sight-seeing activities, such as glacier 
watching by boat near Juneau, Alaska, and a train trip through the 
Pacific Northwest. ``The fun-to-work ratio for Bill is going up,'' 
said a Microsoft executive, one of several who noted that Gates seems 
more relaxed lately than he has in years. And yet, the pace of his 
work does not seem to have slowed much. Last week, for example, he 
spoke at industry gatherings in San Diego and Denver, and he recently 
traveled to Europe to speak at industry events and visit Microsoft 
customers. Back at corporate headquarters in Redmond, Wash., he still 
schedules meetings at his executive offices from 9 a.m. to 7 p.m., 
colleagues said. And while his September memo presents a deeply confident 
view of the company's competitive status, Gates also voices dissatisfactions 
in it that have been part of the Microsoft litany for nearly two decades. 
As early as 1981, Gates' stated corporate quests included the development 
of software that was simpler to use. He is now making that a top priority, 
to deflect growing criticism that as Microsoft has added supposedly 
beneficial features to its software, the products are increasingly 
awkward. True, he places much of the blame on the software that other 
companies produce for use with Microsoft's Windows operating system. 
But he directs his own company to solve this problem by writing more 
rigid programming rules and guidelines for outside software developers. 
Along with this implicit charge to his engineers to bring the industry 
to heel, there are also hints at future industry clashes. Gates' memo, 
for example, describes a new service that may be introduced as Windows 
Tone, or Wintone _ a computing analogy to the concept of a telephone 
dial tone. Sun Microsystems has already introduced a similar concept, 
one based on its so-called Jini software, which is designed to enable 
different hardware devices to communicate over the Internet. As Gates 
sees the future, Wintone will assign Microsoft the job of managing 
PC data over the Internet, which will allow for automatic backup of 
that data on network storage computers while at the same time employing 
the Internet to provide automatic updates of the software on users' 
own machines. To create accessible network ``storage lockers'' for 
this vast amount of data, Gates describes a new system to be called 
Megaserver, which will provide computer users with access to their 
personal information and electronic mail wherever they have an Internet 
connection. He also notes that in the future the operating system 
_ the basic command-and-control software of a computer _ will play 
an increasing role in protecting intellectual property from data piracy 
by tracking the use of information and preventing illicit copying. 
Perhaps the most significant revelation, in light of a government 
lawsuit that posits the monolithic dominance of Windows, is the memo's 
grumblings about the operating system's various technical shortcomings. 
He also notes that programs to remove Windows are among the best-selling 
PC software products and cites that fact as evidence of a fundamental 
failure by Microsoft to keep its customers satisfied. Gates also discusses, 
even if he seems to gloss over them, the competitive threats to Microsoft 
that are coming from outside the personal computer industry. He writes, 
for example, that a recent agreement involving the three leading wireless 
telephone makers _ Ericsson, Motorola and Nokia _ and Psion, a small 
British developer of software for hand-held devices, represents serious 
competition. And yet he appears to believe that the company's Windows-based 
Win CE operating system, which is beginning to appear on a variety 
of information appliances, will stave off the threat the agreement 
might pose. At the end of his memo, Gates calls for the help of his 
Microsoft colleagues in meeting the challenges he spells out. He alludes 
to the sense of privilege he feels in being part of the positive impact 
he says the company's effort will have on the way people work, learn 
and communicate. He even suggests a source of further reading, a Web 
site on Microsoft's internal network. But nowhere in the 10,000-word 
tome does he mention the one external force that could alter Microsoft's 
future more fundamentally than the forays of any software competitor: 
the federal antitrust trial scheduled to begin in Washington next 
Monday. But then, this is the new, less-engaged, more geeky Bill Gates, 
who leaves such vexations to his operational subordinates. ``He's 
not preoccupied with the legal case,'' Herbold said of Gates. Referring 
to the company's general counsel, Herbold added that ``Bill Neukom 
will tell us when we need his input.'' 
</TEXT>
</DOC>