<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981011.0224 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
If you wait long enough, even in a short series, it becomes abundantly 
clear why one team won 114 regular-season games and another 89. In 
the swing game of the American League Championship Series here on 
Sunday, Game 5, the Yankees trotted out the author of a perfect game, 
while the Indians responded with the defendant in what became a crime 
against Mike Hargrove's choice of starting pitchers. The Indians' 
manager went with a guy who didn't make his Division Series roster, 
hoped for the best and got one and one-third painfully dysfunctional 
innings. He got the Ogea trial with no acquittal. All things considered, 
the weekend at Jacobs Field turned out quite nicely for the Yankees, 
who won 5-3 Sunday and have a three-games-to-two series lead going 
home to Yankee Stadium on Tuesday for Game 6. Orlando Hernandez on 
Saturday night. David Wells on Sunday. David Cone on Tuesday. No wonder 
Joe Torre always looks so calm sitting there next to Don Zimmer in 
the dugout. He does not have to blindfold himself and throw darts 
at the wall to select his starting pitcher in the heart of a championship 
series. He does not have to make Game 5 choices like Chad Ogea or 
Jaret Wright. He does not have to wonder which of his core starters 
is less likely to be overwhelmed by the occasion. ``Our signature 
is starting pitching,'' Torre said, repeating his mantra. ``That's 
been our strength and that's the reason why we won so many games.'' 
The Yankees aren't officially done yet with the Indians. Torre may 
want Hargrove's blindfold if the Indians win Tuesday night and the 
dice come up with, gulp, Andy Pettitte's number for Game 7. Torre 
takes the day off Monday, not worrying about that. He knows Cone cannot 
wait to take the ball Tuesday night. He knows there will be no fear, 
the way there was none in Hernandez, and certainly none in Wells. 
You can't teach a pitcher this, like the grip on a split-finger fastball. 
You can't instill the desire that welled inside Hernandez as he plotted 
his escape from Castro's Cuba. You can't manufacture Wells' counter-culture 
life that makes him what Torre called ``a loose horse,'' a pitcher 
impervious to conventional pressure. You can't make players understand 
the way Cone does that an aneurysm in your right shoulder could materialize 
out of nowhere to threaten your livelihood and your life. These three 
have all lived more than a little in their 30-plus years, overcome 
personal situations that are bigger, even, than baseball. It gets 
to the point where center stage on the baseball team that is owned 
by George Steinbrenner and belongs to New York is not that big a deal. 
``You get to the place in your career where you worry about not getting 
the opportunity,'' Cone said in the relaxed Yankee clubhouse. ``Boomer 
is like that, without a doubt, and I think his postseason record with 
us the two years he's been here proves it. El Duque, I think he was 
overanxious to get the chance. He felt he should have pitched before 
last night.'' How many teams in pitching-challenged baseball can trot 
out three talented survivors like that? ``No, I'm not envious of them,'' 
Hargrove lied after his dart, once again, landed in the wrong place. 
In Game 1, he picked Wright, who got bombed for five first-inning 
runs. After Ogea spotted the Yankees a 4-2 lead, Hargrove handed the 
ball to Wright, who pitched six innings of one-run ball. One bad break 
_ a double-play ball headed toward the human vacuum, Omar Vizquel, 
which Ogea deflected into a base hit for Paul O'Neill _ does not mitigate 
the three walks and two hit batsmen and the fact that the laboring 
Ogea looked defeated from the start. Wells, for his part, struggled 
in the first inning but hardly because of the magnitude of the moment. 
He said he was distracted while warming up in the bullpen when fans, 
and some young ones at that, hurled insults at him that broached the 
subject of his mother, who died of cancer in January 1997. By Wells' 
own account, Eugenia Ann Wells was not your standard soccer mom, but 
she raised him lovingly by herself and her passing hit him hard. When 
his focus returned, the anger remained. He left a potential third 
run at third base in the first inning, and later surrendered a Jim 
Thome home run. Mostly, Wells bewildered the Indians' free swingers 
with off-speed pitches and fanned 11 into the eighth, when Torre decided 
he'd had enough. ``To those idiots out there,'' he said later, as 
if making a toast, ``this one is for you.'' All right, so Wells' story 
doesn't exactly have the romance of Hernandez's, and he is not the 
polished, finished product, as is Cone. Pertaining to the rigors and 
tensions of October, this is not the point, which is that Wells is 
absolutely unafraid to fail. Like Cone, Wells and Hernandez are survivors 
to the core. ``You can see it in a guy's body language,'' Cone said. 
On Tuesday night, Game 6, you will likely see it in Cone. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>