<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981011.0109 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Such was the paranoia at CBS News last week, before some 120 employees 
were laid off, that several high-level CBS journalists passed along 
an ominous rumor: Mel Karmazin, president and chief operating officer 
of CBS Inc., had told Andrew Heyward, president of CBS News, that 
the network should get out of the news-gathering business because 
it cannot compete with the 24-hour news channels. That comment was 
never made, both men say. But part of it would have been right on 
the money. CBS cannot compete with CNN, MSNBC and Fox News Channel 
in the 24-news business. Nor can ABC and NBC. That does not mean they 
are getting out of the news-gathering business. But it does mean they 
are significantly changing the way they conduct it. The evening newscasts 
have been reshaped, foreign and domestic bureaus have been closed 
or downsized, correspondents are being asked to move faster and do 
more and the broadcasters are relying more on nonnetwork personnel 
to gather the news. In the last few years, broadcasters have been 
reassessing what news coverage means to them as a result of three 
powerful forces: _ The 24-hour news networks will almost always be 
first to report a story and be able to stay with it longer. _ The 
precarious economics of the broadcast business _ where billions of 
dollars are spent for football and basketball contracts and hundreds 
of millions for shows like ``ER'' and ``Home Improvement'' _ have 
given the Big Three news divisions no choice but to slice budgets. 
_ And the swiftly evolving wizardry of satellite and computer technology 
has enabled networks to produce news reports much faster and more 
efficiently, while also enabling them to rely more on footage from 
partner networks in other countries and from the two giant video news 
agencies, Reuters Television, a division of Reuters Holdings PLC, 
and APTN (Associated Press Television News). ``The technological advances 
and the economic realities of networks are paralleling each other,'' 
said Bob Murphy, senior vice president for hard news at ABC. ``We 
have to figure out how to make the most of that, and how to make sure 
our management of resources on the editorial side becomes stronger 
because of these changes, not more superficial.'' How to be stronger 
on tighter-than-ever budgets is the Big Three networks' challenge. 
Part of the challenge is the growth of CNN, a unit of Time Warner 
Inc., and especially after the Gulf War in 1991, television news viewers 
have had ``a massive change in expectations,'' said Nigel Baker, head 
of news operations for APTN in London. ``Five years ago, people had 
a hope for same-day pictures. Now they expect same-hour, if not same-minute, 
pictures.'' The technology and partnerships and the need to be distinctive 
from the 24-hour channels are combining to change the roles of crews 
and correspondents. On most breaking news stories, video will be the 
same, whether shot by APTN or Reuters crew or by an ABC, CBS or NBC 
crew. So the networks have cut back on crews. But they are also deploying 
them on more in-depth stories that require _ and show off _ their 
own correspondents' expertise. They have to pay for it, too _ salaries 
range up to about $500,000 for a top foreign correspondent. Because 
those men and women are expected to report with greater depth and 
to cover more territory and issues, the premium on keeping the good 
ones is greater than ever. So is getting the most out of them. Gone 
are the days of the ``bon vivant'' correspondent, who stayed in capitals 
like Paris, London or Rome; lunched regularly with the foreign minister, 
and when sent on a story farther afield was accompanied by a producer, 
an editor, camera and sound crew and sometimes extra people to handle 
the bulky and technically complex equipment. ``Now, we can pack a 
satellite uplink in a couple of metal cases as airline baggage,'' 
said Bill Wheatley, executive vice president of NBC News. ``And digital 
equipment will soon mean taking an editing deck the size of an attache 
case.'' With laptop computers and cell phones, a correspondent can 
go afield with a lone camera person, file a story, and consult on 
the editing with someone in London or New York. And with the layoffs 
over the last few months, there are fewer editors, producers and researchers 
to consult with. One CBS correspondent, after hearing of the 120 or 
so layoffs (from a staff of 1,600), said he could hardly mind the 
extra work. Traveling a bit more and having pieces edited at a central 
hub operation was not exactly hardship duty. Sounding enormously relieved, 
he said, ``They could have wiped us out, but they didn't.'' But at 
NBC, where foreign correspondents used to complain that they rarely 
got stories on ``Nightly News with Tom Brokaw'' because NBC uses fewer 
foreign news stories than ABC or CBS, some correspondents now complain 
of burnout. They are asked to file for MSNBC regularly, for CNBC sometimes, 
and for msnbc.com, the Web site the network operates jointly with 
Microsoft. Domestic correspondents, too, face the same pressures and 
are also occasionally asked to file stories for the news magazine 
``Dateline.'' Still, on all three networks' nightly 6:30 newscasts, 
there are fewer slots for stories than there were 10 or even five 
years ago, executives said. ``We used to have nine or 10 stories each 
night of about a minute-and-a-half each,'' Ortiz said. ``Now, we spend 
more time on longer segments that tend to be shot over several days 
and have more depth, more analysis. We feel less need to extract nine, 
10 or 11 hard-news offers out of the news each night to fill up the 
broadcast.'' And the Tyndall Report, which tracks coverage of different 
types of stories on all the networks, has found a steady decline in 
foreign stories used. Until 1996, ABC used more reports from its foreign 
bureaus than the other two did; since then, CBS has had a slight lead. 
NBC deliberately uses more domestic stories, believing viewers are 
more interested in them. ``Ever since the Berlin Wall fell and the 
Cold War was seen to be over, there's been a de-emphasis on foreign 
news,'' said Richard Wald, senior vice president for editorial quality 
at ABC News. ``That has stopped the overseas bureaus from growing, 
and has begun a slow attrition of the amount of overseas coverage 
done and the money spent on it. Money follows interest, not the other 
way around.'' Agency reports fill in the gaps, or at least can be 
on hand as protection, as back-up footage to be used if a story suddenly 
becomes more newsworthy and a report must be pulled together quickly. 
Bill Wheatley, executive vice president of NBC News, said another 
factor helping the Big Three networks feel they are still able to 
stay atop foreign news developments is their partnerships with networks 
in other nations. NBC has alliances in Britain with ITN, in Germany 
with ZDF and in Japan with Nippon TV. They also share bureau space, 
which helps save money; NBC's Frankfurt bureau is in ZDF's headquarters, 
for example. NBC recently closed most of its Tokyo bureau, keeping 
only an office space where visiting correspondents or producers can 
work. ABC News shares bureau space with its Japanese partner, NHK, 
in Moscow, Tokyo and some smaller cities where ABC has stringers and 
NHK has a bureau, like Bangkok, Thailand, and Seoul, South Korea. 
ABC's British partner is the BBC, with whom they share offices in 
Paris, Cairo, Egypt, and Delhi, India (ABC has no correspondent in 
those cities, however). Such affiliation agreements are CNN's hallmark. 
CNN boasts of having 23 fully staffed bureaus in foreign cities and 
10 in the United States, but both CNN/USA and its global counterpart, 
CNN International, also use extensive amounts of footage from Reuters 
and APTN, and from their mutual-affiliation partners. Eason Jordan, 
CNN's president of global news-gathering, said the network has two-way 
contracts with more than 550 television stations in the United States 
alone and more than 200 foreign networks, ranging from the BBC to 
Iranian state television. Those contacts are one reason why CBS News 
has had preliminary talks in the past about a cooperative arrangement 
with CNN. ``We have twice as many affiliates in the U.S. as any broadcast 
network, because we operate on a nonexclusive basis,'' he said. ``When 
there's a big story _ a plane crash or the O.J. Simpson Bronco chase 
or whatever _ we have multiple feeds available, whereas broadcasters 
rely on just one station. It gives us a tremendous competitive advantage.'' 
And that advantage greatly annoys the Big Three networks, whose affiliates 
and in some cases owned stations have these reciprocal contracts with 
CNN. That way, the stations can be sure of getting pictures from a 
breaking news story almost immediately. ``That used to be the role 
of the traditional three broadcast networks,'' said Jim Williams, 
vice president and director of broadcast services for APTN. ``Being 
first, having it right. They can't be first anymore, so their competitive 
strategy has changed to one of being more expert, giving more in-depth 
analysis and bringing context to the story. Which means better reporting, 
better writing and making strategic decisions to invest in their correspondents.'' 
How well protected are those assets when support staff are cut? That 
is a question raised by the cuts at CBS last week, and the less publicized 
cuts at NBC and ABC earlier this fall. Can context, depth and insight 
be provided if correspondents are working with fewer producers, fewer 
researchers, less supervision as to what stories to pursue and how 
to shape them? This remains to be seen. ``What the networks have to 
do is become less like the basic news provider, which the 24-hour 
news services are, and more like a value-added provider,'' said Richard 
Wald. ``That's the current that is pulling us all forward now.'' 
</TEXT>
</DOC>