<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981011.0215 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
At the biggest, fastest track on the Winston Cup circuit, avoiding 
the big wreck can be the determining factor. And there is always a 
big wreck at Talladega Superspeedway. With some 50 laps left in the 
Winston 500 Sunday, tires were screeching and fenders were flying 
in an 11-car series of crashes that sent Ernie Irvan to the hospital. 
And when the smoke cleared, Mark Martin's title chase had taken a 
devastating hit, Jeff Gordon was back on the lead lap, and Dale Jarrett's 
bank account was about to get much bigger. In a dramatic finish, Jarrett 
barely held off a hard-charging Gordon at the line to win and collect 
the Winston $1 million bonus. Terry Labonte, Gordon's teammate, finished 
third. Martin, who was unable to continue after the late-race wreck, 
finished 34th. ``I looked in the mirror more than looked ahead,'' 
said Jarrett, whose Ford reached the victory lane for the third time 
this season and for the first time in his career at Talladega. ``Those 
guys were right behind me.'' It was a nail-biter. Jarrett took the 
lead on the 173rd of 188 laps. Ten laps later, a fingernail wouldn't 
fit between Jarrett's rear bumper and the grill of Gordon's Chevy, 
which led a tightly knit group of challengers _ Labonte, Jimmy Spencer 
and Jeremy Mayfield _ to the line. If there had been 189 laps, Gordon, 
who finished just .14 seconds behind Jarrett, might have won. ``We 
had a great race car,'' Gordon said. ``We had to fight hard today. 
This car was really, really fast. We were really cooking there at 
the end. I thought we had a shot at it.'' So, with four races to go, 
Gordon has nearly secured his second straight Winston Cup title, which 
would be his third in six years. He has a 288-point lead on Martin, 
the only driver with any chance of catching him. Gordon can finish 
16th in each of the remaining races and still win the championship. 
``It's typical restrictor plate racing,'' said Martin, who started 
Sunday's race 174 points behind Gordon. ``It's great for the fans, 
but it's not very good for the competitors. It's not real racing because 
you can't separate yourself from the guys who don't have the equipment, 
don't have the skills, or the experience.'' Restrictor plate racing 
may not be ideal, but Gordon made the best of his horsepower-starved 
car. After leading for 49 laps early, he dropped back to 23rd after 
falling out of lead draft. By Lap 130, he was one lap down, but he 
never stopped racing. With the aerodynamic help of Labonte, he drove 
his way back onto the lead lap just moments before the big wreck. 
The series of crashes occurred on Lap 136, with Martin running sixth 
and Gordon 18th. Had the race ended then, Martin would have moved 
to within 125 points of Gordon. Sterling Marlin spun Irvan around, 
setting off a chain reaction. Irvan's Pontiac, caroming off the wall 
and back into the middle of the track, was broadsided near the passenger 
side by Dick Trickle and then hit Martin's Ford, tearing up the rear 
of that car. After making repairs, Martin was able to finish the race 
running, but he was now miles from the championship. Referring to 
the series of crashes, Gordon said: ``You hate to see something like 
that. I really wanted this championship to come down to just pure 
fighting on the race track. I hate to see something like that happen 
to Mark, but anything can happen to us in the final four laps just 
as it did to him.'' Sunday's race was the third of four restrictor 
plate races this season. The plates are small pieces of metal, which 
are placed over the carburetor to constrict the flow of air and cut 
horsepower in half. They are used at Talladega and Daytona in the 
interest of safety. Restrictor plates also make for closer races and 
unpredictable finishes. The restrictor plates will be on the cars 
next week at Daytona for the Daytona night race, which had been postponed 
because of forest fires. PIT STOPS ERNIE IRVAN was airlifted to Carraway 
Methodist Hospital in Birmingham, Ala., after his Pontiac was pounded 
on the side by DICK TRICKLE on Lap 136. He was admitted to the intensive 
care unit, but preliminary reports were positive. He was awake and 
alert and sustained no broken bones. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>