<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981011.0174 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Three weeks before the midterm election, with the vote on an impeachment 
inquiry finally behind them, congressional Democrats acted this weekend 
like the best place to campaign was right here in the nation's capital. 
Adopting their own version of a president's traditional ``Rose Garden 
strategy,'' they used the ornate backdrops of the Capitol and the 
White House to highlight their own election themes and accuse the 
Republicans who lead Congress of doing nothing _ except, of course, 
talking about President Clinton's impeachment. From a White House 
Cabinet room and at Clinton's side, House Minority Leader Dick Gephardt 
took advantage of the slow-moving spending negotiations that kept 
Congress working through a weekend session to fire away about issues 
left undone by the Republican majority. ``This Congress has been here 
probably less than most Congresses,'' said the Missouri Democrat. 
``But what I'm worried about is not when they're not here; what I 
am worried about is when they are here. They've killed campaign reform. 
They've killed the tobacco bill. They've killed the patient bill of 
rights.'' These are the themes that for months the Democrats have 
been struggling, largely without success, to amplify over the din 
of the scandal engulfing the president. And this weekend they found 
that the spending negotiations gave them the opportunity. Clinton 
rebuked Congress, saying that it ``could have been and should have 
been'' focused on the American people this year rather than on his 
troubles. He said the November election should not be a referendum 
on him. ``First of all,'' Clinton said, ``I'm not running.'' Republicans 
shot back with accusations that they had to negotiate with a do-nothing 
president distracted by his legal problems and his incessant fund-raising 
for the Democratic Party. ``The president, quite frankly, has been 
AWOL all year long,'' House Majority Leader Dick Armey, of Texas, 
said Sunday on ABC's ``This Week.'' ``He's about to take tomorrow 
his 100th campaign trip to go up to New York for a million-dollar 
fund-raiser for Chuck Schumer, a member of the Judiciary Committee, 
which I think is a rather interesting thing,'' referring to the Brooklyn 
Democrat who is trying to unseat Republican Sen. Alfonse D'Amato. 
But Republicans, who are expecting to pick up seats in the House and 
Senate because of the Clinton scandal, were trying to avoid being 
goaded into a misstep. They remained well aware of the political backlash 
they suffered three years ago when they provoked a government shutdown 
in attempting to force Clinton to sign into law key elements of the 
new Republican majority's agenda. Some Republican strategists said 
they thought it was actually to their benefit to keep Democrats in 
Washington, the capital of the Monica Lewinsky scandal, instead of 
having them in their home districts campaigning. The weekend's fevered 
political positioning came just days after the House voted, in a highly 
partisan split, to open an impeachment inquiry. Only 31 Democrats 
voted for a Republican resolution to open a broad inquiry into Clinton. 
Both parties believe that what is at stake is not just Clinton's fate, 
but the outcome of the November elections and, perhaps, the presidential 
election in 2000. A month ago, when independent counsel Kenneth Starr 
reported to Congress that Clinton may have committed 11 impeachable 
offenses, Rep. Henry Hyde, the Judiciary Committee chairman, said, 
``Any impeachment cannot succeed unless it is done in a bipartisan 
or nonpartisan way.'' But that was before it became clear how hard 
Democrats would work to portray the inquiry as a partisan effort to 
unseat an elected president. It was also before positions in Congress 
had solidified. Many Republicans now openly lean toward impeachment, 
saying Clinton undermined the nation's legal system and abused his 
office in his attempts to hide his affair with Ms. Lewinsky. And with 
the first shock of the Starr referral now passed, most Democrats condemn 
the affair and the president's dissembling about it _ but say bad 
private behavior does not rise to the level of impeachment. The first 
tests of whether common ground can be found in this environment comes 
in the next two weeks. As early as this week, committee lawyers will 
begin exploring whether all sides would be willing to attest to the 
truth of some of Starr's evidence in order to speed the inquiry along. 
A week later, a subcommittee begins hearing scholars and legal experts 
cite history and precedent on what kind of offense merits a president's 
removal from office. Greg Craig, a White House special counsel, welcomed 
the upcoming hearing. ``Our position is that the discussion of standards 
is an absolutely essential element for a fair impeachment inquiry 
to go forward,'' he said in an interview. In an appearance Sunday 
on CBS' ``Face the Nation,'' Craig said that Clinton's behavior ``does 
not rise to the level of impeachable offense standard that we have 
used throughout history, and we lower that standard at our peril.'' 
In fact, trying to sense where public opinion will move, the political 
parties have undergone an odd role reversal in just the few days since 
the House vote to open an impeachment inquiry. Though they had held 
out for an unlimited investigation, Republicans are leaning toward 
a restrained inquiry, perhaps without any public questioning of Ms. 
Lewinsky and with much of the investigation conducted behind closed 
doors in an acknowledgment that the public does not want to see a 
circus. Democrats, who had called for a limited inquiry with a timeline, 
are now seeking public questioning of a wide cast of characters, from 
Ms. Lewinsky to her mother to Starr. They are looking for ways to 
cloud Starr's case. There were some signs Sunday that if the Republicans 
sweep to victory in the November elections, some kind of compromise 
could emerge. A bipartisan rump group of four members of the House 
Judiciary Committee that has been meeting quietly in search of compromise 
has now grown to 10 of the panel's 37 lawmakers. And Sen. Robert Torricelli, 
D-N.J., recommended Sunday that Clinton settle the Paul Jones sexual 
misconduct case. He also urged the president's attorneys to write 
to the grand jury to ``correct the record'' of Clinton's testimony 
in order to set the groundwork for a punishment short of impeachment. 
Sen. Orrin Hatch, R-Utah, said Clinton also needed to answer accustions 
by Kathleen Willey, a former White House aide, that he groped her, 
a charge he has denied. And Hatch conceded that the Senate, as currently 
constituted with 55 Republicans and 45 Democrats, does not have the 
67 votes to remove Clinton from office. But he added, ''I think this 
is way too early. We don't know all the facts.'' 
</TEXT>
</DOC>