<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981011.0153 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
The Phoenicians were the master seafarers of antiquity, the first 
to knit the Mediterranean into a trading state. Contemporaries knew 
them well. Homer derided them as ``greedy rogues,'' and the Bible 
praised their ships of oak and cedar as works that ``did sing.'' But 
modern scholarship knows little of the vanished people and almost 
nothing of the empire's basis, its merchant ships. No ships that are 
clearly Phoenician have come to light, and only a few images of the 
trading vessels have come down through the ages. Now, however, the 
cold depths of the Mediterranean have yielded a bonanza that might 
change all that _ if archaeologists and treasure hunters can learn 
to work together. The episode began last month as entrepreneurs based 
in Tampa, Fla., were searching the deep western Mediterranean for 
lost gold and silver. In the inky darkness, a half-mile down, the 
team's robot suddenly lit up hundreds of amphoras, the clay storage 
jars of antiquity. What the robot had revealed was clearly a very 
old shipwreck. Thrilled, Greg Stemm, director of operations for Odyssey 
Marine Exploration Inc., had videotapes of the amphoras studied by 
nautical archaeologists. They tentatively identified the earthen jars 
as typical of the Phoenician colony of Carthage around the fifth century 
B.C., near the peak of Phoenician influence in the ancient world. 
``It's an incredible find,'' Stemm said in an interview. ``It's the 
oldest deep wreck ever found. We're very excited.'' The discovery 
is already stirring great scholarly interest because so little is 
known of the ancient mariners. During the first millennium B.C., the 
Phoenicians, sailing mainly out of the area that is now Lebanon, spread 
colonies along some of the Mediterranean's best land and prospered 
because of their enormous commercial zeal. They traded in textiles, 
dyes, jewelry, glass, wine, perfumes and wood. Rivals often hated 
them. Plutarch, a Greek, scorned them as ``a people full of bitterness'' 
and ``so strict as to dislike all humor and kindness.'' Despite the 
Phoenicians' early success, subsequent waves of civilization wiped 
out most traces of their cities and artifacts. In contrast, the deep 
wreck appears to be pristine. A striking color video made by the Odyssey 
team shows a jumble of brown and red amphoras much as they must have 
lain shortly after the ship, perhaps wrecked by one of the Mediterranean's 
squalls, settled into the ooze. The amphoras are about 3 feet long. 
Some are broken, but most seem to be intact, dotted by delicate sea 
fans and inhabited by snakelike fish. Amphoras were the all-purpose 
shipping vessels of antiquity, holding wine, olive oil, honey, fish 
sauce and other trade products. What lies beneath the amphoras and 
the muck _ whether the ship's wooden hull, tools, personal items and 
perhaps coins, which would help pinpoint the date of the sinking _ 
can only be learned by excavation. The frigidity and low oxygen levels 
of the deep sea are known to keep many old items remarkably well preserved. 
Eager to learn more, and happy to admit the profit motive, Stemm is 
seeking to team up with archaeologists to explore the wreck with scholarly 
rigor and to make the project pay for itself by selling film rights 
and organizing museum shows. Surprisingly, considering past enmity, 
scholars are showing considerable interest in the proposed venture, 
seeing the wreck as a good test of the feasibility of teamwork. ``It's 
got tremendous potential as a way to bring archaeology into the business 
world,'' said Cheryl Ward, a professor at the Institute of Nautical 
Archaeology of Texas A&AMP;M University. ``This is an exciting ship 
because it is from a time that is poorly known and a culture that 
is known to us only from land excavations and the accounts of their 
enemies.'' William Murray, chairman of the underwater archaeology 
committee of the Archaeological Institute of America, a top professional 
group, said he would urge his colleagues to consider the venture seriously. 
``If academic archaeologists are going to deal with deep-water shipwrecks, 
it's going to have to be through cooperative efforts like this,'' 
he said in an interview. ``We need to explore the possibility.'' For 
decades, archaeologists and treasure hunters battled one another over 
shipwrecks in shallow waters. Both sides could visit and excavate 
the ruins by means of relatively inexpensive scuba gear, which allows 
divers to go down 100 feet or so. But advanced technology is moving 
the action deeper, sometimes miles deeper, into dark areas of icy 
temperatures and crushing pressures. The high cost of the equipment 
means commercial interests tend to have the upper hand. No archaeologist 
can afford the millions of dollars it takes to probe the sea's sunless 
depths thoroughly, even though many shipwrecks beckon and much is 
yet to be learned of humanity's past. A lucky few have worked with 
Robert Ballard, an oceanographer and former Navy officer who uses 
military gear to hunt deep wrecks. Last year he announced the discovery 
in the Mediterranean of five ancient Roman ships, the oldest dating 
to about 100 B.C. Scholars have given mixed reviews to some commercial 
deep-recovery efforts, like the raising of Titanic artifacts. But 
in their previous excavations, Stemm and his business partner, John 
Morris, have shown serious interest in learning archaeology and scrutinizing 
lost ships to illuminate the human past. A decade or so ago, they 
recovered a 17th-century Spanish merchant ship from the depths of 
the Gulf of Mexico, and won praise from archaeologists for their care. 
Their deep-diving robot brought up not only pearls, gold bars and 
jewelry but wooden beams, olive jars and ballast stones, recording 
each item's position for archaeological analysis. Stemm and his team 
stumbled on the new wreck last month while searching for a British 
warship that sank in the Mediterranean more than 300 years ago when 
it was transporting a large cargo of coins valued today at up to $500 
million. Their expedition, begun in July and code-named Cambridge, 
is a cooperative venture between Odyssey, a publicly traded company, 
and the Royal Naval Museum in Portsmouth, England, a public institution 
partly financed by the Royal Navy. The Odyssey team used a 90-foot 
boat to tow a sonar over the distant seabed, finding dozens of potential 
targets. Then a desk-sized robot with lights and cameras was lowered 
on a long tether to examine interesting sites close up. The ancient 
wreck was found Sept. 17. The overall site, nearly 3,000 feet down, 
was measured as about 50 feet long and 25 feet wide, with at least 
200 amphoras visible above the mud. Over the ages, amphora styles 
changed from region to region, aiding their dating and identification 
today. Experts say the newly discovered ones are clearly rare, half 
body and half neck, with small, ear-shaped handles. Jenette Flow, 
a marine archaeologist in Tampa who consults for Odyssey, worked with 
top experts to identify the amphoras. Similar ones had been found 
in Morocco, Spain and Greece, where clay jars of this style were recovered 
with other materials that were dated to about 450 B.C. In general 
the amphora style is known as Punic, or Carthaginian, as it seems 
to have arisen in Phoenicia's western colonies. ``I'm jumping up and 
down,'' Ms. Flow said in a telephone interview. ``It really looks 
like an exciting site to me. It's intact.'' Experts caution that a 
distinctive load of trade goods can still be deceptive in determining 
a ship's identity, since ancient cargoes were picked up at various 
ports. So a ship with a Punic cargo might have begun its voyages in 
Phoenicia proper or another ancient land. Stemm said he was already 
talking with top archaeologists and was confident an alliance would 
be worked out. Less certain, he said, was whether Odyssey could raise 
the money for the underwater dig, which he estimated might cost up 
to $4 million. Preliminary work could begin as soon as the spring, 
Stemm said. But he stressed that the pace would be determined by archaeological 
factors, not commercial ones. In theory, much of the surviving ship 
and its cargo could be raised and preserved. If so, he said, nothing 
of the reclaimed ship would be sold individually. ``It's too old and 
rare,'' Stemm said. ``It should be kept together as a collection'' 
that the general public could view, he said, perhaps in a touring 
exhibition. Odyssey has posted videos and pictures of the wreck site 
at www.shipwreck.net on the World Wide Web. The find is likely to 
stir debate over how to save the sea's lost cultural treasures. The 
United Nations, spurred by advances in ocean exploration, is drafting 
a protection treaty that so far tends to favor scholarly over commercial 
efforts _ to the chagrin of Stemm, who as a member of the U.S. delegation 
to a recent expert meeting on the proposed treaty argued otherwise. 
``The archaeologists can't get access'' to the deep's cultural riches, 
Stemm said in an interview. ``And we have to find a way to justify 
the expense.'' Dr. Ward of the Institute of Nautical Archaeology, 
while supportive of the idea of joint work by scholars and treasure 
hunters on deep-sea projects, urged caution. Archaeology is ``a luxury, 
like music or art,'' Dr. Ward said. ``It's hard,'' she said, ``to 
make it pay for itself without losing some of its foundations.'' 
</TEXT>
</DOC>