<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981011.0139 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
In music, as in politics, while some lame ducks are merely hanging 
on, others are thriving. Claudio Abbado, who is 65 and has announced 
that he will give up the podium of the Berlin Philharmonic in 2002, 
seems to be luxuriating in a particularly mellow relationship with 
the orchestra, perhaps partly in compensation for the honeymoon the 
initially recalcitrant band denied him when he arrived in 1989. Such, 
at least, was the impression left by the orchestra's three concerts 
last week at Carnegie Hall, which were superbly performed in almost 
every detail. With few exertions visible to the audience, Abbado drew 
brilliant and committed playing from the group, and seemingly everything 
he wanted by way of interpretation. As so often, the listener could 
wish only that Abbado had wanted more. Mahler's Third Symphony on 
Wednesday evening, for example, was easy to admire but hard to love. 
The dynamic range was breathtaking. Mahler has seldom been heard quieter 
than in pianissimo passages here, suspended by a mere thread of sound. 
And when the underlying coiled tension was unleashed, as at the end 
of the first movement, the ruckus was thrilling in its splendor. Those 
attributes counted for much in performances of Mahler's more abstract 
and tautly constructed Fifth and Ninth Symphonies by the same forces 
at a Mahler festival in Amsterdam three years ago. But the Third is, 
and is meant to be, all over the place. It is, Mahler suggested, the 
world. It needs to bob and weave, vibrate and spin, billow and sway. 
And even if one grants that there are many ways to play Mahler short 
of the all-out passion of a Leonard Bernstein, Abbado's sheerly analytical 
approach left much of the symphony's magic and mystery untapped. Indeed, 
the four inner movements, framed by those vast and powerful pillars 
at either end, would hardly have been eventful at all but for the 
splendid contribution of Anna Larsson, a young Swedish contralto. 
From her first sounds, the repeated A on ``O Mensch,'' Ms. Larsson, 
who is also heard on Esa-Pekka Salonen's recent Sony recording of 
the work with the Los Angeles Philharmonic, carried a listener back 
to the not so distant heyday of great Mahler altos like Kathleen Ferrier 
and Maureen Forrester. The performance of Bruckner's Fifth Symphony 
on Thursday, too, offered almost anything a listener could want except 
transcendence. Which, in Bruckner, may be everything. The final concert, 
on Friday, was a more casual affair, ostensibly juxtaposing German 
and French music. The orchestra retained some of its Brucknerian edge 
and solidity in Schumann's ``Manfred'' Overture, and Renee Fleming 
sang Strauss' ``Four Last Songs'' with gorgeous tone, excellent amplitude 
and evolving emotion. The performance of ``La Valse'' did not, for 
all its magnificent qualities, sound very French. The grotesqueries 
were put forward with earnestness and weight, and by the end, Ravel 
seemed to have entered the world of Varese, with its internationalist 
clangor. In Debussy's ``Nocturnes,'' there seemed to be more women 
onstage than usual in this orchestra. The enigma evaporated in the 
concluding ``Sirenes,'' when it became apparent that the excess consisted 
of women of the Westminster Choir, interspersed with the players to 
achieve an atmospheric vagueness of location in their siren-call vocalise. 
But there was also news on the feminist front. A fascinating sidelight 
to the Mahler performance took place last Monday, when principal players 
of the orchestra coached sections of the Manhattan School of Music 
Symphony in the work's long finale, preparatory to a rehearsal-type 
reading of the movement at the Manhattan School on the Upper West 
Side of Manhattan. Abbado, who was to have conducted but was recovering 
from a viral infection, yielded the podium to the assistant conductor 
of the Berlin Philharmonic, Graziella Contratto. The Berlin Philharmonic 
was, to be sure, quicker than its counterpart in Vienna to bend to 
the social mandates of the 20th century. It admitted its first woman 
in 1982 and now has 11. Still, it was remarkable to find the young 
Ms. Contratto anywhere near the podium so identified with the autocratic 
Herbert von Karajan, who in 1982 reversed his opposition to the hiring 
of women, fighting vainly on behalf of the clarinetist Sabine Meyer, 
only as part of a power play against the orchestra. ``It's mainly 
an office job,'' said Ms. Contratto, who took up the position just 
months ago, ``but a very interesting one.'' In fact, Ms. Contratto, 
who is Swiss and in her early 30s, spends most of her time seeing 
that the players' parts are marked according to Abbado's meticulous 
specifications. Only occasionally does she conduct a rehearsal segment. 
Unlike assistant conductors of U.S. orchestras, who can expect to 
conduct a few concerts a season, if not on the regular schedule then 
at least filling in for an ailing music director or guest conductor, 
Ms. Contratto is offered no such prospect. More's the pity, perhaps. 
Ms. Contratto worked well with the students in halting yet expressive 
English, relying perhaps too heavily on metaphors yet imparting sharp 
musical insights. Tall and lean, she used her wide wingspan cannily 
to illustrate the horizontality and lack of metric stress she wanted 
in what she called this ``most unbeated'' music. Elmar Weingarten, 
the general manager of the Berlin Philharmonic, said, ``She has been 
received very well, and compared to her male predecessors, exceptionally 
well.'' Ms. Contratto, it seems clear, will make her way into public 
view soon, if not in Berlin, then elsewhere. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>