<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981011.0127 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
I don't really have anything against new money. I haven't been around 
enough old money to get snotty about its patina of tradition, its 
noble character and its good breeding. But now things have gone too 
far. No, I'm not talking about the nouveau riche. I'm talking about 
the new $20 bill beginning to creep into our pockets. The recently 
redesigned $50 and $100 notes haven't mattered much; for me, they 
have remained pretty much out of familiar reach. But soon these crude, 
brash and ill-proportioned $20s will be everywhere. And their ruder, 
cheaper cousins are on the way. Why am I making so much fuss? Look 
at the elegant endowments possessed by old money. At the back of the 
old $20 is the graciously curved South Portico of the White House, 
with the building set back, allowing space for the lawn, surrounding 
trees and hints of textured sky. The image is not sharply bounded 
but fades gracefully away. And surrounding it is a frame that resembles 
an elaborate proscenium from a century-old theater, ornamented with 
banners, rosettes and elements derived from classical columns. Even 
the identifying numbers are elegant: two enclosed in octagons, two 
in ovals. Now look at the new bill. The South Portico's curves are 
exchanged for a head-on, close-up of the Grecian north entrance. No 
lawn is visible, only shrubs. The leaves are detailed, but the sky 
is artificial, without texture. The image does not wash into the bill's 
background; instead, it is briskly cropped and bounded by a draftsman's 
oval. And around that oval are disorienting expanses of vacuum. Meanwhile, 
the once ornate frame has shrunk into a thin molding. Two of the identifying 
20s hang down as if by accident. A third pushes up from below, while 
in the right corner another 20, grotesquely large with a typeface 
new to American money, bursts through the frame and bubbles into the 
bill's empty space. It is as if the new design were pieced together 
from spare parts, and there weren't quite enough to go around. The 
almost belle epoque reverence of the old, with its sense of looking 
through some nobly decorated portal at a building of charm and authority, 
is replaced by the cavalier recklessness and rudeness of the nouveau 
riche. And I haven't even mentioned the face of the bill, where the 
formal grace of the top and bottom borders is undercut by the blown-up 
medallion of Andrew Jackson with its matinee-idol slickness. The portrait 
is off-center, even breaking apart the once subtle identifying label: 
The word ``Federal'' is pushed to one side, leaving ``Reserve Note'' 
to fend for itself. This bill looks like money that doesn't care too 
much about looking like money. It looks like play money. All right, 
maybe I'm making too much of this. After all, until we use it, paper 
money is play money. This is its genius: Instead of actually using 
valuables to exchange for other valuables _ nuggets of silver or gold, 
bags of barley or precious-metal coins stamped with their weight _ 
something absolutely worthless is used, worthless and by its very 
nature transitory, subject to rips, wear and decay. But a delicate 
drama takes place within these slips of paper. Their fragility is 
almost part of the point. The authority that distributes them is so 
powerful that it can confer the greatest value on what is most valueless. 
The bill also relies on a social contract between its users, who agree 
to accept that governing authority and trust that others will as well. 
That is why, as economists have long noted, paper money is so vulnerable; 
it relies on intangibles like trust, faith and power. Alexander Hamilton 
objected to the stuff. ``In times of tranquillity it might have no 
ill consequence,'' he wrote about paper money. ``But in great and 
trying emergencies, there is almost moral certainty of its being mischievous.'' 
The mischief, of course, is that more can be printed at will, offering 
a fraudulent promise of value. And if the authority behind the paper 
weakens, or has no influence with a neighboring authority, the bills 
become useless scrip. In 1860, for example, there were more than 1,600 
private American banks offering their own paper money in 10,000 basic 
note types. One estimate is that 5,000 counterfeit types were also 
circulating. The evolution of the Federal Reserve System and the centralized 
American monetary system was not merely an economic reform but a social 
transformation. So the design of bills is not a casual matter. Large 
forces are being invoked. The inscriptions are almost magical: When 
they appear in precisely the right way, they accomplish an alchemist's 
dream, as if turning lead into gold. And called into play are all 
the weighty icons of the social covenant and its governing authority, 
which are _ to alleviate Hamilton's anxieties _ portrayed as eternal, 
immutable, even divine. Mythic or ancient images proliferate on almost 
every nation's currency (look at the Latin inscriptions and the hovering 
eye over the pyramid on our $1 bill). So do the iconic portraits and 
buildings of a country's earthly presence. But the new $20 bill seems 
indifferent to all this. The guiding strategy, according to the Treasury 
Department, was to further foil counterfeiters with watermark images, 
color-shifting ink and a labeled security thread. But that seems to 
have been the only concern; elsewhere all density of detail and intricacy 
of connection are tossed aside. As in so many new American stamps, 
almost every design element has been dumbed down, turned almost cartoonish, 
even condescending. The Treasury even boasts of the ``easy to read'' 
numeral slapped on the back. Why not just print the number over the 
entire surface of the bill if that's the point? The 20s on the back 
of the old bill were actually easier to read, because the eye was 
drawn to them: They formed the stable corners of the note's architecture. 
Finally, while it may seem as if the national icons are given more 
importance _ in Jackson's enlarged portrait or the zoomed-in view 
of the White House _ this assertiveness could be a sign of inflation. 
The bill's stilted decorations, blank spaces and mixed typefaces actually 
weaken the icons, which seem to have no secure place in the overall 
fabric. The White House in particular seems like part of an out-of-place 
curio hanging on a blank wall. And isn't all this an unsettling allusion 
to the nature of contemporary public life? But the new design, with 
its almost casual disregard for the dense meanings of paper money, 
may also be unwittingly revealing another imminent transformation. 
Consider the currency now being designed across the ocean: the euro. 
That currency won't rely on the authority of individual countries, 
because its guarantor will not be a country at all, but an economic 
association. Its bills will be adorned not with national capitols 
but with nonexistent buildings meant to broadly symbolize the evolution 
of architecture in Europe. The euro will start being used for electronic 
transfer of funds on Jan. 1, three years before bills are even available. 
What a peculiar situation: The euro will begin as abstract money and 
then take form in bills decorated with the abstract architecture of 
a newly imagined realm. And instead of being created by a government, 
the euro is creating a government. It is as if money had been freed 
of all material constraints, attaining untested powers. Perhaps the 
new American bills also bear hints of this. We can barely associate 
money with national boundaries anymore (60 percent of American currency 
is probably circulating in foreign countries), so why worry about 
national icons and their meanings? As for design, why be concerned 
when currency is becoming increasingly abstract, dissolving into a 
digital stream of ones and zeroes, making encryption more important 
than inscription? Paper money, with all its mythic invocations and 
heroic portraits, may become superfluous. The real new money may be 
personalized versions of the EZ-Pass used by drivers in the New York 
area. There goes the neighborhood. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>