<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981011.0142 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Describing her as ``an eminent daughter of Israel and a faithful daughter 
of the church,'' Pope John Paul II on Sunday canonized Edith Stein, 
a Jewish intellectual who became a Carmelite nun and died at Auschwitz. 
``Because she was Jewish, Edith Stein was deported with her sister 
Rosa and many other Jews,'' the pope said at a solemn Mass in St. 
Peter's Square before tens of thousands of people. ``In celebrating 
now and later the memory of the new saint, we will be unable not to 
also remember year after year the Shoah, that savage plan to eliminate 
a people, which cost millions of our Jewish brothers and sisters their 
lives.'' The statement was the closest the pope has come to suggesting 
that the Vatican might order an annual commemoration of the Holocaust. 
In recalling Edith Stein's Jewish roots and the suffering of Jews 
in the Holocaust in a Mass that is one of the holiest rituals of the 
Roman Catholic Church, John Paul sought to address the anger and concern 
of many Jewish groups, which have protested the Vatican's decision 
to honor Edith Stein as a Christian martyr of the Holocaust. Edith 
Stein's is one of the most contested canonizations of this papacy, 
which celebrates its 20th year this week. She was deported in 1942 
from a convent in Echt, the Netherlands, where she had sought refuge 
from Hitler's Germany. After Dutch bishops denounced the Nazis' policy 
of deportation in the occupied Netherlands, the Nazis retaliated by 
rounding up Jewish converts, who had until then been spared the fate 
of other Jews. That led the Vatican to conclude that Edith Stein had 
been killed to punish the Catholic Church in the Netherlands and was 
therefore a martyr to her faith. Many Jewish associations and some 
of her relatives who attended the ceremony Sunday have questioned 
the Vatican's logic and sensitivity, insisting that she died in a 
gas chamber because she was Jewish, not became she was a Roman Catholic 
nun. John Paul, who has made reconciliation between Catholics and 
Jews one of the hallmarks of his papacy, clearly hoped that by acknowledging 
in his homily that Edith Stein was killed because she was a Jew, he 
could lay the controversy to rest. The pope spoke beneath a giant 
portrait of Edith Stein in her Carmelite wimple. She was canonized 
in the name she adopted when she took her vows, Saint Teresia Benedicta 
of the Cross. Before an audience that included the outgoing German 
chancellor, Helmut Kohl, the pope said, ``The value of her testimony 
is to render ever more firm the bridge of mutual understanding between 
Christians and Jews.'' But many representatives of Jewish groups were 
not mollified by the pope's words. ``She was killed because she was 
born to Jewish parents, and that is what needed to be emphasized in 
any statement about her death,'' Rabbi David Rosen, director of the 
Israeli office of the Anti-Defamation League told Reuters on Sunday. 
``It was not adequately emphasized. There is a sense that the Catholic 
Church has been portrayed exclusively as a victim of Nazi atrocities 
rather than as a collaborator at times.'' Edith Stein is thought to 
be the first Jewish-born saint since the time of the Apostles and 
early Christian martyrs, but incomplete records, as well as the numbers 
of early conversions, forced or voluntary, make that impossible for 
the Vatican to confirm. Edith Stein's canonization follows the beatification 
earlier this month of Cardinal Alojzije Stepinac, a Croatian who was 
persecuted by the Communists during the Cold War. Although the Vatican 
maintained that he saved hundreds of Jewish and Serbian lives during 
World War II, he is viewed by Serbs and many Jews as a symbol of the 
Catholic Church's complicity with the Fascist regime that ruled Croatia 
from 1941 to 1945. A miracle is required for canonization. In Edith 
Stein's case, it was the recovery of Benedicta McCarthy, the American 
child whose parents prayed to Sister Teresia Benedicta when she swallowed 
a fatal dose of Tylenol as a toddler in 1987; the church recognized 
that as a miracle in 1997. Benedicta and her entire family attended 
the service, at which Benedicta received the communion wafer from 
the pope. Later, her father, the Rev. Emmanuel Charles McCarthy, a 
Catholic priest in the Melkite branch of the church, which allows 
priests to marry, said he hoped that the canonization would lead to 
a period of contrition for the church. ``The last thing she would 
want,'' he told The Associated Press, ``would be that the canonization 
somehow was part of a means to hide the atrocities of Christians in 
relation to the Jewish people during the Second World War.'' Edith 
Stein was born on Yom Kippur in 1891 into an Orthodox family in Breslau, 
Germany (now Wroclaw, Poland). A brilliant philosopher and atheist, 
she converted to Catholicism in 1922. In 1933, she was forced to quit 
her teaching position in Muenster by a Nazi decree banning Jews from 
academia. That year she entered a Carmelite convent in Cologne, where 
she continued her theological writings. In 1938, after Kristallnacht, 
she fled with her sister Rosa to a convent in the Netherlands. After 
the bishops' letter denouncing the Nazis was made public, she was 
arrested. ``Come Rosa,'' a witness recalled her saying, ``we are going 
for our people.'' She died at Auschwitz on Aug. 9, 1942. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>