<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981011.0138 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
A long-sought compromise to let high-technology companies hire more 
foreign workers has been derailed in the Senate, and infighting in 
the final hours of the 105th Congress is threatening final passage 
of two other cornerstones of the information-technology industry's 
legislative agenda. Still in limbo as Congress' newest deadline for 
adjournment neared was a ban on Internet taxes and landmark legislation 
to protect copyrights in the digital age. The breakdowns, late Friday, 
came just two days after industry leaders joined House Speaker Newt 
Gingrich and Republican leaders at a news conference in what turned 
out to be a premature celebration of the bills' passage. ``It does 
show that you cannot let up your guard,'' Marc Pearl, general counsel 
and senior vice president of government affairs for the Information 
Technology Association of America, said Sunday. ``You must remain 
vigilant until the bill is signed. Until the measure you don't want 
is absolutely positively dead. You just can't let go.'' Indeed, Andrew 
Grove, chief executive of Intel Corp., had foreshadowed the snags 
on Wednesday, when, appearing via video hookup at the Gingrich news 
conference, he told the speaker that, at Intel, an order is not complete 
until the product is shipped. ``These bills haven't shipped yet,'' 
Grove said, ``and I hope and trust that they do.'' Gingrich replied 
that the bills were on their way to the loading dock. But time is 
now running out. Congress was supposed to adjourn at midnight Friday. 
Budget disputes, however, forced an extension of that deadline until 
midnight Monday. And while House members are in a hurry to go home 
for campaign season, more extensions could be necessary. For now, 
the only major information-technology bill that has actually passed 
is one involving Year 2000 liability, which encourages companies to 
share information about whether their computer systems are prepared 
to handle calendar dates beyond 1999, and about how any related problems 
can be fixed; the companies would be exempt from lawsuits that are 
based on the information they have disclosed. Besides the Internet 
tax bills and the copyright measure, still pending are a half-dozen 
measures covering matters like Internet gambling, protection of children 
on the Internet and shielding technology companies from lawsuits based 
on their fluctuating stock prices. ``We are very concerned,'' Pearl 
said of the last-minute delays. ``It is always difficult to predict 
what Congress will do when we are in this kind of breakneck speed 
to get into a recess. Sometimes good things fall through the cracks.'' 
One of the victims, apparently, will be the bill sponsored by Sen. 
Spencer Abraham, R-Mich., to nearly double the number of visas available 
to highly skilled foreign professionals. Both the House and Senate 
had passed versions of the bill earlier this year, and a compromise 
was worked out with the White House last month. But late Friday, a 
small group of senators blocked a final vote on the compromise measure, 
effectively killing it for this year. Opponents argue that the industry 
has exaggerated claims of a worker shortage so it can bring in cheaper 
foreign labor to keep wages down. ``The programming shortage never 
materialized,'' said Sen. Tom Harkin, D-Iowa, whose opposition helped 
blocked passage of the compromise measure. He noted that a number 
of high-technology companies have reported layoffs. ``There is simply 
not the shortage that some say,'' Harkin said. In the House, a dispute 
over the appointment of a former Democratic lawmaker to a key high-technology 
trade group delayed final passage of a comprehensive digital copyright 
bill. That measure, the Digital Millennium Copyright Act, would make 
it a crime to break through the technologies that secure digital copies 
of software, music and videos and literary works from Internet pirates. 
It was drafted to implement world treaties for protecting intellectual 
property on the Internet. But lobbyists and congressional staffers 
said that Republican leaders yanked the copyright measure from the 
House calendar late last week, to express their outrage that Dave 
McCurdy, a former Democratic representative from Oklahoma, had just 
been named to head the Electronic Industries Alliance, a lobbying 
group that has been involved in the copyright legislation. ``This 
piece of legislation should not be an issue that is subject to petty 
politics,'' Pearl said. ``It has always been one that has had a global 
implication to it, one that is generally viewed as a tremendous beneficial 
step forward. So we are just hoping that the leadership will realize 
that before they pack it in.'' Final passage of the Internet Tax Freedom 
Act, which would impose a three-year moratorium on any new state or 
local taxes on Internet commerce or access to the network, was threatened 
by disputes between House and Senate leaders over changes made to 
the bill in the Senate on Thursday. The bill is considered crucial 
for the growth of electronic commerce. Without it, supporters say, 
there are more than 30,000 state and local taxing entities that could 
try and lay claim to transactions on the Internet. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>