<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981011.0204 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
In a computer at a secret location, the FBI will open a national DNA 
data base on Tuesday that advocates say could significantly reduce 
rape and other crimes by helping to catch repeat offenders earlier. 
The data base, with a new generation of forensic DNA techniques, promises 
to be so efficient that some civil libertarians fear it will be expanded 
from people convicted of crimes to include almost everyone, giving 
the government inordinate investigative powers over citizens. The 
national DNA data base consists of 50 data bases run by the states 
but unified by common test procedures and software designed by the 
FBI. As of Tuesday, it will be possible to compare a DNA sample from 
a suspect or crime scene in one state with all others in the system. 
The national data base has been nearly a decade in the making. The 
final pieces fell into place in June when Rhode Island became the 
last state to set up a DNA data base. But the system still faces many 
unresolved issues, which are likely to play out according to the reaction 
from the public and the courts. One such issue is what types of offenders 
should be included. Another is whether the mass screening of suspects' 
DNA will prove constitutional. DNA, the chemical that embodies a person's 
genetic programming, can be found almost everywhere. People shed a 
constant torrent of dead skin cells. Criminals leave blood when breaking 
and entering; they shed hair and skin cells in fights, deposit saliva 
on glasses and leave sweat stains in head bands. From only a few cells 
in such sources, enough DNA can be extracted to identify the owner. 
A DNA database of sufficient size could presumably help solve many 
crimes. The crime-fighting potential of DNA data bases is becoming 
evident from the experiences of Britain, which started earlier and 
has had fewer administrative and constitutional hurdles to overcome. 
The data base there initially focused on sex offenses but has spread 
to include burglaries and car theft because of the high number of 
DNA matches that police forces were obtaining. Moreover, there was 
considerable crossover at least in Britain, among different kinds 
of offenses. ``People who commit serious crime very often have convictions 
for petty crime in their history, so if you could get them on the 
data base early you may prevent serious crime,'' said David Werrett, 
manager of the DNA data base for England and Wales. The English DNA 
data base includes entries from crime scenes and from everyone convicted 
of a crime, as well as from suspects in unresolved cases. Since the 
system's debut in 1995, it has matched 28,000 people to crime scenes 
and has made 6,000 links between crime scenes. The data base now holds 
360,000 entries and Werrett said he expected it would eventually include 
one third of all English men between 16 and 30, the principal ages 
for committing crimes. Werrett said that the data base has grown because 
police forces in England, which pay $55 for a DNA analysis, are finding 
it cost effective. Recently the Police Superintendents Association 
called for the entire population to be DNA tested. Forensic use of 
DNA in the United States is unlikely to go as fast or as far as in 
Britain. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>