<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981011.0206 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
For many weeks now, as the storm clouds of impeachment have gathered 
on Bill Clinton's horizon, those who value his presidency or fear 
the political trauma of removing him from office have been looking 
for an honest broker who could cut a deal between the White House 
and Republicans in Congress. So far, they have utterly failed to find 
one. Honest brokers are in short supply these days. The perfect man 
for the job in days gone by _ on most days, as a matter of fact, in 
the last half-century _ would have been Clark Clifford, who died on 
Saturday at age 91. Clifford's reputation was marred in his final 
years by his involvement in the collapse of the Bank of Credit and 
Commerce International and the financial reverses suffered by one 
of his law office's clients, the late Pamela Harriman, but whatever 
his failings in business, nobody questioned his political skills. 
He was the man, after all, who concluded early in 1948 that his fellow 
Missourian, Harry S. Truman, had a far better chance than anyone thought 
to defeat Thomas E. Dewey for president. He set out his ideas on how 
to do it in a memorandum that became almost as famous in political 
circles as George F. Kennan's roughly contemporaneous memorandum from 
Moscow on Soviet containment became among diplomats. So great was 
his reputation for sound advice and unlimited access that Democratic 
presidents from Truman to Kennedy to Johnson to Carter turned to him 
when they got into tight spots. He made something of a career, as 
the columnist James Reston once said, of rescuing U.S. leaders from 
disaster. Clifford, who wrote the legislation establishing the CIA, 
was almost the last survivor of the remarkable generation of men who 
helped build the post-war world, a group that included Dean Acheson, 
John J. McCloy, Charles F. Bohlen and Robert A. Lovett. Only Kennan 
and Paul Nitze remain from that original band of Cold War policy-makers. 
By the time Clinton needed Clifford or someone like him, he had exhausted 
his political capital. He was too old and sick to help. And he never 
really had any progeny as indispensable men in the corridors of power. 
There are many reasons for that. For one thing, Clifford and the other 
Wise Men were not always wise. Some of them helped steer the United 
States into the morass of the Vietnam War, though some of them, notably 
Clifford, helped to steer it back out again. Their aura of infallibility 
began cracking when the national aura of invulnerability began to 
crack. The very cohesion that helped them mold a bipartisan foreign 
policy prompted them to mute their voices when the policy did not 
work. In addition, the Washington political culture has changed radically 
since the heyday of Clifford and his friends. Gone are the times when 
the president, a few senators and House members, a few Cabinet members, 
a few presidential intimates and a few journalists were the only people 
who mattered. Those were the perfect circumstances for a Clark Clifford. 
He could meet discreetly with the heavy hitters, exuding confidence, 
perfectly turned out in one of his beautiful double-breasted suits, 
tie tightly knotted, every wavy hair in place. He could fold his fingers 
into a little tent and spin out his advice in that mellow Midwestern 
baritone and soon you would come on board. Now nobody really controls 
Congress. Lawmakers are subject to far more rapid, far more direct 
influence from the public, through both organized and spontaneous 
campaigns by fax, phone and e-mail. Party discipline counts for much 
less. Every issue requires the building of new coalitions. Most important, 
the kind of bipartisanship that prevailed during World War II and 
the Cold War has all but vanished, as Thursday's party-line vote on 
impeachment hearings showed. Much of today's business in the capital 
is carried on in public. Hearings and congressional sessions are televised, 
as are White House briefings and sometimes even photo opportunities. 
In a sense, television has become the national political forum. One 
House member said during the impeachment debate that he was going 
to save most of his remarks for the Larry King program that evening. 
After the cultural revolution of the 1960s, another consequence of 
the Vietnam War, people demand more information about what happens 
in Washington. They devour stories about politicians' private lives, 
even as they bemoan the cult of celebrity that has infected Washington 
in the last decade or so. In this new world, working behind the scenes 
is difficult. Even when he served as secretary of defense, Clifford 
shunned the spotlight. But today's presidential counselors rapidly 
become public figures, whether on television, like Clinton's attack 
dog, James Carville, or on the golf course and at Georgetown soirees, 
like Vernon E. Jordan Jr. The Washington lawyer Lloyd N. Cutler, who 
served presidents Carter and Clinton as counsel, is probably Clifford's 
closest counterpart in present-day Washington _ a Democratic insider 
with the reputation for calm, cogent thinking, the head of one of 
the city's best law firms, a man with a million-dollar Rolodex. At 
81, he is certainly experienced enough, as are other senior Democrats 
like former Sen. Sam Nunn and Robert Strauss, the former party chairman. 
But power is diffused now. It is also far more multicultural than 
in the era of the old all-white, all-male, all-WASP Establishment; 
if it were not, Jordan, who is black, would not have ascended to the 
right hand of the president. Finally, the old Cold War imperatives 
of pulling together, closing ranks and keeping one's eye on the enemy 
have disappeared. Not even Lloyd Cutler, Bob Strauss or Sam Nunn, 
not even if they tried their hardest, has the capacity to make Kosovo 
and the international monetary crisis seem as compelling an argument 
for national unity as containing the Soviet Union _ at least not yet. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>