<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981011.0229 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Forty-eight hours changed everything for the Yankees, 48 hours and 
two victories. After the Yankees beat the Indians, 5-3, in Game 5 
of the American League Championship Series on Sunday, taking a lead 
of 3 games to 2, George Steinbrenner left town playfully teasing Indians 
fans who had razzed him on Friday. David Wells, taunted mercilessly 
by fans who referred to his deceased mother as he warmed up, pitched 
seven and one-third innings for the victory. David Cone, who departed 
Jacobs Field with a stony glare after the Yankees' defeat in Game 
3, dressed with a smile Sunday, preparing to fly back to New York 
and pitch Game 6 in the four-of-seven-game series on Tuesday. Chuck 
Knoblauch, mocked by the crowd here 48 hours ago, is grinning again 
after spurring a first-inning rally that the Indians would refer to 
as the turning point in the game. On Friday, the Yankees were reeling 
and, as Steinbrenner said, ``People were burying us.'' Now, with one 
more victory, the team vying to be considered one of the best ever 
will move on to the World Series. The Indians operated with a disadvantage 
in manpower. Catcher Sandy Alomar, already bothered by right shoulder 
and left knee pain, suffered back spasms, was forced to leave Game 
4 and may be finished for the rest of the series. Einar Diaz started 
in his place Sunday, with infielder Jeff Branson anxiously fearing 
the possibility that Diaz would be hurt and Branson would be needed 
as an emergency catcher. Then, about two hours before Game 5, outfielder 
David Justice approached Manager Mike Hargrove and asked out of the 
starting lineup, saying he wouldn't feel comfortable batting against 
the left-handed David Wells. Cleveland's lineup included three rookies 
_ Diaz, first baseman Richie Sexson and second baseman Enrique Wilson. 
Chad Ogea, who was left off the Indians' roster in their division 
series against the Red Sox, was on the mound. Every aspect of this 
matchup favored the Yankees, who needed to seize control immediately. 
Knoblauch, a favorite of the Cleveland fans since his mental mistake 
allowed the Indians to score the tie-breaking run in Game 2, led off 
for the Yankees and took two called strikes. Ogea then attempted to 
push Knoblauch away from the plate, but Knoblauch did not flinch; 
the pitch bounced off his left side. The game began among late afternoon 
shadows, the plate in darkness and an alley of light between the mound 
and home, and Derek Jeter said later that he was unable to see the 
ball as he struck out on five pitches. These were not the type of 
conditions in which batters take full, comfortable swings, and for 
this reason, among others, Yankees Manager Joe Torre may have felt 
compelled to press the action. With Paul O'Neill batting, Knoblauch 
broke from first base on a steal attempt, and shortstop Omar Vizquel 
began moving to cover second. O'Neill chopped a grounder that seemed 
destined for second base. ``The ball was coming right at me,'' Vizquel 
said. ``It was chest-high, no doubt a double play.'' But Ogea jumped 
and reached for the bouncer, the ball glancing off his glove and past 
Vizquel, into short left field, rolling far enough for Knoblauch to 
scamper to third base. Ogea could have been out of the inning. Instead, 
the Yankees had runners at first and third and one out. ``That changed 
everything,'' Vizquel said. ``The whole game turned at that moment.'' 
O'Neill stole second without a throw and Bernie Williams walked, filling 
the bases; Ogea's pitch total was 18 and counting, and then he fell 
behind Chili Davis, 2 balls and 1 strike. Davis then turned on a low 
pitch and laced a grounder to the right side of the infield. Through 
the shadows, Williams did not see the bouncer heading directly at 
him. Williams started moving toward second, the ball bearing down 
on him. If it had hit him, he would have been out automatically, and 
the Yankees' rally would have been stunted. ``I thought it was going 
to hit me for sure,'' Williams said. ``I don't know how it missed 
me.'' As Williams lifted his right foot, the ball skipped just under 
his instep, a margin of perhaps an inch, before ricocheting off the 
glove of Sexson and into short right field. Knoblauch scored, O'Neill 
scored, and Williams charged to third. Ogea hit Tino Martinez on the 
top of the foot with his next pitch, loading the bases again. Tim 
Raines grounded to second, with Cleveland's infield playing back, 
enabling Williams to rush across the plate unencumbered. The Yankees 
led 3-0, having received the initial burst of offense they needed, 
no matter how absurd. That gave Wells some room to absorb Cleveland's 
two runs in the bottom of the inning. The Yankees scored single runs 
in the second and fourth innings, taking a 5-2 advantage, before Jim 
Thome banged his third home run of the series, a solo shot that carried 
439 feet and caused Wells to exclaim ``Wow!'' with a smile on his 
face. The situation became serious for the Yankees in the bottom of 
the eighth. Wells struck out Vizquel to lead off the inning, his third 
consecutive strikeout and his 11th in the game. Wells, who sometimes 
throws 130 to 135 pitches, had reached 101. But with right-handed-batting 
Travis Fryman coming up, Torre strolled to the mound to replace Wells, 
who was incredulous, complaining that he had made only one bad pitch. 
When Wells' replacement, Jeff Nelson, hit Fryman with a fastball to 
bring the tying run to the plate, Wells violated protocol by stalking 
out of the dugout before the end of the inning. Manny Ramirez dumped 
a single in front of Raines, who was playing left field, driving the 
crowd of 44,966 into a comeback frenzy. Torre replaced Nelson with 
the closer Mariano Rivera, and no doubt Wells was pacing somewhere 
in the Yankees' clubhouse _ probably wondering, like many nervous 
Yankees fans, whether Torre had been guilty of over-managing. But 
Rivera threw a sinking fastball and Mark Whiten bounced to second, 
where Knoblauch began an inning-ending double play. Later, as the 
Yankees prepared to leave for New York, Steinbrenner walked into the 
bathroom, where Cone was shaving. ``Ready, buddy?'' Steinbrenner asked 
of his Game 6 starter. ``We're going to kick some rear end Tuesday.'' 
In another 48 hours. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>