<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981011.0103 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Almost every weekday morning, Jerri Wildrick pulls her gray van up 
to the headquarters of Berkshire Hathaway and delivers a salmon-pink 
copy of The Financial Times destined for Warren Buffett, Berkshire's 
founder and the nation's best-known and richest investor. Getting 
Buffett his paper means adding a 300-mile weekday round trip to the 
normal Chicago-area delivery routes. That extra effort is emblematic 
of Pearson PLC's, desire to make the year-old expansion of its flagship 
newspaper a success. The goal is to bring North American circulation 
up to 100,000 by the end of 1999 by marketing The Financial Times 
as the single-malt scotch of international financial journalism _ 
then to offer advertisers worldwide the lure of a U.S. readership 
with a taste, and income, for the finer things. But it may also show 
what a stretch it could be to pull this off. The audacious effort 
to push outward from the Financial Times' longtime beachheads in Washington 
and New York, the home base of The Wall Street Journal, was started 
a year ago. Now, measured against itself, The Financial Times _ known 
familiarly as the FT _ is doing quite well, thank you. Spurred by 
substantial price cuts, the Financial Times' circulation in the United 
States and Canada has risen to nearly 60,000 from about 37,800 a year 
ago. (Of the 60,000 about 12,000 are distributed free by airlines 
or hotels.) Worldwide, the newspaper's circulation is about 354,000, 
and early this year, for the first time, it sold more copies outside 
Britain than on its own ground. But measured against the Wall Street 
Journal's circulation of 1.8 million, The Financial Times is still 
a pipsqueak. That, the Financial Times' editors say, is not the point. 
Look at the journalism, urged Robert Thomson, U.S. managing editor, 
who pointed out that some early warnings on the Asian financial crisis, 
including skeptical pieces on Thai lending policies, ran in 1994, 
1995 and 1996, when ``tiger,'' not ``meltdown,'' was the word most 
frequently used in discussions of Asian economies. ``President Clinton's 
speech last month about global problems and global solutions and a 
global summit _ that was an FT speech,'' said Richard Lambert, the 
newspaper's editor. ``Those issues are what we're trying to address.'' 
Lambert spent the last year in New York helping guide the Financial 
Times' expansion in North America _ where it now has printing plants 
and distribution networks around New York, Chicago and Los Angeles 
_ before turning over control of U.S. coverage to Thomson. ``We only 
have a small portion of the niche we're after _ business people, policy 
makers and academics interested in international business,'' Lambert 
said. While the weekday editions and the expanded Saturday newspaper, 
with its wide-ranging political and cultural coverage, are read by 
Treasury Secretary Robert Rubin, House Speaker Newt Gingrich and Federal 
Reserve Chairman Alan Greenspan and people on Wall Street like Robert 
Hormats, a vice president at Goldman, Sachs &AMP; Co., the editors 
want more. In some regions of the world, The Financial Times is struggling. 
In Asia, where The Wall Street Journal started an Asian edition in 
1976, it outsells the Financial Times 59,000 to 14,000, a 4-to-1 margin. 
But in continental Europe, The Financial Times outsells the Journal 
102,000 to 54,000. Still, in both continental Europe and Asia, the 
Journal fields more full-time reporters. In the United States, where 
The Financial Times first began printing a North American edition 
in 1985, the newspaper has doubled its reporting staff in the last 
year and will soon add bureaus in Houston and Atlanta. But the new 
total is just 22 reporters, compared with several hundred at The Journal. 
Limited staff resources can push newspapers to mimic wire services, 
with reporters writing two or three stories daily. Thomson is putting 
more emphasis on longer-term reports. ``A story done well that is 
original, that nobody sees anywhere else, is far more valuable than 
two or three ordinary stories,'' he said in an interview last week. 
With an eye to offering an alternative to the news judgment of U.S.-based 
publications, the editors of the Financial Times' U.S. edition have 
recently played down their coverage of the Clinton-Lewinsky affair. 
Some subjects that are barely mentioned elsewhere, like the Chinese 
central bank's decision last week to shut down one of the country's 
largest financial institutions, received front-page display in The 
Financial Times. Thomson acknowledges that the built-in difficulties 
of remaking his newspaper's U.S. editions for a U.S. audience inevitably 
conflict with the daily push to get presses rolling. It is hard, he 
said, to get London-based editors to think like Americans. Marjorie 
Scardino, the Texas-born chief executive of Pearson, is widely credited 
with making The Economist magazine a should-read among Americans with 
an interest in foreign affairs. It is the success she achieved as 
chief executive of the Economist Group _ which is 50 percent owned 
by Pearson _ that Financial Times executives hope to emulate, although 
a newspaper with daily deadlines faces different challenges than a 
glossy weekly magazine. The 1997 Pearson annual report says that the 
company committed more than $25 million to the international expansion 
of The Financial Times, which began publication in Britain in 1894. 
Last year's expenditures were the first portion of a $160 million 
investment. Thus far in 1998, advertising revenues have increased 
to more than $1 million, from $600,000 in all of 1997. But the same 
financial troubles that The Financial Times has covered, from Thailand 
to Japan and from Russia to Brazil, may torpedo its plans for growth. 
A year ago, it cut its U.S. street price to $1, from $1.50, and its 
annual subscription price to $184 for an introductory one-year offer 
(the cost doubles on renewal), from about $450. Even so, with profits 
falling on Wall Street, will financial institutions like Merrill Lynch, 
Bankers Trust and others be able to justify pricey reading material 
for their executives? ``There is an audience of people who will undeniably 
buy The Financial Times,'' said Karen Elliott House, the president 
of Dow Jones' International Group. ``But the audience for all that 
British news in the FT and the rest of their global news is limited.'' 
But if compared to The Journal, the Financial Times seems a mouse 
scurrying at the feet of an elephant, it is a mouse with attitude. 
While Ms. House, a former foreign editor of The Journal, notes, ``We 
print a ton of international news,'' Thomson coolly replies: ``We'll 
never go head to head with The Wall Street Journal in covering U.S. 
corporate news. Because we're a global business newspaper, we are 
selective. People want a guide to the international events that matter.'' 
</TEXT>
</DOC>