<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981011.0216 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Unhappy about the two-year pay freeze in their contracts, New York 
City's municipal unions are warning that they will not accept such 
a freeze again, while several labor leaders are demanding an end to 
pattern bargaining, in which every union receives the same percentage 
raise. After a three-day meeting last week in which they mapped their 
bargaining strategy, municipal union leaders said their members were 
angry that they had not reaped any benefits from the city's record 
$2 billion budget surplus, which their pay freeze helped create. Indicating 
another area of friction in future labor talks, leaders of the powerful 
teachers and police unions vowed to increase their efforts to scrap 
pattern bargaining, insisting that it has left their members earning 
considerably less than their suburban counterparts. These leaders 
insisted that unless the city gives teachers and police officers larger 
percentage raises than other municipal workers, the city would find 
it increasingly difficult to attract qualified teachers and police 
officers. But an end to pattern bargaining faces major obstacles, 
including the opposition of many city unions and the likelihood that 
City Hall would tie any raises above the pattern to concessions that 
the police and teachers would find hard to accept. With contract negotiations 
expected to begin next year, the leaders of the city's unions signaled 
a tough new stance, insisting they would seek higher raises now that 
the city's finances have improved. Under their current five-year contracts, 
the municipal unions, representing more than 200,000 city workers, 
accepted a two-year pay freeze and then a 13 percent wage increase 
during the final three years. ``We will not take any more zeroes,'' 
said Stanley Hill, chairman of the multi-union bargaining committee 
and executive director of District Council 37, the giant union representing 
120,000 city workers. ``We made a tremendous sacrifice in this contract, 
and we feel very strongly that now there is a surplus, we should be 
rewarded because we have helped make this a better city.'' The tougher 
tone comes after Hill was embarrassed by an investigation into allegations 
of kickbacks and embezzlement at the union's locals. It also comes 
at a time when many union members are complaining that their wage 
increases have not kept up with prices or the city's soaring rents. 
City Hall officials said it was too early to discuss negotiating strategy 
because any resumption of bargaining was months away. They also noted 
that District Council 37's contract does not expire until 2000. One 
city official, who spoke only on condition of anonymity, said the 
union leaders were indulging in sour grapes because they accepted 
a frugal contract in 1995, when the city faced tough budgetary times, 
only to see the city's coffers fill up soon after the negotiations, 
thanks to the multi-year boom on Wall Street. ``They're in the middle 
of a contract,'' the official said. ``This sounds like general posturing.'' 
Union leaders said they fear that with Wall Street's current troubles 
and the economy slowing, the city, notwithstanding its current surplus, 
will argue in future negotiations that economic times are difficult 
and the workers must again make sacrifices. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>