<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981011.0163 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Ronda Elliott's 6-year-old daughter often comes home in tears after 
fending off taunts about her mother on the school bus. Her 10-year-son 
got so fed up with being picked on that he got into a brawl. And the 
man who owned the trailer Ms. Elliott was living in abruptly told 
her to find a new home. ``He said he didn't want people with the disease 
in his trailer house,'' Ms. Elliott said. The disease she has is AIDS, 
and in this dusty country town brushing the Ozarks, she has found 
it to be something people have a hard time accepting. Indeed, Ms. 
Elliott, 30, tried to keep it quiet, but with a population of only 
700, she said, if ``you know something, the other side of town knows 
it.'' Rural America is becoming a new frontier for AIDS as social 
taboos, remote locations, poverty and lack of education aggravate 
the experience of patients and of those trying to help them. And, 
as the HIV virus becomes more common in women nationally, health experts 
are especially worried about rural women because they are often more 
isolated, less independent and less assertive than other people. ``We 
are very concerned about the rural areas and small cities,'' said 
Gary West, a deputy director of the Centers for Disease Control and 
Prevention's division of HIV/AIDS prevention. ``The impact in the 
urban areas is actually coming down a bit, whereas the impact in rural 
areas and small cities is actually going up.'' Rural AIDS victims 
make up an increasing share of the nation's AIDS cases, partly because 
people in cities have more knowledge about and access to methods of 
prevention and treatment and partly because there is more migration 
between city and country than there used to be. While the numbers 
are small compared with cities _ rural cases rose from 5 percent in 
1990 to more than 7 percent of the total cases in 1997 _ the particular 
problems associated with AIDS in rural communities have made health 
experts believe the situation warrants special attention. Rural health 
experts say the incidence of AIDS in these communities may actually 
be higher because some people go to cities to get tested. The case 
of Nushawn Williams, the Brooklyn man accused last year of infecting 
13 women in Chautauqua County, N.Y., was an egregious example of the 
vulnerability of people in rural communities. Experts say various 
obstacles impede teaching prevention or giving rural AIDS patients 
emotional support and information about complying with the often-intricate 
new drug regimens. ``The inability to keep things confidential in 
small communities is a major, major problem,'' said Dr. Helene Gayle, 
director of the National Center for HIV, Sexually Transmitted Diseases 
and Tuberculosis Prevention. ``Everybody knows everybody's mother, 
sister, brother, father. You could drive by the parking lot and look 
at everybody's car and say, `Why does so-and-so need to go to an HIV 
prevention meeting?''' Living in a stretch of Ozark cattle and hog 
country, Lynn, who asked that she be identified only by her middle 
name, is so fearful her AIDS will be discovered that she travels 100 
miles to see a doctor in Springfield. She is too nervous to attend 
a support group there because even in the state's third-largest city, 
``there's a chance that someone might know someone you know.'' At 
the Tennessee children's hospital where she takes her 3-year-old daughter, 
who also has AIDS, she will not even tell other patients what the 
girl's illness is. And while Lynn, 29, would like to use the Internet 
to read up on news about AIDS, she will not, because the computer 
is at the school where her husband works. She said she and her husband 
``have reason to believe'' that whispers about her AIDS cost him his 
teaching job in the last rural town they lived in. Initially, she 
said, ``I told a few close friends, and a lot of those people are 
not my friends anymore. People still think in their mind `I don't 
want to be around that person, I don't want to drink from the same 
cup or I don't want to use the bathroom after you.' This is the Bible 
Belt of the Midwest and morally and religiously and everything, it's 
just not acceptable.'' In part because AIDS patients keep themselves 
so invisible, experts say, people in rural areas do not always see 
it as a threat. Not only do people not see as much of a need for AIDS 
education in their area, but people who are infected may wait until 
they exhibit symptoms to get tested, thereby increasing the chances 
that they may infect someone else. ``I just thought it was in big 
cities that it happened,'' said Teresa B., 24, who was told two years 
ago that she and her daughter, 4, both have AIDS. She recently attended 
a meeting for AIDS patients in southeastern Missouri, the first time 
state counselors have held one anywhere near her home in Cairo, Ill., 
she said. Some of the people with AIDS there ``didn't even know what 
it is,'' she said. In poor rural Missouri, AIDS counselors and medical 
professionals said, traditional efforts to educate people about prevention 
do not work. ``IV drug users are not going to walk down to the square 
in rural Missouri and pick up needles,'' said Stephen Fuhr, the former 
medical clinic administrator for the Joplin health department who 
said owners of pool halls, arcades and other teen hangouts in the 
city barred him from putting up informational posters. ``Gay men are 
not going to walk down Main Street in Small Town, USA, and start talking 
about AIDS prevention. Condom distributions are not a real popular 
idea in schools.'' Some rural schools are so uncomfortable with anything 
related to sex that they make it nearly impossible for AIDS to be 
discussed. Jim House, education director for the AIDS Project of the 
Ozarks in Springfield, said several schools told him he was welcome 
``as long as you don't mention anything about homosexuality or condoms.'' 
One principal told him not to bring a fellow speaker who had AIDS 
because ``he might use the bathroom or take a drink at the fountain.'' 
At Norwood High School, about 50 miles east of Springfield, House 
had to preview his presentation before a meeting of the school board, 
mayor, town officials and parents. ``I asked them, `How many of you 
are concerned because your kids are sexually active?' and they said, 
`Mr. House, you have to understand, we have an abstinence-only program 
here,''' he recalled. They let him speak to students only after ``I 
asked them how many pregnancies there were and they said eight, and 
I said, `Oh, are those test-tube babies from the biology lab?' '' 
Leon Pendergrass, the Norwood superintendent, said the school board 
feels homosexuality and birth control are ``not acceptable topics.'' 
He said that made health education difficult in a county with one 
of the highest rates of teen-age pregnancy in the state. ``It's just 
a matter of time'' until his district has an HIV-positive student, 
he said, ``and with the amount of teen-age drinking that we have and 
the sexually permissive atmosphere that exists, if we had one, we 
could have 20 pretty quick.'' Experts say education about sexual transmission 
of AIDS is especially important for both rural men and women because 
they are more likely to get AIDS from heterosexual sex and less likely 
to be infected by intravenous drug use. A recent survey of low-income 
women in Missouri found rural women were much less likely to use condoms 
than urban women because they believed they were unnecessary or had 
trouble asking their partners to use them, said William Yarber, senior 
director of the Rural Center for AIDS/Sexually Transmitted Disease 
Prevention at Indiana University and one of the study's authors. Nearly 
half the women thought that as long as they were unable to get pregnant, 
either because of a tubal ligation or another method of birth control, 
they did not have to use a condom to protect them from contracting 
the AIDS virus. Teresa O., 23, who lives in Portageville, Mo., said 
she did not always use condoms because her partners did not want to. 
Ms. Elliott said that with her boyfriend of seven years, she used 
condoms for quite a while, ``until he told me that he couldn't have 
kids.'' Some patients travel long distances to find doctors who feel 
comfortable or experienced enough to treat them. For rural people 
in poverty, scant bus service and inability to afford even a tank 
of gas can mean they only get help when they can get a ride. Once 
a month, Medicaid pays for both Teresa B. and Teresa O. to visit doctors 
in St. Louis, roughly 200 miles from each of their homes. Teresa O., 
whose 10-month-old daughter is also infected, said she has found no 
knowledgeable doctors near her southeastern Missouri town. Teresa 
B., who has had trouble sticking to some medications because she hates 
the side effects, believes most of the doctors in a Cairo medical 
clinic are ``scared to treat me.'' Ms. Elliott is lucky that her local 
physician, Dr. Scott Turner, agreed to treat her, but even he says 
he must consult infectious disease specialists because ``if a doctor 
has only a few AIDS patients, it's very, very difficult to keep up 
with all the AIDS research going on.'' Lack of access to support systems 
can exacerbate other problems. Melissa Smith, client services director 
for the AIDS Project of the Ozarks, said many patients she sees are 
poor and may have trouble with substance abuse or domestic violence. 
Some women, including Ms. Elliott, said that when they were told they 
had AIDS, they entertained thoughts of suicide. Others, like Teresa 
B., are wracked with guilt for infecting their children. ``Depression 
is a huge problem for HIV-positive women here _ disconnecting with 
life, hopelessness, isolation,'' Ms. Smith said. Urban women may get 
just as depressed but they are more likely to have access to counselors, 
support groups and open-minded friends. For a while, the AIDS Project 
had a telephone support group, where people did not even have to give 
their names, but the grant for that program ran out. West at the Centers 
for Disease Control and Prevention said more money was needed for 
rural programs and new approaches might be tried, like telephone consultations 
and greater use of the Internet. He said officials are considering 
asking a national AIDS organization to focus on rural communities, 
but the search has been complicated, he said, because most national 
groups are used to working in cities. Sue, 26, who lives in the tiny 
community of Dunawig, near Joplin, finds the secrecy and isolation 
especially trying because her 12-year-old daughter is at an age where 
she needs to talk to someone about the illness both her parents have. 
The girl recently asked to write a paper on AIDS for school, a way 
to focus on the subject without betraying her parents' secret. Lynn, 
who did not want her town mentioned, wonders how to tell her 3-year-old 
daughter and whether to notify schools and the parents of playmates. 
An articulate, personable woman with a girl-next-door face and a wholesome 
background, Lynn wishes she felt free to speak to others about AIDS 
so ``they could see a normal person that's married and has a family 
and is normal and someone they've known all their lives and they like. 
I feel bad because I could really be helping a lot of people.'' 
</TEXT>
</DOC>