<DOC>
<DOCNO> ABC19981204.1830.0872 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> CAPTION </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
We have used the change in the federal gun laws to focus on some debates. 
There are probably 40 million handguns in the U.S. tonight, ABC's 
James walker on this point -- are you better protected or not by keeping 
a gun in the house? Two Florida women. Two radically different experiences 
with handguns. Sammie foust's home was invaded by a robber two years 
ago. He was approximately where I am now and I turned around and saw 
him. Where, in the bedroom? That's correct. So you saw him standing 
right there? Right. And he came through the door? Barreling in on 
me. The robber beat her, cut her neck and face. Foust finally grabbed 
a gun she kept on her bed and killed him. Had I not had that handgun, 
I would be dead. Professor Gary kleck, who studies handgun use at 
Florida state university, says sammie foust's experience more onhan 
we are usually told. Evidence has consistently indicated that people 
who use guns in self-defense are less likely to be injured and less 
likely to lose property than otherwise identical victims who didn't 
have a gun to use. Dr. Arthur Kellerman runs the center for injury 
prevention at emory University. He takes the completely opposite view. 
The gun that represents the greatest danger to members of a household 
is the gun that's kept in the house for self-protection. Kellerman 
points to tragedies like accidental shootings and what happened to 
Carol pawley's husband. I ran out the side of the house and he was 
lying in the driveway. Was he alive? no. Clifton pawley was killed 
with his own handgun when he tried to stop a car thief. I feel he 
would still be here today. If he had not picked up his pistol and 
taken it outside? And flown out the door, right. It's hard enough 
to decide whether it is safe to have a gun. Even worse when you discover 
there is no agreement on how many incidents occur. There's no doubt 
that the number of defensive gun uses in the home greatly exceeds 
the numbers of accidents with guns in the home. According to professor 
kleck's studies, Americans use guns 2.5 million times a year to defend 
themselves. His self-defense use numbers are very inflated and, I 
think, don't jive with reality. Kellerman points to the annual justice 
department survey that finds not 2.5 million uses, but only 80,000. 
Both men agree that the chance of someone being robbed is very small. 
It comes down to what you believe and what risk you choose to take. 
James Walker, ABC News, New York. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>