<DOC>
<DOCNO> ABC19981204.1830.1462 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> CAPTION </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Finally this evening -- medicine on "the cutting edge." When you send 
in the clowns. Here in New York City this week, the big apple circus 
has been putting on its annual performance for children who are blind 
or deaf. 1600 children entertained by the clowns in ways which are 
unique to circuses everywhere. The blind children wore headsets. The 
goings on describedded to them much as a sports announcer describes 
a Game. Was it a bit easier for the deaf children? Laughter need not 
be heard to be appreciated. But let's take "A closer look" at this 
tonight, for what you are seeing here is the science of laughter. 
At New York City's Presbyterian hospital, the clowns of the big apple 
circus are an important part of the medical faculty. Hospitals can 
be a very scary place. Doesn't it just make sense that sick kids need 
to laugh. Behind the makeup, behind the program, is Michael Christensen, 
the co-founder of the big apple circus, and its clown care unit. I 
remember one time in the icu, a doctor turned to me and said clowns 
do not belong in the icu. I just turned to him and said, "neither 
do children." And there is no other time when a child will be in such 
need of laughter. To see the clowns in action is to see their value, 
to see their genuine scientific value. Dr. Maria new is head of pediatrics 
here. I remember one child had been in the hospital for over six months 
for a Kidney disorder. And then, all of a sudden, one day seeing the 
clowns, he began to get better. Does this mean that laughter is a 
legitimate medical treatment? Might it actually be a cure? It is not 
alternative medine. There is nothing alternative about having your 
body be part of the healing process. Professor Lee berk of the Loma 
Linda school of medicine in california has been studying laughter 
and medicine for 18 years. He comes to this conclusion. Laughter works 
as an agent on a body's stress hormones. Stress hormones that suppress 
the immune system. So that when we decrease those stress hormones, 
we actually allow for the immune system to crank itself back up. This 
group in professor berks' laboratory are watching the comedian Gallagher. 
And as they laugh, Dr. berk takes a blood sample. Under the microscope, 
he finds something else. Laughter increases the number of natural 
killer cells in the immune system. Natural killer cells go after and 
fight virally infected cells and fight tumor cells. Professor berk's 
findings have now been accepted by many in the medical community, 
confirming what clowns have understood throughout history. After all, 
the ancient greeks built their hospitals next to amphitheaters so 
the sick could be entertained. Michael Christensen understands that. 
What we do is create an environment in which healing can take place. 
Daniel diehl is 4 years old and has cancer. His father would like 
to believe that the clowns make a difference. He's constantly getting 
Needles and getting stuck with surgeries and such. He sees the clowns 
coming and he knows nothing's going to happen. He's just going to 
laugh. One thing we know, laughter cannot hurt. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>