<DOC>
<DOCNO> APW19981204.0562 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
The Russian ruble tumbled again Friday, trading at about 20 to the 
U.S. dollar and threatening to hit its lowest point since the country's 
economic crisis struck in August. The ruble's latest slide is an ominous 
sign for the government, which desperately wants to stabilize the 
economy as Russia heads into the difficult winter months. With President 
Boris Yeltsin hospitalized, and Prime Minister Yevgeny Primakov still 
struggling to implement a recovery plan, the economy continues to 
founder and remains vulnerable to additional shocks. Primakov said 
the government would not attempt to fix the ruble rate, and would 
continue to let dollars circulate freely in Russia. He acknowledged 
that the crisis had left the government with few good options. ``The 
government has found it has less room to maneuver in these conditions 
than it had a year or two ago,'' Primakov told a session of the World 
Economic Forum in Moscow. He blamed previous governments for the country's 
economic turmoil and said a lack of stability, as well as the loss 
of confidence in the country's future, had jeopardized economic reform 
efforts. ``In such conditions, the crisis can become permanent,'' 
he said. ``But the worst consequences of the crisis aren't the fall 
of the ruble, or the drop in production, but a total crisis of confidence 
between creditors and debtors, owners and managers, the government 
and the population.'' Primakov's government is urgently seeking foreign 
help, but International Monetary Fund chief Michel Camdessus came 
and left this week without giving any signal that a frozen loan package 
will be released soon. The country's financial markets have been largely 
wiped out by the economic crisis, which hit Russia in August after 
first ravaging many Asian economies last year. In this environment, 
the value of the ruble is one of the leading indicators of economic 
confidence, and it is again on the decline. After stabilizing temporarily 
at about 16 to the dollar, it has been falling in recent days. The 
official rate was down from 18.8 on Thursday to 19.6 on Friday, and 
in street trading it took more than 20 rubles to purchase one U.S. 
dollar. The ruble dipped below 20 to the dollar shortly after the 
country's economic crisis hit in August before making a modest comeback. 
The ruble was at about 6 to the dollar before the crisis. Meanwhile, 
the government announced that inflation has gone up more than 65 percent 
so far this year and is expected to top 70 percent by year's end. 
Russian inflation had been coming down after years of soaring prices 
and was expected to be in single digits this year until the country's 
economic crisis hit. If the government does not receive foreign assistance 
soon, it is expected to start printing more rubles to pay off millions 
of workers and pensioners who haven't received their money for months. 
But the additional money is almost certain to push inflation higher 
and would risk bringing back the hyperinflation that Russia suffered 
during the early 1990s. Russia's problems could get worse next year 
when its dlrs 17.5 billion dollar foreign debt falls due. Several 
officials have already said the country won't be able to meet these 
payments and have called for creditors to set new terms for payment. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>