<DOC>
<DOCNO> APW19981204.0565 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
The Palestinians will forge ahead with their part of the Wye River 
land-for-security agreement despite Israel's decision to suspend implementation, 
a senior aide to Palestinian leader Yasser Arafat said Friday. In 
a next step, the Palestinian Cabinet was to meet later Friday to discuss 
preparations for a Dec. 14 meeting in Gaza City _ to be attended by 
U.S. President Bill Clinton _ that is to usher in the second stage 
of the peace agreement. Israeli Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu 
announced earlier this week that he would not carry his obligations 
until Arafat dropped plans to unilaterally declare a state next year 
and accepted Israel's criteria for the release of prisoners. Netanyahu 
charged that since the agreement was signed Oct. 23, ``we have seen 
a constant attempt by the Palestinians to erode the agreement, to 
ignore the agreement, or to violate it flagrantly.'' The Clinton administration 
was angered by Netanyahu's decision, but also believes the crisis 
is not genuine and will be resolved before Clinton's arrival, the 
Israeli daily Yediot Ahronot said Friday, quoting unidentified U.S. 
officials. Criticizing Israel, U.S. State Department spokesman James 
Rubin has said the Wye agreement should be implemented as signed. 
On Thursday, U.S. Secretary of State Madeleine Albright called Netanyahu 
to discuss the dispute. Netanyahu told her that he was not imposing 
new conditions, but simply insisting that the Wye agreement be carried 
out in full, said Netanyahu adviser David Bar-Illan. ``I think the 
main misunderstanding was that the Cabinet decision was interpreted 
as new conditions,'' said Bar-Illan. ``The prime minister explained 
that (he was insisting) on compliance with commitments made as long 
as five years ago.'' However, Arafat adviser Ahmed Tibi said Netanyahu 
created the crisis to appease hard-liners and strengthen his shaky 
coalition. In response to the suspension of the accord, hawkish legislators 
withdrew their support for an early elections bill that was to have 
been brought before parliament Monday. The Palestinians demanded Friday 
that Israel resume implementation. ``As for the Palestinian Authority, 
it has and will continue to implement its part of Wye River agreement,'' 
said Arafat spokesman Nabil Abourdeneh. On Friday evening, the Palestinian 
Cabinet and the PLO Executive Committee were to discuss procedures 
for convening the Palestine National Council, the Palestinians' parliament-in-exile, 
and various Palestinian groups on Dec. 14. On that day, the PNC and 
the other groups are to ``reaffirm'' a letter to Clinton in which 
Arafat declares that clauses of the PLO founding charter calling for 
Israel's destructions are null and void. The session is being convened 
as part of the Wye accord. In other developments Friday, Palestinians 
briefly clashed with Jewish settlers and Israeli troops in two land 
protests. In one incident near the Jewish settlement of Ateret, some 
50 Palestinians from the village of Umm Safa blocked an access road 
with rocks and a washing machine to protest the expropriation of village 
land. Palestinians stoned a settler bus, but no one was hurt. Soldiers 
in a jeep accompanying the bus fired in the air. Near the West Bank 
village of Turmus Ayya, some 100 Palestinians held Muslim prayers 
on land slated for expropriation by Israel. Four settlers arrived 
and fired in the air, and the Palestinians gradually dispersed. Also 
Friday, a spokesman for Israeli Foreign Minister Ariel Sharon said 
the minister was to leave this weekend for meetings with Albright 
and senior Clinton administration officials in Washington. The first 
item on the agenda will be the latest crisis with the Palestinians, 
said Sharon spokesman Raanan Gissin. Sharon will also raise his ideas 
for a permanent peace agreement with the Palestinians. Such an accord 
would have to set final borders and determine the status of Jerusalem. 
Sharon reportedly hopes to postpone the May 1999 deadline for reaching 
agreement, and compensate the Palestinians by granting them near-independence 
in the areas they already control. Final status negotiations were 
formally launched last month, but the real work has not yet begun. 
Clinton will discuss final status proposals separately with Netanyahu 
and Arafat when he arrives in the region Dec. 12 in what would be 
the first serious deliberations on the subject, the Haaretz daily 
said. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>