<DOC>
<DOCNO> APW19981204.0258 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
France and Britain on Friday agreed to intensify their defense cooperation 
in order to react more quickly to international crises such as Kosovo. 
Defense Ministers Alain Richard of France and George Robertson of 
Britain, who met onboard two frigates, signed an agreement that would 
allow for greater cooperation in crisis management and military operations. 
French President Jacques Chirac, French Prime Minister Lionel Jospin 
and British Prime Minister Tony Blair were also expected to sign an 
agreement on European defense before Friday's closing of a two-day 
summit in the Brittany port town of St. Malo. ``The text has already 
been worked out,'' Marc El Nouchi, an aid to Jospin, said Friday morning. 
Though differences on defense policy remain between the Paris and 
London, Chirac Spokeswoman Catherine Colonna said late Thursday the 
leaders were likely to sign an accord on European defense that would 
provide for closer Franco-British cooperation. The EU is sensitive 
to criticism that it reacts too slowly and in disjointed fashion to 
crises such as Kosovo, forcing the United States to take the lead 
in resolving continental conflicts. France has been pushing for an 
independent European defense, starting with a European pillar within 
NATO. But Britain has said NATO must remain the cornerstone of defense 
and security. Blair, Chirac and Prime Minister Lionel Jospin attended 
the summit, which began Thursday evening and was to last until noon 
on Friday. Topics on the agenda included EU tax levels, small business, 
and cooperation in Africa, where both countries have former colonies. 
A possible merger between British Aerospace PLC and Germany's Daimler 
Benz Aerospace is also expected to be discussed. But defense and security 
were seen dominating the meeting. Blair is accompanied by Deputy Prime 
Minister John Prescott, Chancellor Gordon Brown, Foreign Secretary 
Robin Cook and Defense Secretary Robertson. France is also represented 
by Defense Minister Richard and Foreign Minister Hubert Vedrine. Officials 
met in Paris on Wednesday for three hours to discuss defense. Britain 
and France, both nuclear powers and U.N. Security Council members, 
traditionally have been at odds over the role of the European Union. 
But both now recognize the need for Europe to cope militarily when 
the United States does not get involved in crises. Paris and London 
have stressed there are no plans yet to abolish the Western European 
Union, the EU's fledgling defense arm, or to merge it into the European 
Union. The summit comes follows a Franco-German summit earlier this 
week in Potsdam. French officials say the summit, unprecedented in 
terms of the number of officials attending, is the result of a change 
in British policy toward the EU since Blair's Labor Party took over 
from the Conservative Party in May 1997. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>