<DOC>
<DOCNO> APW19981204.0850 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
World champion Fiji avenged its defeat here last year, beating title 
holder New Zealand 31-22 to land the Emirates International Trophy 
in a thrilling final Friday night. The Fijians, who were narrowly 
beaten by the All Blacks in the recent Commonwealth Games final in 
Kuala Lumpur, ran in five tries to four, with scrum half Rokini Kiliraki 
sealing victories with three conversions. Kiliraki, named Player of 
the Tournament, set up many moves and helped the Fijians keep up the 
pressure throughout the final, with some judicious passing and swerves. 
``We were determined to make up for our performance in Dubai last 
year and we did just that,'' Fiji manager Jone Buakula said after 
picking up the dlrs 25,000 first prize. ``This is a wonderful moment 
for us,'' he added. ``I am very proud of the team for the spirit they 
have showed and want to thank all the fans for their great support 
over the last two days.'' New Zealand took the lead in the final when 
the powerful Brad Fleming went over for the first of his two tries 
from an overlap. But the Fijians grabbed the lead through a converted 
try by Jope Tuikabe. Sirilo Lala then increased the advantage. But 
the New Zealanders were on level terms at half-time, when skipper 
Dallas Seymour passed to Fleming who touched down under the posts, 
presenting an easy conversion for Damien Karuana. The irrepressible 
Marika Vunibaka pulled Fiji ahead immediately after the break using 
his pace and build to power over 70 meters, and Kiliraki added the 
extra points for a 19-12 lead. Amasio Valence gave New Zealand a lifeline 
when he muscled over for a try after Fleming had made the initial 
run along the left side. Karuana failed with the conversion. Fiji 
then took control of the game through quick tries by Kiliraki and 
Lala as the New Zealanders committed handling errors, though skipper 
Dallas Seymour scored the final try of the match for the All Blacks. 
``Fiji maintained pressure on us and the better team won today,'' 
said New Zealand manager Ross Thurston. ``But we will meet again soon.'' 
France won the Emirates Plate event, drubbing South African side Natal 
40-7 in the final to make up for its earlier elimination from the 
main event. Fiji and New Zealand had contrasting paths to the final, 
with Western Samoa stretching the reigning world sevens champions 
before going down 29-21 in a stirring semifinal that brought out the 
best in both sides. The Samoans, who came from behind to beat Scotland 
in the quarters, took the fight to the Fijians, but left their charge 
too late after being 22-0 down at the first half. Marika Vunibaka, 
last year's Player of the Tournament, displayed his punishing speed 
to ground two tries while scrum half Rokini Kiliraki, Sirilo Lala 
and Vilomoni Deasau scored one apiece. Orene Ai'i almost saw Samoa 
through to a remarkable victory with his pace, upsetting the fine 
rhythm of the Fijians. But despite a try from him and one each from 
Afato Sp'oalo and Saito Sililito - a stunning effort after a raking 
run by Ai'i - the Samoans were unable to catch up with the Fijians, 
who used their typically aggressive tackling to stop their rivals. 
New Zealand made use of their superior sevens skills to oust Australia 
29-0, with young star Rico Gear planting two tries, covering a distance 
of over 60 meters to score the second try, after Australian Stephen 
Devine's move towards the New Zealand try line was foiled. The Australians 
had their chances, but messed up meters in front of the Kiwi try line 
and had no answer when their opponents began to run the ball from 
wing to wing. Brad Fleming, one of the lynchpins of the Kiwi campaign 
here, scored the first try while Craig de Goldie and Rua Tipoki planted 
one apiece. Fiji overcame gutsy Canada 35-12 in the quarters while 
New Zealand overwhelmed Zimbabwe 45-5, though the African side had 
the distinction of being the first team to breach the defense of the 
reigning Dubai champions this year. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>