<DOC>
<DOCNO> APW19981204.1147 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
The Palestinians on Friday took the next step toward carrying out 
the land-for-security agreement even though Israel has suspended implementation 
for now. The PLO Executive Committee began preparing for a mid-December 
gathering in Gaza City under the auspices of U.S. President Bill Clinton 
that is to reaffirm earlier pledges that the Palestinians no longer 
seek Israel's destruction. However, a new crisis with Israel was already 
shaping up at a time when the current one was still unresolved. Under 
the Wye River peace agreement, the Palestine National Council, the 
Palestinians' parliament-in-exile, and various Palestinian groups 
are to meet on Dec. 14. On that day, the PNC and the other groups 
are to ``reaffirm'' a letter to Clinton in which Palestinian leader 
Yasser Arafat declares that clauses of the PLO founding charter calling 
for Israel's destructions are null and void. Israel has maintained 
that the PNC is required to take a vote by a show of hands. The Palestinians 
have said the Wye agreement does not call for a vote. ``There will 
be no vote in this meeting,'' Zakaria Agha, a PLO Executive Committee 
member, said after the Friday evening meeting. After the PNC session, 
five percent of the West Bank are to be transferred from sole Israeli 
control to joint jurisdiction. David Bar-Illan, a senior adviser to 
Israeli Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu, suggested Friday that there 
would be no handover of land without a PNC vote. ``It has been made 
clear that Israel will not withdraw troops if the Palestinians do 
not adhere to their commitments under the Wye agreement,'' Bar-Illan 
said. ``We will bring it up with the Americans.'' As part of the Wye 
agreement, the Arafat letter listing the PLO charter clauses considered 
revoked is to undergo a three-stage process of approval. Last month, 
the 18-member PLO Executive Committee reaffirmed the letter. On Dec. 
10, the 120-member Palestinian Central Council, which is comprised 
of senior Palestinian officials and legislators, will approve the 
letter by vote, Agha said, citing Friday's decision. The final step 
is the PNC session at the Shawa Cultural Center in Gaza City on Dec. 
14. About 1,500 people will be gathered to hear speeches by Clinton 
and Arafat. The PNC has more than 500 members, including many who 
live abroad. Also attending will be members of various Palestinian 
groups. The PLO Executive Committee asked the PNC chairman, Salim 
Zanoun, on Friday to begin sending out invitations for the Dec. 10 
and the Dec. 14 gatherings, Agha said. Ahead of the Clinton visit, 
some 2,500 Palestinians jailed by Israel for anti-Israeli activities 
prepared to launch a hunger strike to press for their early release. 
The hunger strike, to begin Saturday, will be accompanied by protest 
marches and commercial strikes, all aimed at sending a message to 
Clinton that the peace agreement cannot proceed until the dispute 
over the prisoners has been settled, said Issa Karakeh, head of the 
Palestinian Prisoners' Association. The criteria for prisoner releases 
have become a major point of contention between Israel and the Palestinian 
Authority. The dispute has contributed to the latest crisis which 
culminated in Netanyahu's announcement earlier this week that he was 
suspending the upcoming West Bank troop withdrawal. Netanyahu said 
he would hold up the accord until Arafat dropped plans to unilaterally 
declare a state next year and accepted Israel's criteria for releasing 
prisoners. Netanyahu complained that the Palestinian Authority repeatedly 
violated the agreement, including by inciting against Israel in the 
dispute over the prisoners. ``We have seen a constant attempt by the 
Palestinians to erode the agreement, to ignore the agreement, or to 
violate it flagrantly,'' he said. The Clinton administration has been 
angered by Netanyahu's decision, but also believes the crisis is not 
genuine and will be resolved before Clinton's arrival, the Israeli 
daily Yediot Ahronot said Friday, quoting unidentified U.S. officials. 
During their meeting Friday night, the Palestinian Cabinet noted American 
disapproval of Israel's action while reaffirming their own intention 
to keep to the schedule stipulated by the Wye Accord. ``The Palestinian 
leadership,'' a cabinet statement read, ``will continue for its part 
to implement the Wye Accord according to the timetable especially 
since the American administration has clearly rejected the Israeli 
conditions.'' 
</TEXT>
</DOC>