<DOC>
<DOCNO> CNN19981204.2130.0130 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> CAPTION </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
The chairman of the Judiciary committee, meanwhile, is under scrutiny 
tonight for his definition of lying. Henry Hyde's current belief seems 
to contradict what he said in another famous congressional hearing 
11 years ago. Frank Sesno explains. As chairman of the house committee 
sitting in judgment of President Clinton, Henry Hyde has been quite 
direct about what he thinks of lying under oath. Lying poisons justice. 
But back in 1987, Hyde Sang a different tune when another U.S. official 
charged with lying before Congress wound up before a congressional 
committee, lieutenant colonel Oliver north. Why did you have to lie 
in Congress? Well, it's very simple when you have a covert action 
that everybody agrees with. Isn't that correct? When you have a controversial 
one, then you have a whole different problem. Let me give you a quotation 
that you might carry with you. "A strict observance of written laws 
is doubtless one of the high duties of a good citizen, but it is not 
the highest. The laws of necessity, of self-preservation, of saving 
our country when in danger are of higher obligation." And that same 
person said, quote, "on great occasions, every good officer must be 
ready to risk himself in going beyond the strict line of law when 
the public preservation requires it." The person who said those things 
had a little bit to do with the founding of this country. We have 
a monument to him. It's called the Jefferson memorial. Oliver north 
and Bill Clinton. Are the cases that different? Have the rules changed? 
Or is Henry Hyde a hypocrite? Today's "Los Angeles times" raises the 
question in an article headlined, "Hyde's view on lying is back haunting 
him." Congressman Hyde would not comment on the story. But Oliver 
north, the central character in those hearings 11 years ago and now 
a radio talk show host, offered his take. He says there's no comparison 
and no hypocrisy. Is Henry Hyde a hypocrite? Not at all. Henry Hyde 
is commenting on the fact that the Reagan administration was accused 
of the following things -- of not revealing everything that they were 
doing to save the lives of Americans being tortured to death in dungeons 
in Beirut and trying to keep a freedom fighter alive in central america. 
That the Congress had sent into combat. Now, 1998, fast-forward 11 
years. Henry Hyde is commenting on the fact that the chief executive 
officer of the United States of America the president, has raised 
his right hand, promised to tell the truth, the whole truth, and nothing 
but the truth and then lied as soon as he raised his hand. They can't 
get it straight at "the L.A. times," "the New York Times" or anywhere 
else. Hyde says he's doing his job, his constitutional duty, criticism 
notwithstanding. Frank Sesno, CNN, Washington. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>