<DOC>
<DOCNO> CNN19981204.0130.0123 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> CAPTION </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
The house Judiciary committee is showing signs it might be wrapping 
up President Clinton's impeachment inquiry. Thursday, committee republicans 
decided the inquiry will not include any allegations of campaign fund-raising 
abuses. Three republican house Judiciary committee members tell CNN, 
chairman Henry hyde said justice department memos related to alleged 
campaign finance irregularities contained nothing that would fall 
within the realm of the inquiry. Meanwhile, CNN learned 20 republican 
congressmen are circulating a petition advocating censure of President 
Clinton as an alternative to impeachment. House speaker-elect Bob 
Livingston says if the committee doesn't finish its work by the end 
of next week, the inquiry probably will stretch into next year. Livingston 
says he wants the full house to vote on any articles of impeachment 
in the next two weeks. This is not something that should be taken 
lightly. It's not something that should be -- that should invoke pressure 
from any one sector of the Congress or the other. Each member of Congress 
has the responsibility to search his heart and his conscience and 
judge for himself the importance to his constituents, what his vote 
should be. And I think for us to arbitrarily prejudge the conditions 
under which he casts that vote is unfair at this point, because we 
really don't know what the recommendations of the Judiciary committee 
are going to be. House Judiciary committee chairman Henry Hyde has 
granted a request from White House lawyers for investigative materials 
related to the Monica lewinsky matter. Hyde says the president's lawyers 
can have most of the information. And he set a Friday deadline for 
them to produce a list of witnesses they wish to call to defend the 
president against impeachment. The primary charge is perjury. Charles 
Bierbauer looks at what that means. i do. President Clinton's lawyers 
concede he has not been forthcoming, but contend he's not broken the 
law. The president did not commit perjury. Perjury, as federal law 
would instruct jurors, is the willful giving of false testimony -- 
knowing the testimony is false as to a Material matter. It's a significant 
matter that impacts on the issue that the person is being questioned 
about. Rogers says what's material is difficult to pin down, often 
in the eye of the beholder. But so is truth, as the house Judiciary 
committee found this week when it examined perjury. I'm having trouble 
reconciling how you mislead without lying. If you tell a literal truth 
that you understand will mislead, that is misleading without literally 
lying. The president picked his words carefully in his grand jury 
deposition. It depends upon what the meaning of the word "is" is. 
That's a true answer. So that can't be perjury, because there was 
no sexual relationship at the time of the deposition. And "is" is 
the present tense. Perjury also cannot be ambiguous. Jury instructions 
say, "if you should find that the question was clear but the answer 
was ambiguous and one reasonable interpretation of such answer would 
be truthful, then such answer would not be false." You are free to 
infer that my testimony is that I did not have sexual relations as 
I understood this term to be defined. Clinton's attorneys argue the 
terms "sexual affair" and "sexual relationship" are inherently ambiguous 
and when used without definition cannot possibly amount to perjury. 
To the public and political eye, the president may have lied, dissembled 
and misled, explaining his relationship with Monica Lewinsky. But 
the legal standard is more precise. Were the president's answers false 
or technically true, willfully misleading or an ambiguous escape from 
a perjury charge? Charles Bierbauer, CNN, Washington. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>