<DOC>
<DOCNO> CNN19981204.1130.1463 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> CAPTION </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
If you plan on picking up some Indian Curry for dinner tonight, the 
internet is now offering the perfect accompaniment. Sanjay Singh has 
more. If you thought you'd seen it all when it comes to virtual reality, 
think again. At the akash Indian restaurant in central London on a 
winter afternoon, history, as well as some rather special Curry, were 
being made. The occasion? The creation of the world's first ever virtual 
reality Indian restaurant. It's a video titled "tandoori nights," 
described as the perfect companion to an Indian take-out meal. The 
producers say it attempts to give viewers an authentic feel of sitting 
in an Indian restaurant without actually being there. sir? Can I take 
your order? Can I take your order, sir? The video has been shot as 
though the camera is the viewer, and the fifth person at the table. 
How did you actually come up with the idea of "tandoori nights"? And 
also who you think is actually going to go out and buy it? We came 
up with the idea for a video which was going to be a virtual Indian 
restaurant really by tapping into what we thought was a popular vein 
in the country. There's a fascination in England with Indian food 
and bangladeshi cuisine, and it's taken over to such an extent that 
the English take-away food has become of secondary importance. So 
we came up with idea of providing the video tape that would offer 
everything that an Indian restaurant would offer, in the privacy of 
your home. Restaurant industry watchers say a virtual reality video 
couldn't have come at a better time, this being an era when the British 
tourist authority in its latest guide for international visitors states 
that Curry is now Britain's national dish. What's going to happen 
is that there are a lot of people who like Indian food. And now, some 
are called "curryholics." Who will do anything to have that Indian 
restaurant experience. It'll appeal to them as they're having their 
food. They're gonna have fun watching this. While they have their 
meal at home. It's gonna appeal to quite a lot of people, because 
Indian food has become so addictive for some British people. But some 
people might view it as a gimmick, something which creator Mark ubsdell 
accepts as a possible danger. Still, he hopes viewers will also get 
to see another aspect of "tandoori nights" -- its ability to tap into 
a trend which he describes as "laddism" -- The fascination among young 
British men to go out for a few beers and a Curry at the end of an 
evening. The video "tandoori nights" is already on sale in Britain 
for about $17. And while it's still uncertain whether it'll be a hit 
or not, what is sure is that for now at least, the Indian eating experience 
is here to stay. Sanjay Singh, CNN, London. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>