<DOC>
<DOCNO> MNB19981204.2100.2390 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> CAPTION </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Another name being mentioned in political circles is a -- as a possible 
presidential candidate is that of successful and popular New York 
City mayor Rudolph Giuliani. Term limits won't let him seek another 
term running the city. That has the journalists covering him looking 
elsewhere. This Sunday "the New York Times" city ha bureau chief Dan 
Barry writes about the mayor for the magazine. He joins us tonight 
from our New York studios in Rockefeller center. There is a great 
photo caption in this article that caught my eye in addition to the 
phrase that Rudolph Giuliani is so New York he could be the yankee 
mascot. It says -- it's a picture of the mayor with a governor of 
South Carolina -- riding high with governor David beasley. Beasley 
would lose the election. Giuliani has been kind of feeling out the 
Turf outside of New York. What has he learned? Well, first, of course, 
you point out the only thing I didn't write. no. I said the Yankee 
thing. no. I understand. Say that again? What has he learned in these 
forays outside of New York? Is there any great appear tied for this 
-- appetite for this man who has proved he can run this city? yes. 
There is. I think a lot of peopleind him engaging and smart. What 
about the right in the republican party? What are his stands on the 
issues that are bellwethers with them like abortion? That's a problem 
-- abortion and gay rights. That was a problem for him, but they seem 
to be attracted to his stance on crime and welfare and fiscal conservatism. 
He seems to be able to attract them on those points, and the other 
issues don't really get discussed, at least not this time around. 
It's a great article. He seems to be very candid with you during the 
interview during which he mentions higher office, talks about it openly 
in response to your questions. Even talks about appointed office. 
What does he mean? I think he's holding out the possibility that if 
a republican is elected president in 2000, say George bush, he might 
be able to get an appointed office as attorney general, certainly 
his record as a prosecutor and a Justice department official served 
him well and would be something he would like. Bush would like. What 
is the Senate picture in New York? Most people know that Alfonse D'Amato 
has been defeated by Schumer. What are we looking at next time? The 
next time is Moynihan's seat. Mayor Giuliani said he would never challenge 
Daniel Patrick Moynihan but when Moynihan announced last month he 
would not seek re-election, that kind of opened up the field a little 
bit and Giuliani's people are saying that's a very real possibility 
for him. Is there any debate that the mayor can sell, outside of New 
York, what he's done to New York? The phrase he likes to say is -- 
his quality of life issues, the fact that New York is a much more 
livable city. You're talking outside of New York state? Yeah. It might 
be a little fass I will tore him to apply that to the entire country. 
I don't know what he knows about hog farming or anything like that. 
But it does seem to touch on the issues of particularly fiscal conservatism, 
as I said welfare and crime, that people seem to be drawn to, and 
gets to point out that he brought down crime and murder in New York 
City dramatically. And people like to know that Times Square is safe. 
Dan Barry is the New York City hall bureau chief. The piece appears 
in this Sunday's "New York Times" magazine. Thanks for coming on the 
air with us. Thank you for your time. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>