<DOC>
<DOCNO> MNB19981204.2100.0069 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> CAPTION </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
First off tonight, the past several evenings, some of the America's 
largest employers have been supplying much of the news for this broadcast 
in the form of huge layoffs and job losses affecting tens of thousands 
of American families, right before the holidays. Today came news of 
a different kind from Washington. Astoundingly good employment numbers 
showing unemployment at a six-month low and even with all the recent 
headlines, it shows an American work force very close to full employment. 
We're going to begin there tonight. NBC news correspondent Ann Compton 
starts us off. On the day the nation's unemployment level hits its 
lowest level in six months, the first of 48,000 pink slips hand out 
at Boeing in Seattle. What can do you? You get your notice and you're 
out the door. But Seattle like the rest of the country is enjoying 
an economic boom. Historical low unemployment and a job growth rate 
twice the national average spur the by high-tech businesses. We have 
a large opening of jobs which held very comparable wages to what the 
Boeing workers are presently used to. In fact a software trade group 
including Microsoft says the industry will need 64,000 more workers 
by 2001. It's boom times in the construction injury, too. 47,000 new 
jobs last month. As low mortgage rates push up home sales. Douglas 
county, Colorado -- the fastest growing county in America. 43 hundred 
new homes built in the past year. In Hinsdale, Illinois, Marsha Elliott 
can't hire workers fast enough. We're going to have a shortage of 
qualified skilled labor so this is definitely a field to be in. But 
it's American factory workers who are in trouble today the Zenith 
plant outside Chicago closes its doors -- 12,000 jobs gone. Johnson 
& Johnson announces 4100 layoffs. Almost a quarter million manufacturing 
jobs lost since March. Former labor secretary Robert reich says these 
people will find new jobs, but -- Chances are the service job that 
you then find is not going to pay nearly as much or have benefits 
attached to it. On average, a worker in the service sector makes $140 
less a week than a Factory worker. Reich says the U.S. is an oasis 
of prosperity in a global economy where half the world is in a recession, 
hurting exports. Causing American manufacturers toind more efficient 
ways to run their businesses. A trend that's reached all the way to 
Fairfax, Vermont. Population 2900, home to an American classic for 
20 years. Today the Milton Bradley plant that makes the wooden tiles 
for the game scrabble shut down. Its parent company Hasbro wants out 
of the tile producing business leaving the 57 workers to spell layoffs 
while the rest of the economy is booming. Anne Thompson, NBC news, 
Chicago. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>