<DOC>
<DOCNO> MNB19981204.2100.1100 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> CAPTION </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Continuing our look at the impeachment inquiry tonight, we're joined 
this evening by two people close to this debate -- Patrick Murphy 
a democratic strategist and Mike Collins from the republican national 
committee, both men with us from Washington. We should explain Patrick 
has been at a formal event tonight and doesn't have a job at a restaurant. 
Was it cocky or just wrong for the White House to float out the rumor 
they weren't going to engage in the invitation to defend the president 
on the hill? I think that the White House responding to the signals 
being sent by the hill. The chairman of the Judiciary and others were 
letting it out very carefully that -- that things seemed to be cooling 
down. They decided not to go after campaign finance, after 48 hours 
of putting it on the front burner. So the White House was reacting 
again to what we're hearing from the hill. Mike Collins, what has 
changed over the last 24 to fours that has led to such a change in 
the White House reaction? I think there is a growing sentiment that 
this matter should not go unpunished, that this matter should go to 
the Senate and that's a sentiment that's developed not only among 
republican moderates but indeed among some democrats. Dershowitz did 
the President a lot of harm last week and the president himself did 
himself a lot of harm with his 81 answers. They were flippant and 
irrelevant and the committee and Congress is quite angry. Judge higginbotham, 
another one of the witnesses is on this broadcast a Little bit later 
on. How did dershowitz harm the president? I think the committee resented 
the attitude that dershowitz showed. His answers were flippant, disrespectful, 
they were combative. Frankly he acted more like he was on a talk show 
than testifying before a Major committee, and the president now has 
indicated he's going to continue this symposium. They've asked for 
24 witnesses for a symposium on the constitutional standard of impeachment 
and prosecutorial misconduct. What's become apparent, Brian, is that 
this president has no intention nor do his lawyers of defending himself 
or of putting up a defense. What they really want to do again is attack 
the accuser, run out the clock, and take this matter into the next 
year, for a group that wanted to just move on, now they're trying 
to drag their feet. Patrick Murphy, this may not be the right time 
to give chairman Hyde a Symposium, judging how the dershowitz testimony 
went over. The idea that the democrats and the president and his lawyers 
can't have three or four days to combat four years and however million 
dollars of investigation against him I think is absurd. I think they 
need the time, and I think the fact that -- I think a lot of what's 
happening on the hill is that congressmen -- both democrats and republicans 
-- are realizing that when their obituaries are written, this is going 
to be the lead. It doesn't always -- it doesn't necessarily just follow 
bsk for the rest of his life but each of these members have to decide 
are they going to vote yes or no on articles of impeachment for this 
president. Frankly I think a lot of republicans are having second 
thoughts and that's why you see the republican leadership whipping 
this vote like it was a Balanced budget act. However, we also see 
a reaction by the White House, Patrick, that would indicate that a 
lot of folks are realizing that this is going to be on their resume 
forever. It's tightening up. The Clinton White House which has really 
been quite cock sure for over one term now is kind of showing a switch 
-- a clear swing to defense. Is it not? I think they are, and I think 
in order to survive this process and to protect the president once 
he leaves office, I think they're being much more aggressive than 
they have been, and part of it is just the gravity of the charges 
that are being considered -- that will be considered by the judiciary 
committee. Mike Collins, do you think the incoming 106th Congress 
is really substantially a different body, enough so that the White 
House chances suddenly improve after January? no. I don't think so. 
I think that fundamentally members of Congress are going to be confronted 
with a choice. Do we sd this matter to the Senate, or do we let these 
matters go unpunished? Do we send the message to the country and to 
witnesses in the future, to our children that you can lie under oath 
and get away with it? Those members don't feel comfortable with that, 
and the closer they get to the vote, the less comfortable they're 
getting with that sentiment. Chairman Hyde was comfortable with it 
in 1989 on the Iran-contra issue when he was defending Oliver north 
both in Congress and in the courts. I'm glad you mentioned that, because 
I don't think what we're talking about here, murph, are allegations 
that the president was lying for the good of the country. This time 
the president was lying for -- to cover his own -- If you're lying 
for the right issues, it's OK. You're dressed too well to argue. I 
knew somebody would bring that up, though. Thank you both for coming 
on tonight. Thank you. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>