<DOC>
<DOCNO> MNB19981204.2100.0753 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> CAPTION </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Following up for a look now on where things stand in the impeachment 
inquiry, a story still changing tonight. We are joined this evening 
by Capitol Hill veteran and MSNBC political analyst norah O'Donnell 
who writes for "roll call," a newspaper on the hill. She joins us 
tonight from Washington the nothing lika report of three articles 
of impeachment to get the White House suddenly involved in this suddenly. 
That's exactly right. There are two big headlines this evening. One, 
the Judiciary committee plans to vote on three articles of impeachment 
-- Perjury, abuse of power, and obstruction of justice. The second 
big headline that the White House now wants three to four days to 
present their case. That means, of course, another week. That means 
that this full house will either be voting on it the week of christmas, 
or it could be pushed into the 106th Congress. That is definitely 
what the White House wants. They think that environment, after January, 
with the new Congress, there are more democrats in that Congress remember 
after the November elections, they think they'll have a better chance 
then of blocking a vote to impeach this president. So what of the 
White House concerns that suddenly the house Judiciary committee, 
plain and simple, had a pretty good case on its hands? Again, remember, 
mid last week the White House was saying we're going to probably take 
a pass on this and not participate and give up our chance to defend 
the president. That's exactly right. Remember we had moderate republicans 
like Pete king of New York who said there could be as many as 15 to 
20 republicans who defect and that impeachment would fail on the full 
house floor. Members of the republican leadership said, OT true. It's 
going to be much closer than that. It could be within votes. There 
are some conservative democrats who will vote to impeach this president. 
The White House realizes it is want an easy ride for them, that in 
fact this vote on perjury specifically, the article of impeachment 
that comes up, could in fact pass, and then would end up in the hands 
of senators who could hold a trial on this. The White House -- it 
would benefit them to delay this, as they're suggesting tonight, with 
wanting to call many new witnesses again to this 106th Congress. They 
want to delay in order to find a more favorable political environment 
for them. So some in the White House actually see a Senate trial with 
rehnquist presiding as chief judge of at least a measurable possibility. 
It is a possibility and in fact people at the White House have indicated 
that tonight. They're going to play hardball here. The White House 
attorneys are going to go before this committee and not only are they 
going to argue aggressively on behalf of the president, but they want 
to use several days for it. This has turned all of this into chaos. 
Of course, the chairman of the Judiciary committee said, we'll be 
done any new year's. That's when I want to have it done by, but today's 
news opens up the possibility that it could extend into next year. 
Norah'Donnell, thank you very much for coming on tonight. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>