<DOC>
<DOCNO> MNB19981204.2100.1558 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> CAPTION </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
When Elmira, New York reaches 70 degrees in the December afternoon, 
something must be wrong. We go to WNBC-television in New York, meteorologist 
Janice huff. What is going on? I gather it was a little too hot for 
you today? Just unusual. yes. That's exactly what it is, unusual. 
The weather is topsy-turvy not only across the United States but in 
the world. In places like Europe and Russia, temperatures well below 
normal with highs barely making the 20's. They're experiencing weird 
weather as are we hear in the United States. So the big news, the 
big topic is once again the record heat in the east and including 
New York City's 74 degrees, which was an all-time record for the month 
of December. Was 80 in Charleston and 70 in mobile, Alabama. A snowstorm 
over parts of the Rockies and the interior region, the mountains have 
been getting snow. Snow around Salt Lake City. As we show you this 
videotape I'll tell you an interesting story. This is Salt Lake City 
today. They received six inches of wet snow. Yesterday, 24 hours ago, 
it was 63 degrees there. So, yes, it's quite unusual. The weather 
is topsy-turvy all around the nation. Some showers into the L.A. basin 
tonight and some of this snow will extend into parts of the northern 
plains over the weekend. Cold temperatures back this way, in the 20's 
right now. Some 20's across northern New England but, look, New York 
is at 65 degrees right now. It will turn colder across the northeast 
and New England as we go through the weekend. For tonight, though, 
lows in the 30's and 40's. 50's and 60's for the southeastern portion 
of the country. Highs tomorrow once again from St. Louis down to Nashville 
in the 60's. 70's for the carolinas and along the gulf coast. But 
cold across the northwest and into the mountains where more snow is 
expected. 43 in Seattle tomorrow with rain. Los Angeles 61. It's going 
to be warmer though in Washington, D.C. with a high of 64 with the 
rain showers. Still mild in Boston, 50. But here comes some colder 
air. Finally the upper level wind pattern is going to change. The 
high pressure system that's been bringing all this unusually mild 
weather from the plains and southeast into the northeast is breaking 
down a bit. Some rain showers expected to move out ahead of a front 
into parts of the tennessee valley, and here comes the cold air finally 
settling south with the jetstream. By Monday, much cooler readings 
for the central plains and the northeast by tuesday, things will be 
back to normal. That's it, Brian. Hope you have a great weekend. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>