<DOC>
<DOCNO> MNB19981204.2100.0264 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> CAPTION </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Turning now to matters on Capitol Hill. Word came today that President 
Clinton's lawyers are planning an elaborate defense of their client, 
an -- at impeachment hearings next week after first indicating they 
might take a pass on the opportunity. All the while, the man in charge 
of those proceedings, house Judiciary committee chairman Henry Hyde 
of Illinois was defending himself against charges of simple hypocrisy. 
A report on all this tonight from NBC news congressional correspondent 
Gwen ifill. As an impeachment vote draws near, the president's lawyer 
tonight announce they want to call several additional witnesses before 
the committee next week. In a letter sent to house Judiciary committee 
chairman Hyde the White House asked for another week of testimony 
because hearings they said have been "Inadequate and incomplete." 
Committee staffers all but rejected the plan out of hand saying the 
White House is only angling to delay the hearings until next year. 
White House lawyers Greg Craig and Charles ruff didn't name their 
proposed witnesses and the two sides engaged in a day long war of 
words over the impeachment proceedings. At the White House, officials 
alerted reports today to a "Los Angeles times" article that appeared 
to demonstrate how Henry Hyde's opinion of lying and perjury have 
shifted through the years. Hyde, as a member of the 1987 Iran-contra 
committee said lies should be judged -- "in the murkier grayness of 
the real world." And he quoted Thomas Jefferson -- A strict observance 
of the written law is doubtless one of the high duties of a good citizen, 
but it is not the highest. The laws of necessity, of self-preservation, 
of saving our country when in danger are of higher obligation. Hyde 
this week as chairman of the committee -- We still believe this is 
a country and a nation governed by laws and not men, and we're exploring 
whether there are different consequences -- I think the chairman shows 
remarkable dexterity in applying standards when it comes to the subject 
at hand. A spokesman for Hyde said the president's alleged lies were 
not in the interest of national security like Oliver north's. The 
White House also complained today about committee plans to question 
the president's lawyers. Following Thursday's letter charging Hyde 
with running a "chaotic and erratic" combeef. S process. This afternoon 
Hyde released this sharp response -- And the committee said it fully 
intends to question White House lawyers during next week's hearings. 
In the interest of fairness, Tom Mooney wrote, it is only right that 
those who he concerns about the president's conduct be allowed to 
raise concerns with whoever will represent him. Meanwhile White House 
spokesman Joe Lockhart said officials there are actively encouraging 
lawmakers seeking to pass a censure resolution instead of impeachment. 
Iould say as we get closer to the date as they move where we are aggressively 
listening. For all of the charges and countercharges flying around 
Capitol Hill this week, there is still a 99% chance that the house 
Judiciary committee will vote out at least one article of impeachment 
next week. And a 50/50 chance that the full house could follow soon 
after. Gwen Ifill, NBC news, the capitol. Again late developments 
on this front at the White House. Reacting to late developments on 
the hill. For the latest we're joined by veteran NBC news White House 
correspondent john Palmer. John, what is at work at the White House 
there tonight? Good evening, Brian. The White House is indeed clearly 
very concerned about this growing trend, not just in the Judiciary 
committee, but the entire House of Representatives, toward impeaching 
the president of the United States. That is why aides say the White 
House tonight requested three or four days of -- of testimony next 
week to bring witnesses to present a very vigorous defense for the 
president. They want to win back, they want to buy time and win back 
some of these moderate republicans that have drifted back toward the 
impeachment side. They say they're not trying to delay things, that 
they can still have their week or day in court here next week, and 
the committee will still have time to act and the full house can act 
before the end of the year, but right now they want to buy a little 
bit of time to present their case again and try to change some minds 
there. John, this is actually starting to seem like serious business. 
You just mentioned three possible articles of impeachment against 
the president that actually have a chance in the house. What is in 
them? Right. Obstruction of justice. What about Betty Currie taking 
the gifts that the president gave Monica lewinsky and hiding them 
under her bed? Is that obstruction of justice? Did the president lie 
about his relationship with Monica Lewinsky, and then what about the 
abuse of power? What about a conspiracy that the committee alleges 
that the White House carried out to try to deny that they were engaged 
-- that the president was engaged in this. So it's very serious. The 
White House is very concerned tonight, and they want to spend all 
of next week talking not only to the House of Representatives, but 
to the american people, to try to get back those votes so the impeachment 
will not succeed. A house that just a week ago was making indications 
they weren't going to play at all W going full bore on this. John, 
thank you very much. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>