<DOC>
<DOCNO> MNB19981204.2100.3071 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> CAPTION </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
A former American soldier who served in the gulf war and has been 
suffering from unexplained neurological damage ever since traveled 
to Iraq this week looking for answers about her illness. Answers she 
believes are to be found somewhere in the Iraqi desert. We have her 
storyonight from NBC news correspondent Kevin Tibbles in baghdad. 
The first time Carol picou came to Iraq, it was as a soldier fighting 
for her country. This time she has returned armed only with toys and 
candy for bedridden iraqi children she believes are victims of the 
gulf war like herself. Breaks my heart. As a mother. There is no medicines. 
And as a nurse, it breaks your heart even more. My son gives this 
to you. Picou from Georgia was an army nurse with the 141st combat 
support hospital, the first female soldier to be on the front lines 
since Vietnam. She saw the carnage, treated the injured, was decorated, 
and then she went home. On the night I got home, my first night back 
I told my husband, there is something wrong with me. The touch sensation 
doesn't feel the same. Since then, Carol's body has fallen apart. 
Diagnosed witheurological damage, she labors to use his arms and legs. 
Functions and in one can tell her why. So you're battling for your 
life. You're battling for answers. She believes those answers lie 
in the Iraqi desert with the chemical toxins that may have been released 
during the war or with the depleted uranium from U.S. anti-tank shells. 
Dangers she was never told about. There is no evidence gulf war illnesses 
were caused by events in the desert eight years ago, so Carol's lonely 
trek has brought her here to Baghdad, a Place many believe is still 
enemy territory. I didn't come to put down my country. I came to seek 
answers. Invited to attend an Iraqi conference on health problems, 
Carol meets former soldiers she once faced done on the front. They're 
now in wheelchairs. The Iraqis say they, too, have gulf war illness. 
The U.S. government disagrees. There are certainly many other factors 
endemic for causing other deceases that may look like cancers, other 
infectious diseases. If there are other factors, Carol wants to know 
what they are, and she's willing to defy a U.S. travel ban to find 
out. I guess there's a regulation that says somewhere that you can't 
go to Iraq, but there is also a constitution that says you can -- 
we're free citizens in the United States. So far the answers she seeks 
eludes her but she soldiers on, delivering stuffed toys and well wishes 
to dying children who weren't even born when the gulf war raged. She's 
so afraid she's going to die. Alone in a cancer Ward where Carol picou's 
own illnesses come second. Kevin Tibbles, Baghdad. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>