<DOC>
<DOCNO> MNB19981204.2100.1804 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> CAPTION </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
This week the house Judiciary committee held hearings on the subject 
of perjury. 11 witnesses looking to define the term, and more importantly, 
decide whether a president can be impeached for committing perjury 
in this case. Our next guest testified before that committee earlier 
this week. Former U.S. appeals court judge Leon higginbotham is counsel 
to the firm of paul, Weiss, rifkind, Wharton, and Garrison, teaches 
at Harvard University. Is a recipient of the presidential medal of 
freedom. He is with us tonight from our NBC studios in New York. Judge, 
good to have you. Good afternoon -- good evening, I guess. That's 
all right. We're all tired. Is it safe to characterize your testimony 
very simply as there is perjury and then there is perjury? There are 
different types of perjury. Some of profound significance. Others 
could be pertaining to a traffic offense, so therefore my position 
is there is no per Se perjury where all perjury is of the same magnitude 
and warrants the same remedy. The committee brought an athletic coach, 
believe women's college basketball coach who had perjured herself 
and been punished for it, by way of explaining that actions have consequences. 
That seemed to anger you particularly. Well, it didn't anger me. It's 
absolutely irrelevant. No one is saying that President Clinton cannot 
be prosecuted. He can be prosecuted as of January 21 of 2001. So therefore, 
her case is absolutely irrelevant. The impeachment process has certain 
safeguards which were built in, and they're trying to use a prosecution 
for a -- an impeachment, and it just doesn't rise to that magnitude. 
What is your frustration with this process chiefly? Well, my frustration 
is that I think that what President Clinton did was clearly wrong, 
but it is not much worse than someone who was then a -- driving 60 
miles in a 50-mile zone and when questioned by a prosecutor before 
a grand jury asserts that he was going 49 miles per hour. That would 
be perjury, because it was clearly intentional. It could have been 
material, but would you impeach a president who has to deal with the 
problems of war, economy, Bosnia, Asia, all of these over that minuscule 
an event? And I think that in the grand scheme of things the incident 
involving Ms. lewinsky is more on the level of a traffic violation 
and not on the level of treason, which is the term they use -- the 
first term they use in article two of the constitution. Well, now, 
judge, let me get you to one of the other articles of impeachment 
we're told may be drawn up by this committee and that is abuse of 
power. Do you think there is a case to be made for getting -- forgetting 
perjury for just a moment, that the president used all the tools of 
his office, and many of the employees of the White House to defend 
a charge he knew to be true? Well, I don't think there's any abuse 
of power. You have to look at a page of histy. Now let's take the 
Nixon case. What constitutes an abuse of power? There President Nixon 
used the international revenue services to engage in improper tax 
audits and investigation of political enemies. He attempted to obtain 
confidential information maintained by the I.R.S., containing political 
enemies. He used the federal bureau of investigation, secret service 
and other executive personnel to undertake improper electronic surveillance. 
And the list goes on with him, one point after the other. I think 
that was an abuse of power. The fact that the president makes a defense 
when he thinks that there is no validity to the claim, I don't see 
where that is an abuse of power. William Clinton is an American citizen, 
and becoming president, he is not denied his right to raise a rational 
defense. And two justices of the Supreme Court, as you undoubtedly 
know -- justice breyer wrote an opinion saying that the Supreme Court 
should have granted on the issue as to whether secret service people 
should be immune. Now if these two justices saw some merit in it, 
on what basis do you impugn -- Not you -- but what basis does the 
republican majority impugn president clinton? As a former member of 
the federal bench, what, in your view, would William rehnquist bring 
to presiding over a trial in the Senate? Well, I think that the chief 
justice is a fair person. But I think the fundamental issue is whether 
there should be a prosecution. If -- if we -- we've only had one in 
the history of this country which involved President Johnson. Now 
what we are starting to do is that when you lose an election, as the 
republicans lost the election, now they are using the political process 
to try to get the president out. Now how is this country hurt one 
scintilla, if he stays in office, and if after he leaves office he's 
prosecuted? All right. That final point from judge Leon higginbotham. 
He's with Paul, Weiss, rifkind, Wharton, and Garrison currently and 
with harvard University sometimes. Judge, thank you very much for 
coming in tonight. We appreciate it as always. Pleasure. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>