<DOC>
<DOCNO> MNB19981204.2100.2611 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> CAPTION </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
The busy holiday season with overcrowded shopping malls can mean open 
season on children when parents become distracted while they shop. 
As NBC news justice correspondent Pete Williams reports tonight, more 
and more retailers are taking it upon themselves to keep children 
safe in their stores. It's the season of shopping crowds, chaos, and 
distractions, and for some families, panic. Their children are missing. 
A child suddenly vanishes, vulnerable to adult predators who lurk 
in shopping malls, especially during busy holidays. Particularly at 
a time when parents are preoccupied and they're thinking about other 
things, a lot of those kids are not well supervised. Belinda Dawson 
remembers exactly how it happened to her at a Wal-Mart in central 
Indiana. Busy with shopping she looked up and couldn't find her 3-year-old 
daughter katie. We were in the toy section and I went around to get 
the cart and back around to get Katie and she was gone in a matter 
of seconds. It turns out a man approached her daughter who is now 
8 and carried her outside. I was very, very worried. I didn't knowhere 
I was. I was only 3 years old. But in a growing number of retail stores, 
parents are no longer on their own when a child is missing. Many stores 
now have a precise plan of action, and it works. Belinda Dawson was 
lucky to be in a store that had just such a program called code Adam, 
named for Adam Walsh after he disappeared from a Florida shopping 
mall. Wal-Mart stores were first to develop the program and demonstrated 
what happens when a parent reports a missing child. We have a lost 
4-year-old girl whose name is -- Using a description announced on 
the P.A. system, employees immediately begin a systematic storewide 
search, knowing that kidnappers sometimes switch a child's clothing 
so it won't match the parent's description, employees check rest rooms 
where kidnappers sometimes try to put different clothes on the victims. 
The commotion of the code Adam program caused Katie's abducter to 
bring her back from the parking lot. It's identified many children 
missing in the stores but more mornl it's helped prevent about six 
abductions that we think were in the attempt. Other retailers are 
starting to adopt similar programs of their own -- training employees 
on the procedure. Attention, I have a code Adam in progress. And one 
company is planning to marketer in way to help, a device a parent 
can put on a child. It can be activated if the child runs off, setting 
off a Tone to help the parent find where the child has gone. All of 
it sbinded to help keep children at home for the holidays. -- Intended 
to help keep children at home for the holidays. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>