<DOC>
<DOCNO> NBC19981204.1830.0062 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> CAPTION </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Good evening. There is much more good news than bad as we head into 
the final shopping weeks before Christmas, which is reassuring unless 
you're caught in the bad-news cycle. But let's begin with the good 
news -- jobs. Unemployment is at a six-month low. It came out today 
at 4.4%, a sign of a booming economy. But President Clinton offered 
a cautionary reaction. This is not a time for self-congratulations 
or a time to rest. We have more to do here at home and more to do 
to stabilize the global economy if we expect economic growth to continue. 
We're into new territory when it comes to jobs -- where they are, 
who has them and who is losing them. The good news about the unemployment 
rate comes as a number of companies are laying off workers. But as 
NBC's Anne Thompson reports, there are other jobs waiting to be filled. 
On the day the nation's unemployment rate hits its lowest level in 
six months, the first of 48,000 pink slips, handed out at Boeing in 
seattle. What can you do? You get your notice and you're out the door. 
But Seattle, like the rest of the country, is enjoying an economic 
boom, historically low unemployment and a job growth rate twice the 
national average, spurred by high-tech businesses. We have a large 
opening of jobs which have very comparable wages to what the Boeing 
workers are used to. In fact, Washington state's software alliance 
says it will need 64,000 more workers by 2001. It's boom times in 
the construction industry, too, 47,000 new jobs last month as low 
mortgage rates push up home sales. Douglas county Colorado, the fastest 
growing county in America, 4,300 new homes built in the last year. 
In Hillsdale, Illinois, Marsha Elliott can't hire workers fast enough. 
One of the problems that we're facing in the new millennium is that 
we're going to have a shortage of qualified skilled labor, so this 
is definitely the field to be in. But it's American factory workers 
who are in trouble. Today, the Zenith plant outside Chicago closes 
its doors. 12,000 jobs, gone. Johnson & Johnson announces 4,100 layoffs, 
almost a quarter million manufacturing jobs lost since March. Former 
labor secretary Robert reich says these people will find new jobs, 
but -- Chances are the service job that you then find is not going 
to pay nearly as much or have benefits attached to it. On average, 
a worker in the service sector makes $140 less a week than a factory 
worker. Reich says the U.S. is an oasis of prosperity in a global 
economy where half the world is in a recession, hurting exports, causing 
American manufacturers to find more efficient ways to run their businesses. 
A trend that's reached all the way to Fairfax, Vermont, population 
2,900, home to an American classic for 20 years. Today, the Milton-Bradley 
plant that produces the wooden tiles for the game scrabble shut down. 
It's parent company, Hasbro, wants out of the tile-producing business, 
leaving the 57 workers to spell layoffs while rest of the economy 
is booming. Anne Thompson, NBC news, Chicago. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>