<DOC>
<DOCNO> NBC19981204.1830.0867 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> CAPTION </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
NBC news "in depth" tonight -- keeping a very close eye on your children 
as you head out to do your holiday shopping. Each year in this country, 
up to 4,600 children are abducted by someone other than a family member. 
More than 50% of these abductions occur on the street. 46% of the 
time a child is lured into a vehicle. But, sometimes, the danger lurks 
in the crowded aisles of a department store. So what are stores doing 
to keep your children safe? NBC's Pete Williams tonight, "in depth." 
It's the season of distractions, long shopping lists and big crowds, 
and for some, shopping with children can bring panic. A child suddenly 
vanishes, vulnerable to adult predators who lurk in retail stores, 
especially during busy holidays. Particularly at a time when parents 
are preoccupied and are thinking about other things, a lot of those 
kids are not well supervised. Belinda Dawson remembers exactly how 
it happened to her, at a Wal-Mart in central Indiana. Busy with shopping, 
she looked up and couldn't find her 3-year-old daughter, Katie. We 
were in the toy section. And I went around to get the cart and back 
around to get Katie and she was gone in a matter of seconds. It turns 
out a man approached her daughter, who's now 8, in the toy section, 
picked her up, and carried her outside. I was very, very worried. 
I didn't know where I was. I was only 3 years old. But in a growing 
number of America's retail stores, parents are no longer on their 
own when a child goes missing, many now have a precise plan of action. 
And it works. Belinda Dawson was lucky to be in a store that had just 
such a program, called "code Adam" named for Adam Walsh, who was murdered 
after he disappeared from a Florida shopping mall. Wal-Mart stores 
were first to develop the program, and demonstrated what happens when 
a parent reports a missing child. Code Adam. We have a lost 4-year-old 
girl, whose name is kenna. Using a description announced on the pa 
system, employees begin a Store-wide search. Employees check restrooms 
and dressing rooms where victims sometimes put different clothes on 
the children. It's helped find and reunite many, many children with 
their parents, that are missing in our stores. But more importantly, 
it's also helped prevent about six abductions that we think were in 
the attempt. Other retailers are starting to adopt similar programs 
of their own, training employees on the procedure. I have a code Adam 
in progress. And one company is planning to market another way to 
help, a Device a parent can put on a child. It can be activated if 
the child runs off, setting off a Tone to help the parent find where 
the child has gone. All of it, intended to help keep children at home 
for the holidays. Pete Williams, NBC news, Washington. Since code 
Adam was inplemted back in 1994, the alarm system has been ininstrumental 
and credited with rescuing six children who were abducted while in 
a Wal-Mart. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>