<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981204.0253 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Rome has seven hills, and from the best rooms at the Hassler Hotel, 
which sits gloriously at the top of the Spanish Steps, the panorama 
includes not only two of them _ the Aventine and the Quirinale _ but 
also the Piazza di Spagna, St. Peter's and the Pantheon. Other important 
Roman hotels boast great locations. At the Excelsior a visitor can 
practically fall out of bed onto the Via Veneto, and the Eden is a 
stone's throw from the Spanish Steps. But only the Hassler has dazzling 
views, a 120-year-old pedigree and the best shopping in Rome just 
136 steps away _ at the foot of the famous steps that spill directly 
into the heart of the elegant Via Condotti. For years the Hassler 
has been the hotel of choice for international celebrities, American 
politicians and movie stars from Audrey Hepburn, who wanted her room 
filled with camellias when she filmed ``Roman Holiday,'' to Bruce 
Willis, Tom Cruise, Woody Allen and Sharon Stone. Ms. Stone told Roberto 
Wirth, the managing director, that she had stayed at the Hassler on 
her first honeymoon. When asked when that was, the actress replied: 
``Before my first divorce.'' Roughly 40 percent of the hotel's clientele 
is American, according to Wirth. One measure of the Hassler's haughty 
stature is that it does not hesitate to turn away clients that it 
feels would make its guests unhappy. On that list: Madonna, when she 
was only a rock star (motherhood got her through the Hassler's doors), 
and Muhammad Ali, who refused to put on a tie to enter its august 
rooftop restaurant. The classically elegant eight-story building is 
done in ochre, with greenish brown window shutters. Above the windows 
are ornaments reminiscent of the Medici family crest. The lobby has 
a formal, Old World feel, with its marble floors, boiserie and upholstered 
chairs. The back of the hotel faces the private Villa Medici park. 
The lobby also boasts a sculpture of a she-wolf, symbol of Rome. It 
is a copy of the original made for the Hassler in Naples. But the 
nose of the otherwise bronze statue is white. It was worn down, so 
the story goes, by American officers who used to touch it for good 
luck when the U.S. military took over the hotel in World War 11. Over 
the decades, the Hassler has been sufficiently central to Roman life 
that even Mussolini took note, complaining that the name did not sound 
Italian enough, and insisting that the hotel be renamed Villa Medici, 
which it was until the end of World War II. The fairly small hotel 
_ just 85 rooms and 15 suites _ remains one of the few leading city 
hotels still owned and run by a single family. Roberto Wirth's father, 
Oscar Wirth, was the partner of Albert Hassler. Albert Hassler's father, 
born in Switzerland, started the business when he bought a small pension 
in Naples. By 1870, he had changed the name to the Hotel Hassler. 
Fifteen years later, after the family had moved to Rome, Albert Hassler 
bought the 200-year-old palazzo, once home to Napoleon's sister, from 
the Santorelli family and converted it into a hotel. In 1915 a Hassler 
son-in-law, who then owned the Eden Hotel, joined his Swiss-born friend 
Oscar Wirth, and the pair started running the two hotels. Though Robertogrew 
up living at the Eden in 1964, when the families went their separate 
ways, the Wirths kept the Hassler. (Descendants of the Hassler family 
sold its interest in the Eden to the Forte group in 1989.) Passing 
the Hassler from one generation to the next was not easy. The Wirths' 
older son, Roberto, was deaf at birth, and though he worked at odd 
jobs at the hotel as a small boy and wanted desperately to be in the 
hotel business, his father was not particularly supportive. ``My husband 
wanted to get a farm for Roberto or maybe have him become a graphic 
designer,'' said Carmen Wirth, Wirth's mother, in a telephone interview. 
But Roberto Wirth wouldn't give up. After attending the American School 
for the Deaf in New Haven, and Gallaudet University in Washington, 
``he applied to Cornell Hotel School himself and got in as a special 
student,'' his mother said proudly. ``He was the only deaf person 
they have ever taken. I think to a great extent he owes his success 
to his will power.'' Once out of school, Wirth did the traditional 
training at various hotels. It was not always easy. ``I was working 
in the kitchen of one hotel, when a cook shouted to pass the butter,'' 
Wirth recalled. ``Since I did not understand what he wanted, I asked 
him to write a note. He reacted badly. I lost my patience and threw 
a cloth at him. As a reaction he took his knife and threatened to 
hurt me. Fortunately another cook intervened and divided us. The chef 
wanted to fire us, but I explained what happened and we made peace.'' 
Today Wirth, who reads lips with ease in English, French, German and 
of course Italian, has the hotel firmly in hand. ``The most difficult 
part of my job is of course communications,'' he acknowledged during 
a recent interview at New York's Four Seasons Hotel, where he stayed 
when he came to run the marathon. During the interview he communicated 
with the help of an interpreter who talked with him using both lip 
reading and sign language, and then translated. Wirth spoke about 
the great skill required in running a hotel and the need to meet clients' 
demands. It helps that over the years he and his 170-person staff 
have become familiar with some very fussy clients. For example, each 
year a South American family rents a pair of suites for three weeks. 
``One suite is just for fitness machines,'' Wirth said. ``The gentleman 
rents a pair of treadmills: one for himself and one for his wife. 
Then he rents a Stairmaster and a bicycle.'' Like some other stars, 
the rock singer Brian Adams brought his own chef, who also stayed 
at the hotel. ``They want special diets and so we let the chef go 
into the kitchen,'' said Sabina Galdiolo, who handles the hotel's 
public relations. Claudia Shiffer, the model, asked for special chocolates 
late at night. The hotel's chef made her small milk chocolate turtles 
on the spot Certainly the Hassler, where a standard double is $420 
and suites begin at $1,357, has competition for well-heeled guests, 
but not so much as one might assume. Despite the boom in tourism for 
Italy, far fewer chains have made appearances on the hotel landscape 
in Rome than in other major European cities. Rome, of course, is not 
a business destination in the way that Paris, London and New York 
are, and it has neither a Ritz Carlton, a Peninsula nor a Four Seasons, 
though Wirth said that the Four Seasons chain had made an offer for 
the Hassler. However, Wirth intends eventually to turn the hotel over 
to his 6-year-old twin son and daughter. ``The fact that the Hassler 
is family-owned is probably one of the most important ingredients 
of its success,'' he said, citing ``the feel of a private club or 
a home where being personally welcomed really counts.'' He added, 
``The Hassler is not a commercial hotel. We don't have the facilities 
or size to cater to a business population. We do have a few people 
who ask for e-mail, but not many.'' At the Hassler you can still leave 
your shoes out to be polished overnight, and one of the hotel's five 
concierges hands guests real keys instead of cards. Pages arrive at 
any time of the day or night bearing messages on silver trays, and 
the hotel florist goes to the flower market daily and arranges fresh 
flowers for the guest rooms and public spaces. Ms. Galdiolo said that 
sometimes as many as 30 percent of the guests dine in their rooms. 
Since 22 of those rooms have terraces, its easy to understand the 
tempation. Soaps and lotions come from an Italian firm called Bottega 
dell'Albergho, which provides personalized items for a variety of 
Italian hotels. One thing the hotel still lacks is a health club. 
Until the health facility is completed next year, the principal sports 
activity will continue to be a jog with Wirth, who runs daily through 
the nearby Villa Borghese gardens. ``Clients like to go with me because 
I know the special parts of the park,'' he said. Another favorite 
guest activity, with Prada, Bulgari, Ferragamo and Gucci so close 
at hand, is shopping, and Wirth has helped make that somewhat easier. 
He is president of the Associazione Trinita dei Monti, which, together 
with the Associazione Piazza di Spagna, monitors the upkeep of the 
upper and lower piazzas. While even he could not stop what he sees 
as the lamentable arrival of a McDonald's in the Piazza di Spagna, 
Wirth is pleased that two public elevators have been installed and 
are open after a long hiatus. They carry Romans, along with tired 
foreign shoppers, from just under the Spanish Steps to a subway entrance 
on the Piazza Trinita dei Monte _ only steps away from the Hassler. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>