<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981204.0364 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
So does President Clinton arrive in the Palestinian Authority on his 
big 747 or on a little helicopter? Does he balance his visit to the 
Gaza Strip with one to Masada, the Alamo of Israel? And then must 
he balance that with a quick tour of Bethlehem? After all, it is the 
Holy Land, however disputed, and it's Christmastime. If the problems 
of the Middle East are about land and blood, the diplomacy that tries 
to resolve them is often about language and symbolism. In the case 
of Clinton's upcoming trip to Israel and the Palestinian Authority, 
designed to promote and advance the agreement between the Israelis 
and Palestinians reached in Wye, Md., in October, it's also about 
airplanes and sightseeing. But the issue at the core of these questions 
was never settled at Wye: will the Palestinians declare statehood 
unilaterally on May 4, 1999, when the Oslo peace process formally 
runs out, or are they simply threatening to do it, as their best leverage 
on the Israelis? Israeli Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu, struggling 
to keep his government together following the Wye agreement, was taken 
aback by the warm reception given Palestinian leader Yasser Arafat 
in Washington last week. Not only was Arafat showered with money at 
an international donors' conference hosted by the Americans, he was 
treated indulgently when he spoke frankly about his intention to declare 
Palestinian statehood. Other Palestinian officials have done the same 
at the United Nations and elsewhere, which the Israelis regard as 
a violation of the Oslo accords and of promises at Wye not to take 
unilateral steps that would foreclose negotiations between the parties. 
In response, Netanyahu says he has frozen further implementation of 
the very Wye agreement Clinton is going to Israel to celebrate, causing 
the Americans to criticize Netanyahu further for setting ``new conditions.'' 
The Palestinian Authority needs to commit itself ``unequivocally to 
abandoning its intention to unilaterally declare a Palestinian state'' 
and ``to conducting continuous negotiations with Israel until an agreement 
is concluded'' _ and needs to publish that intention in the Palestinian 
media _ for Israel to continue carry out the Wye agreement, an Israeli 
Cabinet statement said. American officials have done little to criticize 
Arafat or his officials, other than to say that ``unilateral steps 
are not helpful'' and that ``Palestinian statehood must be addressed 
in the negotiations themselves.'' And the Americans have refused to 
say what they would do or say if Arafat does declare statehood unilaterally. 
One senior American official said Friday: ``There's a difference between 
saying you're going to declare statehood and actually doing it. There's 
a lot of posturing on both sides.'' But what is clearly bothering 
Netanyahu is that the Clinton visit will provide powerful new pictures 
and symbolism of a new American-Palestinian relationship _ including 
the arrival of the American president at the new Palestinian international 
airport opened with great fanfare as a result of the Wye accord. David 
Bar-Illan, Netanyahu's chief spokesman, has now formally asked Clinton 
not to arrive in the Gaza Strip in his big, baby-blue 747 emblazoned 
with the huge seal of the United States. American officials said Friday 
that they are likely to heed the Israeli request, but on the grounds 
of pragmatism. The trip from Tel Aviv to the Gaza Strip is a short 
one, analogous to the distance from Washington to Baltimore, one official 
said, and ``chances are we wouldn't use a 747 but a helicopter.'' 
To use the larger plane, the official said, would also require ``bringing 
in a lot more people to upgrade the airport.'' Similarly, when the 
Israelis suggested a presidential visit to Masada, the Americans agreed. 
But now Clinton is contemplating a stop in Bethlehem, which is controlled 
by the Palestinian authority, further upsetting the Israelis. The 
Wye agreement, reached after nine days of intense negotiations _ including 
nearly 90 hours of Clinton's own time, set out a three-month timetable 
under which Israel would withdraw from another 13 percent of the West 
Bank in return for specific, phased steps by the Palestinians to combat 
terrorism. It was supposed to be followed immediately by intensive 
negotiations on a final settlement between Israel and the Palestinians, 
which would resolve fundamental questions like the future of Jerusalem 
and whether the Palestinians will have a state. Under the original 
Oslo timetable, that final settlement is supposed to be complete by 
May 4, 1999, providing urgency to the process. But final status talks 
have yet to get under way. One quiet procedural meeting between Israeli 
and Palestinian officials, at which no Americans were present, has 
not been followed up. Israeli and American officials concede that 
with all the furor over the implementation of the Wye agreement itself, 
there has been little energy to focus on the final status talks, which 
would offer the best answer to Arafat's claims. After all, one American 
official said sardonically, ``May is months away.'' Instead, American 
officials are worrying about the few days of the Clinton visit, which 
begins Dec. 12, and what exactly is to be celebrated in the Gaza Strip. 
At Wye, Netanyahu's demand that the Palestinian National Council formally 
revoke all the clauses in their charter calling for Israel's destruction 
was handled with an Israeli-originated compromise. Arafat would gather 
a quorum of the council, surround them with lots of other, less radical 
Palestinians, and confirm the revocation of the old charter in some 
form of mass vote, by hand or voice. Since then, however, the Israelis 
have called for something more formal, and an American official said: 
``We want to make sure that what happens in Gaza meets the Israeli 
needs.'' At the same time, however, the Americans are nervous that 
Netanyahu will continue to change his requirements. Yoel Marcus, writing 
Friday in the Israeli newspaper Haaretz, described Netanyahu as ``in 
a panic'' to consolidate his political position, broaden his government 
and act toughly ``while the Palestinian state is being established 
right under his nose.'' But Netanyahu ``will not be able to halt the 
hurricane known as Clinton's visit and the American recognition of 
a Palestinian state that it implies,'' Marcus said. American officials 
insist that Clinton's visit implies no such thing. Yet as Marcus suggested, 
the symbolism argues otherwise. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>