<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981204.0516 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
The New York Times said in an editorial for Saturday, Dec. 5: When 
New Jersey's governor, Christie Whitman, heard this week that New 
York City was planning to unload a sizable chunk of its garbage on 
her state in a few years, she did what any politician would do in 
such a case _ she went ballistic. It was a feeling some New Yorkers 
understood well. After months of waiting to see how New York Mayor 
Rudolph Giuliani would make good on his promise to close the Fresh 
Kills landfill in Staten Island, the world's largest, city residents 
were also learning this week which neighborhoods could be next in 
New York's big garbage lottery. As the mayor and his staff were busily 
apologizing to Whitman and explaining that New Jersey would not suffer 
any environmental problems from two new transfer stations for New 
York's garbage, residents of Brooklyn were hyperventilating about 
how a third transfer station there could foul their air as well. The 
protests have come primarily from residents of the Red Hook section 
who see the proposed new station as an added insult to an area that 
already has hundreds of noisy, smelly commercial garbage trucks lumbering 
through its streets. While it is true that the mayor could have aired 
his plans earlier, this proposal offers a positive first step. It 
begins what should be an evolutionary process allowing the city to 
refine its plan for disposing of the yearly equivalent of 76 Titanics 
full of garbage, as Douglas Martin, a New York Times reporter, described 
it last month. With hearings and environmental studies looming, the 
public will have a chance to raise the disturbing questions about 
this huge shift in waste policy. The mayor's proposal moves toward 
using the existing city-owned waterfront stations to ship garbage 
by barge to the two transfer stations in New Jersey and one in Brooklyn 
where it would be pressed into containers and sent on to privately 
owned landfills in other states. The garbage shipments have been criticized 
as a threat to New Jersey's beaches and to the revival of downtown 
Newark, although Giuliani says the transfer sites are already used 
or designated for garbage. The real question is whether New York should 
add an expensive new transfer step for all of the city's trash. Instead, 
planners might consider more creative ways of retrofitting and expanding 
at least some of these existing waterfront stations to put garbage 
in airtight containers before it is shipped out of the city to its 
final destination. The mayor's plan is set to go into effect at about 
the time he leaves office, or perhaps even later. In the meantime, 
the city is planning to begin rerouting garbage away from Staten Island's 
landfill on an ``interim'' basis. This plan is provoking far more 
alarm in communities affected by it, because ``interim'' often turns 
into decades in the dumping business. The best approach now might 
be to stall the interim plan and focus on completing the final plan 
before the deadline to close Fresh Kills. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>