<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981204.0476 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
A federal jury in Manhattan ordered DaimlerChrysler on Friday to pay 
$750,000 to the estate of a 5-year-old Bronx boy who was killed when 
an air bag deployed. The case had been widely watched because it was 
the first trial of a lawsuit involving a child's death from an air 
bag, lawyers and industry critics said. In reaching its verdict, the 
jury concluded that the air bag in the front passenger seat of the 
family's 1995 Dodge Caravan was unreasonably dangerous and had caused 
the death of Michael Liz Crespo, whose father was driving down a steep 
driveway while the family was vacationing in Puerto Rico. The minivan 
was traveling 9 miles an hour when the air bag inflated. The jury's 
official award was $1.5 million. But because the boy was not wearing 
his seat belt at the time of the accident, the jury held the manufacturer, 
DaimlerChrysler, liable for only half that amount. The award was to 
compensate for the minute of pain and suffering the family's lawyers 
said that he experienced when the air bag fired and struck him in 
the chin and neck, damaging his spinal cord and causing suffocation. 
Chrysler denounced the verdict Friday, contending that its air bags, 
which are set to fire at impacts of 8 mph or more, are designed to 
meet the strictest of safety standards required by law and recommended 
by outside safety experts. Its lawyers asserted that the death could 
have been avoided had the boy been wearing a seat belt, as the company 
advises in warning labels placed in all of its vehicles. ``We have 
obeyed the law,'' said Kenneth Gluckman, assistant general counsel 
of DaimlerChrysler. ``We've met the regulations. We have designed 
this properly. There's not a hint of a dispute that the air bag didn't 
function as intended.'' In reaching its verdict, Gluckman said, the 
jury had in effect concluded that ``every air bag in the country is 
defective'' because the rest of the industry uses the same system. 
He said the jurors appeared to have ``let their emotions cloud their 
judgment.'' The jury in U.S. District Court in Manhattan took five 
days to reach its verdict and to award damages for the boy's suffering. 
Earlier, Judge Jed Rakoff had dismissed other claims by the family, 
including one for punitive damages and another that asserted that 
Chrysler had failed to give drivers adequate warnings. Chrysler said 
it would ask Rakoff to reverse or reduce the verdict, while a lawyer 
for the family, Gary Douglas, said he would appeal the dismissal of 
the other claims by the judge. The director and general counsel of 
Parents for Safer Air Bags, Robert Sanders, said the verdict was particularly 
important because the victim was not belted in, which ``is the biggest 
defense the automakers always throw up,'' he said. Clarence Ditlow, 
director of the Center for Auto Safety, said the verdict would also 
demonstrate to other plaintiff lawyers that such a suit ``is a winnable 
case.'' Other suits over children's deaths from air bags have been 
settled out of court for undisclosed amounts, and still others have 
been dismissed by judges before trial, the lawyers said. The industry 
and government safety experts have generally argued that air bags 
and seat belts are intended to function together, and that if drivers 
and adult passengers are wearing belts, then with few exceptions the 
bags are a benefit. But for children who are not big enough to wear 
lap-shoulder belts, they say, the bags can be a hazard. The Insurance 
Institute for Highway Safety, which studies crash data and conducts 
its own crash tests, said Friday that by Nov. 1, 73 passengers had 
been killed by air bags in low-speed crashes, including 53 children 
between the ages of 1 and 11. Of those children, 43 were unbelted, 
and six were wearing only the lap portion of a lap-shoulder belt. 
Only four children who were properly belted were killed, according 
to the institute, which is based in Arlington, Va. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>