<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981204.0401 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Gus Van Sant's new color replica of ``Psycho'' opened without advance 
screenings Friday, adopting Alfred Hitchcock's policy of dodging reviews 
but neglecting some of his other, even better marketing ideas. There 
was a time when no one could enter a theater playing ``Psycho'' after 
the film had started. Today's audiences can traipse freely, and at 
the theater I attended somebody even made a loud cellular phone call 
just as the rest of us were bracing ourselves for the shower scene. 
Anyway, the film's main suspense revolved around a single question: 
now that room rent at the Bates Motel is up to $36.50, what else is 
new? It turns out the apparent rocks in Van Sant's head are mere pebbles. 
If he isn't Hitchcock, neither is he crazy. His film is an artful, 
good-looking remake (a modest term, but it beats plagiarism) that 
shrewdly revitalizes the aspects of the real ``Psycho'' (1960) that 
it follows most faithfully but seldom diverges seriously or successfully 
from one of the cinema's most brilliant blueprints. Those of us not 
quite ready to write off the first film will gain little from learning 
that Norman keeps porn magazines and toy soldiers in his once off-limits 
childhood bedroom. If the filmmaker is right in supposing that ``Psycho'' 
is most widely remembered as that scary shower movie, here's a brief 
reminder. A secretary named Marion Crane (originally Janet Leigh) 
has a lover who won't marry her for financial reasons. So she absconds 
with a pile of cash that has literally landed in her lap. Eager to 
hide, Marion checks into a remote motel and winds up having a powerfully 
disturbing effect on the proprietor. Then he has an even more disturbing 
effect on her. Three other characters (Marion's sister, lover and 
a private detective) begin investigating Marion's disappearance. Norman, 
an amateur taxidermist, has one scary mom watching all this from her 
perch atop a hill. The new ``Psycho'' begins promisingly with bold 
green added to the Saul Bass title sequence, a fuller sound to Bernard 
Herrmann's unforgettable theme music (re-recorded by Danny Elfman) 
and Anne Heche refreshingly cast in Marion's role. Ms. Heche, along 
with Julianne Moore as her no-nonsense sister and William H. Macy 
as the detective, is one of the players here who speak Joseph Stefano's 
dialogue as if it were brand-new and who successfully recreate their 
characters in present-day terms. (``Why?'' Ms. Heche asks irritably, 
when a policeman asks to see her license and registration.) This Marion 
is almost as demure as Ms. Leigh's, yet she's also more headstrong 
and flirty. Aided this time by witty costume and production design, 
she now sports orange underwear (in the opening hotel scene), an orange 
paper parasol (at the car lot) and orange nail polish to match her 
orange blood in the shower scene that Van Sant has modified only slightly 
and ineffectually. Shots of roiling clouds are now interjected into 
this famous sequence, and the stab marks show up more. If this ``Psycho'' 
makes the most of its Marion, the same can't be said of its Norman 
Bates. The absence of anything like Anthony Perkins' sensational performance 
with that vitally birdlike presence and sneaky way with a double-entendre 
(``A boy's best friend is his mother'') is the new film's greatest 
weakness. While Vince Vaughn gives the role its share of creepiness, 
his beefy presence and mechanical recitations also throw off the material's 
exquisite balance. (The intriguing physical resemblances between the 
story's matched pairs of characters have been eradicated.) And another 
of Van Sant's new ideas, having Norman masturbate just before he kills 
Marion, would seem to dispel the very tension that matters most to 
the story. Beyond having weakened two principal male characters (Viggo 
Mortensen seems equally miscast as Marion's love, John Saxon's old 
role, though he does seem more likely to be spending his life in a 
hardware store) and greatly bolstered the women, Van Sant adds extra 
ambient sound and a few more insect actors. (Fly and spider wranglers 
get screen credit this time.) However interesting these modifications 
are, they won't make ``Psycho'' any more ``Scream''-like for viewers 
who like fast, easy fright. It remains the most structurally elegant 
and sneakily playful of thrillers. At least some things never change. 
PRODUCTION NOTES: `PSYCHO' Directed by Gus Van Sant; written by Joseph 
Stefano, based on a novel by Robert Bloch; director of photography, 
Chris Doyle; edited by Amy Dudbleston; music by Danny Elfman, based 
on original score by Bernard Herrmann; production designer, Tom Foden; 
produced by Van Sant and Brian Grazer; released by Universal Pictures. 
Running time: 100 minutes. Cast: Anne Heche (Marion Crane), Vince 
Vaughn (Norman Bates), Viggo Mortenson (Sam Loomis), William H. Macy 
(Milton Arbogast), Julianne Moore (Lila), Robert Forster (Dr. Simon), 
Chad Everett (Tom Cassidy) and Rance Howard (Lowry). Rating: ``Psycho'' 
is rated R (Under 17 requires accompanying parent or adult guardian). 
It includes brief nudity, flashes of blood and the same famous reason 
for staying out of showers. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>