<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981204.0436 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
For the first time in three years, city officials Friday urged New 
Yorkers to start conserving water, saying the city's reservoirs are 
14 percentage points below normal levels for this time of year. Below-average 
rainfall during the fall has reduced the city's reservoirs to 57 percent 
of capacity, said Joel Miele, commissioner of the Department of Environmental 
Protection, who issued an advisory Friday calling for voluntary conservation. 
Normally, he said, in early December they are at 71 percent of capacity. 
He said that unless heavier rains fall in the Northeast in the coming 
weeks, the city may declare a drought watch by late January, a more 
serious advisory but one that also calls only for voluntary conservation. 
To make sure the reservoirs do not dip into dangerous levels, the 
commissioner urged New Yorkers to adopt water-skimping steps like 
taking shorter showers, soaking in only half-filled tubs, running 
washing machines and dishwashers only when full, and flushing toilets 
only when necessary. ``It is prudent at this time to conserve water,'' 
Miele said, though he stressed that the city's water supply had not 
yet fallen to drought levels. According to the National Weather Service, 
rainfall in New York City for the year is actually 3.8 inches above 
normal right now, but that is because the city experienced unusually 
heavy rains during the first half of the year. The city has not had 
much rain since July, a spokesman said. And throughout the region, 
rain has not been as abundant. Delaware, for example, has had about 
7 fewer inches of rain than normal. Drought watches are more typically 
called during the summer, when water use is at its highest, with people 
filling pools, watering gardens and washing cars. But the Delaware 
River Basin Commission issued an advisory last Wednesday that reservoirs 
in its region were 25 percent below normal levels for this time of 
year. The Delaware River Basin provides about half the city's water 
supply. City officials said, however, that the city's other water 
sources, the Catskill area reservoirs and the Croton water system, 
have not been as depleted by the recent dry weather. The Delaware 
River Basin also serves New Jersey, Pennsylvania and Delaware. Delaware 
officials have not yet issued advisories to consumers, but officials 
in New Jersey, where reservoir water levels are now 24 percent below 
normal, last week issued conservation warnings similar to New York 
City's, which stop short of a drought watch. But in Pennsylvania the 
Department of Environmental Protection on Thursday declared drought 
watches in the southern part of the state and issued drought warnings 
in the northern and central parts. A spokeswoman for the Pennsylvania 
agency, April Linton, said that a drought watch calls for a voluntary 
reduction of 5 percent and a warning calls for a voluntary reduction 
of 10 to 15 percent. Ms. Linton said the next step would be a declaration 
of a water emergency, which would mandate restrictions and allow suppliers 
to start rationing water. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>