<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981204.0234 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Women everywhere this holiday season are out buying neckties for the 
men in their lives. They might just as well be gift-wrapping spittoons. 
December 1998 finds the American workplace more casual than ever: 
Four out of five workers get to dress down at least one day a week, 
according to Peter Simon of NPD Group, a market research firm. And 
a recent survey of hiring executives by Management Recruiters International 
found that 42 percent believe the suit and tie will ultimately disappear. 
(Most of these doomsayers think it will happen in the next 10 years.) 
Consider the situation at the Pro Player sports licensing unit of 
Fruit of the Loom in Hudson, N.H. A company spokesman described the 
place as so actively hostile to neckwear that it bans ties from the 
premises. Until recently, the company had a rack in the lobby where 
guests could park these primitive totems; the rack was removed recently 
because no one ever turns up in a tie anymore. Times certainly have 
changed. In the days of afternoon baseball and snap-brim hats, of 
hair oil and smoker's coughs, men who pretended to any sort of social 
class wore neckties to ball games and apologized for being in public 
without a suit coat. The necktie was the emblem of masculine propriety. 
As Monica Lewinsky put it, in grand jury testimony that must have 
rung bittersweet with haberdashers everywhere, ``Ties were a big issue 
with us.'' If neckties are an endangered species, it should not be 
too surprising. They are the ultimate Freudian accouterment in an 
increasingly gender-neutral workplace. In that sense, the old four-in-hand 
can seem as Neanderthal as pinup calendars and secretary-chasing. 
Neckwear is also associated with a more formal era, when people worked 
in downtown offices and did business face to face. These days, more 
of us do at least some of our work at home, or in suburban office 
parks far from the public gaze. And in an age when everyone is cool 
and confession is valued over concealment, neckties can seem awfully 
buttoned up, their wearers secretive, rigid and constrained. On sitcoms, 
a high-school student in a tie is usually a geek, the sort of social 
climber who intends to run for student council president. He may be 
liked, as Biff says in ``Death of a Salesman,'' but he isn't well 
liked. So why do women (who account for half of all necktie purchases) 
keep buying them for men? Dr. Joyce Brothers has weighed in on the 
subject. ``It is a gift of manhood,'' she said, citing an ``implied 
intimacy'' that prevents women from giving ties to just any casual 
acquaintance or co-worker. A cigar may be just a cigar, but Ms. Lewinsky 
knew that a necktie is something else again, which is why she made 
presents of them to the commander in chief. There's no equivalent 
to the tie in women's wardrobes. They once tried floppy bow ties but 
soon abandoned them for a less derivative brand of business attire. 
And in men's wardrobes, there is no substitute: Without neckties to 
channel decorative instincts, men are left to flounder uncertainly 
in a sea of corduroys, khakis and ``dressy casuals.'' G.K. Chesterton 
once said, ``When man ceases to believe in God, he does not believe 
in nothing. He believes in anything.'' Post-necktie, we may be in 
for the sartorial equivalent. Besides, a necktie implies a certain 
maturity in a man, the way long pants once did. Should we really be 
wearing T-shirts and flip-flops to the office when we're past the 
age of reason? Haven't school districts across the country, in adopting 
dress codes and uniforms, acted on the belief that disdainful clothing 
and disdainful behavior are connected? There are signs of a backlash 
against the untie-ing of adult America as well. The Douglas County, 
Neb., Register of Deeds has adopted an employee dress code, including 
ties for male managers, and sent a copy to private firms whose employees 
often visit the office, in the hope that they, too, will comply. And 
the necktie on America's most influential office worker, Dilbert, 
always points upward, an inextinguishable symbol of hope in the office-cubicle 
wasteland. Either that, or it badly needs ironing. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>