<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981204.0246 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Noam Chomsky is spinning a fable. Chomsky, linguist, teacher, author 
and social critic, is sitting in a pose so customary it has been captured 
in scores of photographs taken since he upended the study of language 
40 years ago. He leans slightly back in his chair, one foot propped 
on the pulled-out bottom drawer of his desk, hands aloft. His office 
at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology exudes both a Spartan 
asceticism and a pleasant disorderliness: the primary decor consists 
of piles of paper on the floor. Imagine, Chomsky says, that some divine 
superengineer, in a single efficient stroke, endowed humans with the 
power of language where formerly they had none. This idea of a single, 
brilliantly designed language mechanism is the cornerstone of Chomsky's 
newest _ and most unconventional _ approach to the discipline he founded 
in 1957. Chomsky, who turns 70 on Dec. 7, is the father of modern 
linguistics and remains the field's most influential practitioner. 
Although he has revised his theoretical framework over the years, 
no modification is as dramatic as the present one, called the Minimalist 
Program, in which he largely breaks with the last four decades of 
his own work. The Minimalist Program, said the linguist Morris Halle, 
Chomsky's longtime colleague at MIT, ``is the most radical thing I've 
ever heard anybody say in linguistics.'' Though Chomsky's method has 
changed, his fundamental mission has remained the same: to construct 
a symbolic representation of the ``language faculty'' _ the inborn 
mental endowment that allows human beings to acquire, use and understand 
language. But unlike its predecessors, the Minimalist Program (or 
Minimalism for short) seeks to do this in the most streamlined way 
possible, dispensing with concepts that were more or less canonical 
in Chomsky's earlier work, like ``deep structure'' and ``surface structure.'' 
``All the properties which were explained in terms of deep and surface 
structure were really mistakenly described,'' Chomsky said. ``And 
they ought to be explained, and maybe can be explained better, without 
postulating these systems.'' Linguists hope his new approach is the 
start of a major breakthrough. A slender, sharp-featured man with 
graying wavy hair and wire-rimmed glasses, Chomsky was dressed casually 
on this morning in a sweater, running shoes and corduroy trousers. 
His voice is soft and measured, and he speaks as he writes, in perfectly 
formed sentences that spin out into page-long, reasoned paragraphs. 
To be in Chomsky's presence, a colleague once said, is to see ``the 
overwhelming picture of Rational Man standing before you.'' The theory 
of language that Chomsky introduced in 1957, often called the Chomsky 
revolution, has been equated with Darwin's theory of evolution and 
Freud's theory of the unconscious in terms of its importance in the 
history of ideas: it was the first concerted approach to investigating 
the human mind through a systematic study of how people produce and 
understand sentences. For the first half of this century, structural 
linguistics reigned as the field's dominant methodology. Structuralism 
viewed language as a purely social phenomenon, like tool making or 
table manners. Deeper questions of language and mind, including how 
young children can dope out their native language from the wash of 
adult talk surrounding them, were never considered. But Chomsky was 
deeply troubled by this account. In the mid-1950s he began wrestling 
with questions he felt the structuralists could not answer: If language 
was simply learned behavior, what gave people the ability to produce 
and understand an infinite number of sentences, including those that 
had never before been uttered? How did children acquire language seemingly 
spontaneously, without being overtly taught? Chomsky was by nature 
a questioner _ and, where he deemed necessary, an exploder _ of received 
truths. Over the years, this trait became evident in his political 
work, including his early opposition to the Vietnam War, his outspoken 
condemnation of U.S. policy in Central America, East Timor and elsewhere, 
and his castigation of the mainstream news media in general (and The 
New York Times in particular) for what he describes as complicity 
with governmental and business interests. When it came to taking on 
50 years of structural linguistics, Chomsky was singularly well suited 
for the task. Growing up in Philadelphia, he was exposed to language 
scholarship firsthand through the work of his father, William, an 
eminent Hebraist. As an undergraduate at the University of Pennsylvania, 
Chomsky studied linguistics, mathematics and philosophy, setting the 
foundation for his novel perspective. Language, Chomsky came to believe, 
was rooted not in behavior but in biology _ in an inborn set of principles 
that speakers unconsciously draw on whenever they produce or understand 
sentences. The goal of linguistics, he argued, should be to reproduce 
these principles. Since one couldn't go mucking around in people's 
brains, the linguist would attempt to mirror the workings of these 
inborn principles with a set of abstract, quasi-mathematical rules 
intended to generate the range of possible sentences in a given language 
_ in other words, a generative grammar. Ultimately, he said, the aim 
of linguistics was to formulate not just the grammars of specific 
languages but a ``universal grammar'' as well _ a model of the shared 
properties that underpin all human language. It is these universal 
principles, Chomsky argued, that all people are ``born knowing'' and 
that allow children to acquire whatever native language they're exposed 
to. In the late 1950s, Chomsky ushered in modern linguistics with 
the publication of the monograph ``Syntactic Structures'' (1957), 
which set forth the theory of generative grammar. But early generative 
grammar was a rococo device. It posited an unconscious level of linguistic 
knowledge (the deep structure), which was distinct from what people 
actually say (the surface structure). It also contained a vast set 
of grammatical operations, called transformations, used to produce 
the range of constructions found in actual speech: questions, statements 
and the like. But this thicket of rules presented a major obstacle 
to the development of universal grammar. A true universal grammar, 
Chomsky argued, must satisfy two conditions. The first requires it 
to be detailed enough to describe any possible construction in any 
human language: questions in Navajo, passive sentences in Japanese, 
relative clauses in Urdu. This is called the condition of ``descriptive 
adequacy.'' By contrast, the second condition, known as ``explanatory 
adequacy,'' required the grammar to be simple enough to reflect the 
small set of inborn principles that allow humans to acquire and use 
language. For years, linguistic research was snagged between these 
two competing demands. ``The entire development of Chomskyan generative 
grammar is a history of tension between descriptive and explanatory 
adequacy,'' said Howard Lasnik, a professor of linguistics at the 
University of Connecticut and a frequent collaborator of Chomsky's. 
``In order to have a descriptively adequate theory of language, you 
need to have a rich variety of descriptive devices available. But 
here's the kicker: The more devices available, the harder the child's 
task in sorting through the maze of possibilities.'' This impasse 
persisted until the early 1980s, when Chomsky partly resolved it with 
a more streamlined framework called Principles and Parameters. ``People 
were discovering completely new and unexpected properties of languages,'' 
he said. ``It was beginning to become possible to find what at some 
level we know must be true: that they're all cast in the same mold, 
otherwise you couldn't learn any of them. And though they look extremely 
different, you began to see how they really were variations on the 
same theme.'' Out of this work, the Minimalist Program emerged in 
the early 1990s. Minimalism takes as its point of departure an essential 
fact about language: it is a system of communication connecting sound 
and meaning. Now comes the unorthodox part: Minimalism speculates 
that this system has been optimally designed _ that the connection 
of sound to meaning was forged as simply as possible, as by the divine 
superengineer of Chomsky's fable. Any theory of language, therefore, 
should reflect this simple design. To that end, Minimalism jettisons 
most of the baggage of early Chomskyan grammar. What remains is a 
single, multipurpose mechanism used to generate the same rich array 
of sentences that transformations did. Ideally, the Minimalist Program 
will do what earlier models could not: be both simple and complex 
enough to fulfill the competing demands of a true universal grammar. 
Some linguists say it holds out at least a tentative promise. Others, 
however, find Chomsky's new program difficult to work in, and they 
continue to use alternative models that have sprung up over the years. 
``There have been a whole lot of linguists who have adopted it and 
seem _ for reasons that are incomprehensible to me _ to find it attractive,'' 
said James McCawley, a prominent linguist at the University of Chicago. 
``There are others, like me, who find it completely unintelligible.'' 
As Chomsky is quick to point out, Minimalism is years away from being 
a full-fledged theory (hence the term program). ``It's difficult, 
and it's also a shot in the dark,'' he said. ``You don't have any 
particular reason to believe that it's going to work.'' Should it 
succeed, however, he will be that much closer to realizing the goal 
he set for his field 40 years ago. ``The subject,'' Chomsky said, 
``is trying to find out how humans really work.'' 
</TEXT>
</DOC>