<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981204.0375 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
After nine months of grueling debate, Mexican lawmakers have reached 
broad agreement on measures to refinance the government's troubled 
$61 billion bank bailout, but final accord has been stymied by a high-stakes 
dispute over the resignation of a top government finance official. 
The protracted discussion in the Mexican Congress over the bailout 
program has compounded the uncertainties in the country's weak banking 
system and worried international investors at a time when Mexico is 
struggling to defend its basically strong economy against contagion 
from global market turmoil. In a sign of how closely the markets are 
watching the debate, a spate of rumors Wednesday of an imminent resolution 
sent Mexican bank stocks shooting up as much at 15 percent. Deputies 
from the government's Institutional Revolutionary Party or PRI, and 
the National Action Party or PAN, a more conservative opposition group, 
said Friday that they are in ``fundamental agreement'' on the outlines 
of a new autonomous agency which will absorb the debts now held by 
the bailout fund. They also agreed on a new program to help small 
debtors and homeowners. ``We are ready to do this deal,'' said Angel 
Aceves Saucedo, chairman of the committee of the lower house of Congress 
where the bank package was forged. Together the PRI and the PAN have 
mobilized enough votes to pass the proposal in the lower house, the 
Chamber of Deputies. If the PRI supports it there, approval by the 
Senate, where the PRI holds a majority, is assured. But at the last 
minute, the two parties clashed over the role of Guillermo Ortiz, 
an economist who heads the Banco de Mexico, the central bank, and 
was Mexico's finance minister until early this year. The PAN delegates 
are determined to force Ortiz to step down. An ultimatum they have 
issued is one of the most direct and serious challenges to President 
Ernesto Zedillo that Mexicans have seen in their young democracy, 
which came to life with elections in July 1997. The PAN argues that 
the original bailout, which Ortiz hammered together in the heat of 
a severe economic crisis in 1995, violated the constitution by taking 
on government debt without approval from the Congress. At the time 
the bailout was credited with saving the country's banking system 
from collapse due to soaring interest rates and chronic mismanagement. 
But opposition legislators balked at the government's proposals to 
refinance the bailout program, accusing it of rescuing corrupt bankers 
at the expense of Mexican citizens. ``The bailout was illegal,'' said 
Gerardo Buganza Salmeron, a PAN deputy who helped to write the bailout 
proposal. ``It was done wrong. President Clinton is facing impeachment 
proceedings because of a little slip-up. Why shouldn't we demand that 
Guillermo Ortiz leave if he made a mistake that cost Mexican taxpayers 
$61 billion?'' PAN lawmakers wrote a special clause into their bailout 
proposal which would require Ortiz to leave his central bank post, 
and have said they would not support the rest of the package without 
that clause. In recent days PRI deputies, responding to cues from 
Zedillo, stepped up their defense of Ortiz. They say that the opposition 
cannot legally force him to resign because the central bank enjoys 
special independence. Losing Ortiz would be a sharp political blow 
for Zedillo. As finance minister, Ortiz engineered one of the most 
conspicuous achievements of Zedillo's presidency, the rapid economic 
recovery which brought Mexico back from a crushing recession to more 
than 7 percent growth in two years. In addition, sending Ortiz to 
head the central bank was part of Zedillo's plan to insure financial 
stability through the transition to the next president in the year 
2000. In October, government officials said, Ortiz tendered his resignation, 
but Zedillo rejected it. Friday, an emissary from the executive branch 
met with PAN deputies to insist that Ortiz's resignation is out of 
the question. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>