<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981204.0481 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Bill Bradley, the former New York Knicks basketball star who represented 
New Jersey for three terms in the Senate as a Democrat, took the first 
major step Friday toward running for president in the year 2000 and 
said he could foresee nothing that ``would derail me at this stage.'' 
Describing himself as rejuvenated in the two years since he left office 
and now ``on top of my game,'' Bradley, 55, said he believed he could 
offer the leadership needed to address the nation's problems _ from 
the lack of affordable health care insurance to childhood poverty. 
``I think I can unleash the potential of the American people,'' he 
said, standing in the gymnasium of a community center here. ``I see 
the energy out there every day that makes the economy run, makes the 
technological breakthroughs. I want to turn that energy toward dealing 
with the problems in this country.'' Bradley, who resisted efforts 
by supporters to persuade him to run in 1988 and 1992, would most 
likely face a difficult fight for the nomination. Despite his celebrity 
and track record raising millions of dollars in previous campaigns, 
he would need to overcome the well-financed organization that Vice 
President Al Gore has built across the country over the last six years 
and the inherent advantage Gore has as the nation's second-highest 
official. Another challenge for Bradley would be in finding a message 
to differentiate himself from Gore, and other possible Democratic 
contenders. And Friday, Bradley resisted making such a distinction. 
``This is not about Vice President Gore and me,'' he said. ``This 
is about telling people what I believe, going out and talking to people, 
as I have been doing for 30 years.'' Bradley took the first step toward 
a presidential bid by formally creating a Bill Bradley Presidential 
Exploratory Committee. He will meet with fellow Democrats in New Jersey 
over the weekend to begin putting together the apparatus for a presidential 
campaign, which will be based in New Jersey. Early next week, he will 
travel to Los Angeles and San Francisco to meet with supporters and 
begin fund-raising, his aides said. Bradley will need to raise between 
$22 million and $25 million in the next year to be able to successfully 
compete for the nomination, particularly now that the presidential 
primary process is likely to be front-loaded with contests in New 
York and California on March 7. Bradley left little doubt that he 
was seriously committed to the race. Although his family did not join 
him at the announcement, he noted that he had the full support of 
his wife, Ernestine, and his daughter, Teresa Ann, a junior at New 
York University. ``This is training camp,'' he said. ``This is when 
you get your team together. You see how you relate to each other, 
try to work out some plays, and the regular season is when you form 
the official campaign. I can tell you that I have never gone to training 
camp without expecting that I would be playing in the regular season.'' 
Bradley's advisers said they expected he would wage an ``anti-political'' 
campaign with an ``outside-the-Beltway'' message that would seek to 
reach voters directly and tap into voter frustration over the recent 
scandals in Washington. But Bradley, trying to paint his campaign 
as a positive mission, said he would not make the president's recent 
troubles an issue in the race. Even though he spent 18 years in Washington, 
Bradley sought to portray himself as an outsider. He often operated 
outside the traditional party structure in the Senate as well as in 
New Jersey. In the Senate, Bradley focused most of his efforts on 
overhauling the tax system, and on Third World debt, race relations, 
the environment, health care and education. When he left the Senate 
two years ago, Bradley declared that the political system was broken. 
He said Friday that his complaints then were about the amount of money 
in politics, the sensationalism of the news media, and about politicians 
who did not believe in core convictions. ``I am not sure that it has 
been proven what I said,'' he said. ``But I think it is important 
to try to make changes.'' At the time, he left open the possiblity 
of running for the presidency. He had thought about it in 1988 and 
1992, but both times, he said in a recent interview, he had decided 
he was not ready. In one of his books, ``Time Present, Time Past,'' 
he wrote that he was partly concerned about privacy for his family, 
as well as a fear of failure. He said he recently made up his mind 
to run because he had the full support of his family and because he 
truly believed that he was prepared this time. He described reaching 
a certain level of peace within himself. He said he intended to tell 
the American voters ``what I believe and take my chances.'' Since 
Bradley left the Senate two years ago, he has played various roles 
from professor to best-selling author. He taught at Notre Dame, Stanford 
University and the University of Maryland. He has also appeared on 
national television as an essayist for the CBS Evening News. Bradley 
also spent much of his time cultivating a network of friends and supporters 
whom he will now try to rely on for money and organizational help. 
Although Gore presents stiff opposition, some political analysts said 
that Bradley's celebrity should assist him and he would probrably 
lead other possible contenders. Other Democrats considering making 
a bid include Sens. John Kerry of Massachusetts, Bob Kerrey of Nebraksa 
and Paul Wellstone of Minnesota, and House Minority Leader Richard 
Gephardt of Missouri. Democratic political consultants who represent 
Gore and other possible contenders said they welcomed Bradley into 
the race. ``I've always thought it's going to be a big field,'' said 
Bob Squier, a Democratic political consultant who is handling Gore's 
campiagn. ``It's a prize worth fighting for.'' ``Right now, Mr. Gore 
is such a prohibitive favorite that it is difficult to imagine any 
of the other candidates justifying a race at the moment,'' said Larry 
Sabato, director of the University of Virginia's Center for Governmental 
Studies. ``That can change quickly. And Bradley is a genuine celebrity 
in the age of celebrity of all sorts, real and phony. He has established 
his credentials in the field of politics, and outside of it. He has 
a good issue base that ranges from campaign finance to economic issues.'' 
A former star basketball player at Princeton, Bradley went on to win 
an Olympic gold medal. He was also a Rhodes scholar before joining 
the New York Knicks. He played for the team from 1967 to 1977, helping 
them win two championships in 1970 and 1973 and earning a reputation 
for his integrity by refusing to endorse products. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>