<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981204.0360 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
In a country that has enjoyed democracy for less than a decade, an 
epic mayoral battle is being fought here in the capital between two 
rising political stars. The battle has drawn the attention of Beijing 
and Washington, where officials worry that the result could upset 
Taiwan's precarious standoff with mainland China. In a dead-even race, 
re-election of the incumbent on Saturday could presage a national 
victory in coming years for his pro-independence party, many here 
believe, which would mean serious new tensions across the Taiwan Strait. 
Victory by the challenger, on the other hand, could be the salvation 
of the long-ruling Nationalist Party and its way of getting along 
with mainland China: to operate like an independent country but swear 
homage to the long-term goal of unifying. The two leading candidates 
are both handsome, articulate and youthful. The incumbent, Chen Shui-bian, 
47, is from the upstart Democratic Progressive Party, which is committed 
to the eventual goal of Taiwan's independence. His challenger is Ma 
Ying-jeou, 48, of the Nationalist Party. The results are expected 
to influence the presidential election 16 months from now, in March 
2000, only the second democratic election for president in Taiwan's 
history. Then voters will decide whether to keep power in the hands 
of the Nationalist Party, or Kuomintang, which has ruled Taiwan since 
Chiang Kai-shek fled the mainland in 1949 but whose grip has begun 
to slip. ``The Kuomintang wants to use this race to stop the momentum 
of the Democratic Progressive Party, and especially of Chen Shui-bian,'' 
said Chu Yun-han, a political expert at National Taiwan University. 
``So many people see this as a bellwether for 2000.'' The Taipei mayoral 
race, the most important in nationwide elections for the legislature 
and city offices, has been argued largely over platitudes and the 
nitty-gritty of urban planning, with some silly costumes and mud-slinging 
along the way. But beneath the surface are sensitive issues of national 
identity, including Taiwan's relations with a Communist mainland that 
calls it renegade, and the internal cleavage between the majority 
here whose ancestors moved from the mainland long ago and the ``mainlanders,'' 
whose families escaped to Taiwan in 1949. The Nationalist Party remains 
rich and well organized at the local level. It still controls the 
presidency and is expected to retain control of the legislature. The 
popular president, Lee Teng-hui, who will step down in 2000, has skillfully 
carved a separate niche for Taiwan in the world. But the party remains 
formally committed to eventual reunification with the mainland, a 
formula that has appeased Beijing. The rival Democratic Progressive 
Party, with Chen as its brightest light, calls for Taiwan's independence. 
Mindful of Beijing's threats, Chen and other leaders promise not to 
act rashly if they gain power and to seek a referendum on future relations 
with the mainland. But the party's success would certainly raise tensions 
with Beijing, which cares deeply about even symbolic gestures on this 
issue. And it would cause jitters in Washington, which fears being 
drawn into any conflict. Such concerns seemed distant this week as 
the city took on a carnival air and residents reveled in the process 
of elections. Caravans blasting pleas from loudspeakers roamed streets 
lined with banners promoting the multitude of candidates. Fireworks 
crackled on the sidewalks, announcing candidates' frenetic hand-shaking 
tours of markets and parks. As an incumbent and a native-born Taiwanese, 
credited with improving the quality of city life by acting decisively 
to speed traffic and clean up vice, Chen should be a shoo-in. He faces 
a formidable challenger, though, in Ma, a former justice minister 
and a Harvard Law School graduate who embodies vigor and integrity. 
A third candidate is Wang Chien-shien, 60, of the New Party, a breakaway 
group from the Nationalists that is more strongly committed to reunification 
with the mainland. He is expected to take no more than about 10 percent 
of the votes, mostly at Ma's expense. Many Nationalists fear that 
if Chen wins this time, he would be nearly unbeatable if he ran for 
president. A victory by Chen may also throw the Nationalists into 
turmoil as the party struggles to agree on a presidential candidate 
strong enough to take him on. If Ma wins in this, his first try at 
elective office, he will certify himself as a future top candidate. 
While the Nationalists are extremely unlikely to let someone so green 
run for president in 2000, if he blunts Chen he would boost the confidence 
of the party. The core question of Taiwan's identity has scarcely 
been mentioned in the campaign. This is, of course, a race for mayor, 
but the candidates have a stronger reason for avoiding the issue: 
It could cost them votes. Both have large solid blocs of support, 
so they are dueling for an undecided middle of nearly one in five 
voters. And that middle, said John Hsieh, a political scientist at 
National Political University here, is part of the large majority 
of residents who prefer the status quo: to behave like an independent 
country but not to rile China by formally declaring it. This point 
was illustrated by Hsieh Tsai-ze, a 44-year-old noodle seller in the 
Songshan Market in Taipei, who was happy to shake Chen's hand this 
week as the candidate and cameras raced by. ``I support him because 
he does what he thinks is right,'' Hsieh said after the whirlwind 
passed. But on the question of Taiwan's independence, he is prudent. 
``It's not necessary,'' he said. ``The current situation is fine.'' 
For a contest so important, the mayoral campaign has been strangely 
devoid of major issues. Chen's slogan is, ``We have a beautiful dream, 
let's continue on with it.'' At vibrant rallies this week, in front 
of giant posters on which the Mona Lisa, Charlie Chaplin and Sun Yat-sen 
were portrayed as endorsing him, Chen asked, ``Are you better off 
today than you were four years ago?'' His supporters responded with 
a loud ``Yes!'' Ma, in turn, has tried to belittle Chen's achievements. 
``Taipei needs a better mayor,'' he repeats, saying citizens feel 
less secure and that future prosperity is in peril. Ma, who was born 
in Hong Kong after his parents fled the Communists and then moved 
to Taiwan when he was a year old, has had to counter another identity 
problem, reflecting the fading but still resonant cleavage between 
so-called mainlanders and the majority. The native-born Taiwanese 
have not forgotten their brutal subjugation by the invading Nationalists, 
and sometimes suspect that mainlanders have not embraced a Taiwanese 
identity. It is not clear how important this ethnic factor will be, 
but at rallies Ma sometimes breaks into an awkward version of the 
Taiwanese dialect to prove his roots. He has adopted as his campaign 
slogan, ``Taiwan First, Taipei First,'' and at the suggestion of Lee, 
the president, who was born here, he has started calling himself a 
New Taiwanese. At Ma's final rally, Lee sought to lay to rest the 
ethnic issue and some bitter memories. ``It's time to leave behind 
the tragedies of the past and step into the 21st century,'' Lee shouted 
to a chanting, flag-waving crowd in the tens of thousands. Some older 
people in the crowd wept as he spoke. Chen himself has felt the sting 
of the scandal-mongering so prevalent in election campaigns here. 
Known for closing down brothels and unlicensed ``hostess bars,'' he 
was embarrassed when a top aide was found to have frequented such 
places; the aide had to resign. Then a newspaper reported a totally 
unsupported allegation that the mayor had often flown to Macau to 
consort with prostitutes and to gamble. The charge was convincingly 
rebutted, but not before Chen's wife felt she had to reassure the 
public that the couple has a sex life. With few decisive issues, the 
old American advertising phrase ``Where's the beef?'' has somehow 
entered into the speech of many candidates, including those for mayor, 
as they accuse their opponents of lacking substantive proposals. A 
city council candidate, Chen Su-hua, has taken the concept further, 
distributing a flier that looks like a restaurant ad indicating that 
she can provide the beef. ``Beef Course Coupon,'' it says across the 
top, and below are fake coupons reading, for example, ``Women and 
children's security: roast beef dinner,'' and ``Environmental protection: 
stewed beef parts.'' That the plate of food pictured in the flier 
is actually grilled chicken seems to have gone unnoticed. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>