<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981204.0454 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
The way some residents tell it, the area on the edge of the Everglades 
National Park known as East Everglades can have all the charm of a 
swamp _ flooding, mosquitoes, remoteness. But the same residents describe 
the bright side of the neighborhood as ``magical'' and ``breathtaking.'' 
``The privacy, the quality of the air, the low noise, the safety, 
the spiritual contact with nature,'' said Jose Exposito, 38, an East 
Everglades resident and the owner of an orchid business, ``it's just 
a way of life you don't find anywhere.'' That way of life is about 
to end for the area, about 25 miles west of Miami. Exposito's rural 
neighborhood, government officials say, stands as one of the obstacles 
to a comprehensive effort to repair the vast expanse of wetlands that 
is the Everglades. Officials of the South Florida Water Management 
District, the agency that oversees flood protection and water supply 
for 16 counties, voted last month to spend about $120 million to buy 
out the 1,400 landowners in the East Everglades area by the year 2002. 
Those who refuse to sell will have their properties condemned, officials 
said. Officials of the water management agency say plans are for most 
of the area of 6,000 acres to have continuous standing water once 
the residents are gone, as they try to restore the flow of water to 
the Everglades National Park. ``This is one of these crucial components'' 
for restoration, said Mark Kraus, conservation director for the Everglades 
office of the National Audubon Society, ``and the people living in 
the area are victims of circumstance. We support the plan for buyout 
but we know there's a human factor here and there ought to be fair 
treatment, including relocation costs.'' East Everglades neighbors 
say money does not begin to compensate them for wiping out their homes 
and businesses, which started developing in the 1950s. The area, an 
eclectic collection of small farms, ranches and cement-block homes 
on plots of several acres, oozes self-sufficiency. There are no government 
services such as trash collection or door-to-door mail delivery, and 
if a house should catch fire, residents say, it would probably burn 
down before firefighters could reach it on the pothole-filled dirt 
strips they call roads. But residents say all troubles are forgotten 
at the sight of an Everglades sunset or with the feeling of independence 
that comes with their isolation. Among the residents, most of Hispanic 
descent, are breeders of birds, fish and snakes, growers of tropical 
crops like mamey, papaya guava, and those who assert their privacy 
with signs like, ``No Trespassing. Sniper on Duty.'' Now, some fences 
also feature signs reading, ``This land and my life are not for sale.'' 
Businesses include Exposito's Soroa Orchids, whose motto, ``an exquisite 
encounter with nature,'' is a promise he said he might not be able 
to keep somewhere else. And neighbors include Berta and Humberto Valdes, 
who built their 2,800-square-foot home in 1979 as a haven to raise 
five sons and had planned to grow mamey trees to support their retirement. 
``You can't compensate 20 years of a lifetime,'' said Mrs. Valdes, 
48, a teacher. ``We did everything right to build our family house, 
our retirement house. Our future retirement income is gone.'' Just 
like the Everglades, the community has become a casualty of what Everglades 
preservationists call a monumental environmental mistake _ ditching 
and draining that started in 1947 as a flood-control project mandated 
by Congress. It resulted in the loss of about half of the Everglades' 
four million acres to agricultural production and urban development 
and allowed rural communities like East Everglades to spring up even 
outside flood protection zones. The project by the Army Corps of Engineers 
spurred growth in South Florida, which today encompasses the state's 
most populous counties. But the project also disrupted the natural 
southward water flow that nourished plants and animals in the protected 
Everglades and fisheries in Florida Bay, endangering an ecosystem 
unlike any other in the world. To try to undo the damage, federal 
and state officials announced in October the comprehensive $8 billion 
plan, which is subject to congressional approval. It calls for reconstructing 
the flood control system and acquiring land to recapture through new 
reservoirs and channels most of the fresh water that is now channeled 
to the sea and to help restore the slow flow of water that seeped 
across the Everglades for centuries. For that, government officials 
say they need to retake more than 200,000 acres of mostly agricultural 
land and a few populated tracts, prominent among them East Everglades. 
The buyout in East Everglades was authorized under restoration efforts 
that preceded the proposed new plan, said officials of the Army Corps 
of Engineers. Now it is the humans' turn to pay. Except for a narrow 
coastal strip and some higher areas, most of South Florida at one 
time belonged to the Everglades, environmentalists say. But even today, 
they note, local governments are allowing development in areas that 
are needed for restoration. ``The development pressure is just enormous,'' 
said Alan Farago, conservation chairman of the Sierra Club's Miami 
Group. ``The Sierra Club considers urban sprawl the worst environmental 
problem we have. We're dealing with an almost intractable local political 
problem.'' Many East Everglades residents and their supporters said 
that as nature lovers they would understand the need to give the land 
back to the Everglades in order to insure its health. But many refuse 
to believe that their displacement is necessary to restore water flow 
to the Everglades National Park. Some note that the Army Corps of 
Engineers had proposed at one time a less costly alternative _ building 
a levee around the area to allow it to survive as more water was released 
into the park. Richard Bonner, a deputy district engineer for the 
Army Corps in Florida, said state officials had decided against that 
option for fear that such protection would induce more population 
growth and ultimately become more of a barrier to getting water to 
the park. ``Controlling growth is tough,'' Bonner said. ``It's hard 
to keep people out.'' Many neighbors are suspicious of the government's 
motives for deciding to dislocate them, and some even accuse the water 
management agency of manipulating levees and dikes to periodically 
flood the area on purpose to get them out, an accusation that agency 
officials deny. ``Nature is flooding them out,'' said John Neuharth, 
spokesman for the water management agency. The South Florida Water 
Management District had already been buying property from willing 
sellers in recent years _ 16 parcels have been acquired _ as it grappled 
with what to do about the area. The acrimony over the current plan 
underscores the pain involved in the displacement of hundreds of residents 
and doubts that any sale price would ever make them whole again. Many 
East Everglades homes were rebuilt or underwent major repairs after 
the area was hit by Hurricane Andrew in 1992. Among Cuban residents, 
there are comparisons to the land confiscations they suffered under 
Cuba's Communist rule. Neuharth said that the agency was getting many 
calls from willing sellers. But many homeowners are also digging in 
their heels. Ms. Valdes, who heads a loosely organized homeowners' 
association, says most residents do not want to sell and are consulting 
with lawyers. Some residents have closed their doors to government 
appraisers making the rounds in the area. Hector and Georgina Beceiro, 
who moved into the area in 1975, spending five years building their 
house on two and a half acres, where they grow plantains and tangerines, 
say it will take a court order to get them out. The ashes of her father, 
who once lived with them, are scattered around the property according 
to his wishes, the family said. ``I'm 67,'' said Beceiro, a retired 
salesman. ``Do you know what it's like to have to start over at 67? 
Can the government pay me for all the hours of work over 23 years?'' 
Madeleine Fortin, 48, a nurse, said she checked with state and Miami-Dade 
County officials before she bought her home only four years ago and 
was told there were no plans to acquire the land. She said she wanted 
quiet, having lived in a noisy apartment, and now had a view of a 
saw-grass prairie from her rooftop and sees white ibis, egrets and 
storks in her yard. Ms. Fortin accuses government officials of lies 
and double-talk and says that because the residents have been pitted 
against the Everglades, their plight has little sympathy from the 
public. If forced to sell, she vowed, ``I'd move away and give up 
my citizenship.'' ``It just takes my breath away that they're doing 
this to us,'' she said. ``If they can do this to us they can do this 
to anyone.'' 
</TEXT>
</DOC>