<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981204.0301 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
The Hindu nationalists who lead India's government were trounced in 
state elections last week because of their failure to deliver on pocketbook 
economic issues. But the defeats, which weakened their already tenuous 
grip on power at the national level, are also likely to make it more 
difficult for them to sign the nuclear test ban treaty. The Hindu 
nationalists, who lead an 18-party coalition government, would face 
heavy political criticism from militants in their Bharatiya Janata 
Party, as well as from their victorious opponents in the Congress 
Party, if India signed the test ban treaty without securing what could 
be sold at home as a good deal. ``To sign it is not an easy thing, 
especially for a government which enjoys a paper-thin majority and 
has its own domestic problems,'' said Pramod Mahajan, a senior leader 
in the party. ``The United States has to give something to this government 
so it can say, `Look what we got for it.' '' Since first India and 
then Pakistan conducted underground nuclear tests in May, India has 
engaged in long talks on nonproliferation and security issues with 
U.S. officials, who felt betrayed by India's action and imposed economic 
sanctions on both India and Pakistan after the tests. So far there 
has been no breakthrough despite more than 50 hours of discussions 
in seven diplomatic rounds between India's envoy, Jaswant Singh, and 
President Clinton's representative, Deputy Secretary of State Strobe 
Talbott. It is not clear that the eighth round, scheduled for January 
in New Delhi, will be any more productive. Prime Minister Atal Behari 
Vajpayee is to address Parliament next week on the status of the talks 
with the United States and the negotiations on the test ban treaty, 
officials in his administration said Thursday. Talbott spelled out 
the U.S. position three weeks ago in an article he wrote for The Times 
of India. The United States wants the Indians to sign the test ban 
treaty, to stop producing materials for nuclear weapons and to hold 
the development and deployment of nuclear-tipped missiles to the lowest 
possible levels, Talbott said. The Indians want a complete lifting 
of economic sanctions and the freedom to develop what they term a 
minimum, credible nuclear deterrent, according to Brajesh Mishra, 
principal secretary and national security adviser to Vajpayee. Since 
November Indian and Pakistani officials have been doing one thing 
the United States had requested of the adversaries, and that is to 
talk to each other in a series of formal meetings. But the meetings 
have yet to yield much fruit. Nonetheless, Clinton recently lifted 
some of the sanctions on the two nations to reward them for steps 
they have taken to reduce tensions in the region. For instance, Clinton 
decided to allow U.S. banks to lend money to their governments. But 
Clinton also exercised his discretion to lift more of the sanctions 
on Pakistan than on India _ a step that angered leaders in both the 
Bharatiya Janata and Congress parties here and that may complicate 
future efforts to sell the test ban treaty. The United States decided 
that Pakistan was such an economic basket case that the World Bank 
and the Asian Development Bank should be allowed to resume lending 
to it in hopes of restoring stability there, while such loans to economically 
stronger India should continue to be blocked. ``This discriminatory 
attitude creates an unhelpful atmosphere in India,'' Mishra said in 
an interview Thursday. ``And it creates problems for a smooth dialogue 
between India and the United States.'' Mahajan, the Hindu nationalist 
leader who serves in Parliament, was less diplomatic about what he 
described as the unequal punishments meted out to the two countries. 
``If you made a law,'' he said ``that you would hang someone for murder 
and then you say, `I won't hang him because he's thin, but I'll hang 
him because he's strong,' what kind of law is that? A murder is a 
murder.'' While Vajpayee may find that signing the treaty entails 
significant political risks, he is also in need of accomplishments 
that show he can govern effectively. His central political task in 
the coming months will be to win back the public's confidence by bringing 
down the prices of onions, potatoes and tomatoes. Their high prices 
led to his party's devastation at the polls. But his administration 
has also put its prestige on the line with the high-profile negotiations 
over nuclear issues with the United States. The political challenge 
for Vajpayee is to change the nature of the debate here on the test 
ban treaty. He has already said publicly that India learned enough 
from the nuclear tests in May to make further testing unnecessary. 
But the treaty is still widely seen here as part of an unfair effort 
by the big nuclear powers to keep the rest of the world out of their 
club. Vajpayee has bitterly referred to the status quo before India 
tested as ``nuclear apartheid.'' His primary opposition, the Congress 
Party, opposed the test ban treaty when it was in power in the mid-1990s. 
Its position was that the nuclear powers should agree to a scheduled 
series of steps toward nuclear disarmament before India would sign. 
Congress, which won three major state elections last week, has not 
taken a position on the treaty since the nuclear tests, but its leaders 
could depict a decision to sign as capitulation to American pressure. 
``The Americans continue to say, `We will unilaterally dictate the 
role of nuclear weapons in your defense strategy,''' said Mani Shankar 
Aiyar, spokesman for the Congress Party. ``It becomes very difficult 
for any Indian government to put a signature on a piece of paper for 
something that the American government wants that is not perceived 
to be for Indian security.'' Mishra, Vajpayee's security adviser, 
said he still believed that the political obstacles to India's becoming 
a party to the test ban treaty can be overcome if his country's core 
security needs are met. India has promised never to use nuclear weapons 
first, he said, but wants its adversaries to know that it would retaliate 
if nuclear weapons were used against India. To achieve that, he said, 
India needs the ability to develop missiles and the means to deliver 
them. So far, he said, the United States has not given India the room 
it needs to do so. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>