<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981204.0410 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
President Clinton challenged the House Judiciary Committee's impeachment 
inquiry Friday night, opening a counteroffensive to broaden and slow 
the panel's deliberations while raising doubts in the public mind 
about the fairness and scope of the proceedings, White House officials 
said. Responding to the committee's invitation to present Clinton's 
case next Tuesday, only days before the panel is to vote on articles 
of impeachment, the president's lawyers asked for at least three days 
to raise questions about the legal and constitutional basis for the 
impeachment inquiry. In the opening passage of a letter sent to the 
Judiciary Committee on Friday evening, the two top White House lawyers 
dealing with impeachment, Charles Ruff and Gregory Craig, said the 
stakes involved were extraordinarily high. ``Short of a declaration 
of war,'' they wrote, ``there is no more significant or grave constitutional 
process than the impeachment inquiry currently under way in your committee. 
Should the House of Representatives approve an article of impeachment 
against the president and send it to the Senate for trial, the impact 
on the national government and on the American people as a whole would 
be profound. For that reason alone, this process must be deliberate, 
thorough, fair and expeditious.'' The tone of the letter signaled 
an effort to present a vigorous defense of the president against accusations 
of perjury, obstruction of justice and abuse of power raised by Kenneth 
Starr, the independent counsel. Many in the White House assume that 
the politically polarized committee will vote along party lines to 
approve at least one article of impeachment against the president. 
The counter-arguments the White House hopes to present next week appeared 
aimed at moderate Republicans who are still trying to decide whether 
to vote for impeachment on the House floor. Rep. Henry Hyde, R-Ill., 
the chairman of the Judiciary Committee, did not immediately respond 
to the White House proposal. ``We made the decision that we want to 
go up and demonstrate that these proceedings have not been fair,'' 
said Joe Lockhart, the White House press secretary. ``None of the 
allegations that have been made rise to the standard of impeachment. 
It's that simple. This is not a bank shot.'' Lockhart also denied 
that the White House proposal was a delaying tactic. He said that 
the committee could still vote on articles of impeachment by the end 
of the week if the president's lawyers are allowed four days to make 
his case. The White House letter echoes complaints that Clinton's 
partisans have raised throughout the process. They believe that the 
Republican-dominated committee has conducted a partisan inquiry that 
has not provided Clinton adequate opportunity to defend himself against 
the charges raised in Starr's impeachment referral. With the committee 
rapidly approaching a vote on articles of impeachment, the White House 
clearly wants to slow down the process and raise issues it believe 
have been given short shrift in the panel's accelerated schedule. 
The White House said it wants to present three panels of witnesses 
over three to four days to discuss what constitutes an impeachable 
offense, the standards for prosecution for the accusations against 
Clinton raised by Starr, and prosecutorial misconduct. ``We feel it 
is essential to the president's defense that we be able to call our 
own witnesses and present our own arguments to address these important 
questions,'' Clinton's lawyers wrote. The White House proposed a day-long 
seminar on each of these questions, but did not reveal Friday the 
witnesses it intended to call to make its case. The president's lawyers 
said they would present a summation of Clinton's defense at the end 
of the panel discussions. The White House has contended all along 
that Clinton's misleading statements about his relationship with Monica 
Lewinsky do not constitute perjury, and therefore do not justify impeachment. 
The president has steadfastly denied tampering with witnesses or otherwise 
obstructing justice. He also has said that none of his actions constitute 
an abuse of power. A senior White House official said that the letter 
to the Judiciary Committee reflected ``enormous frustration in this 
building'' with what he called the precipitous pace and one-sided 
nature of the impeachment proceeding. ``We don't even know what we're 
charged with,'' this official said, demanding anonymity. ``If this 
were a speeding ticket, at least we'd know how much over the limit 
we'd gone. These charges are completely unformed and politically motivated.'' 
As part of its defense, the White House wants to use next week's hearing 
to once again showcase what it calls misconduct on the part of Starr. 
When Starr appeared before the committee 10 days ago, Clinton's lead 
private lawyer, David Kendall, grilled Starr for more than an hour 
on what Kendall contended were leaks from his office, intimidation 
of witnesses, selective presentation of testimony and deceptive investigative 
techniques. Kendall did not raise a single point in defense of the 
president's actions, however. Now the White House says that Kendall 
was not given enough time to defend the president. ``With the exception 
of one hour of time provided to us for questioning Mr. Starr at the 
end of his appearance before the committee on Nov. 19, however, we 
have been foreclosed from playing any role,'' the letter said. ``We 
anticipate that we will require no more than three to four days of 
the committee's time to deal with the topics identified above, at 
which time counsel for the president will present a final argument 
as to why, given the law, the facts and these circumstances, this 
committee should not report out articles of impeachment to the full 
membership of the House of Representatives,'' the letter concluded. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>