<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981204.0473 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
With the House Judiciary Committee just a week away from a scheduled 
vote on articles of impeachment against President Clinton, the White 
House challenged the panel's inquiry Friday night by requesting several 
days to present a defense that would slow the committee's deliberations. 
Responding to the committee's invitation to appear next Tuesday, the 
president's lawyers sought to broaden the impeachment inquiry while 
raising doubts in the public mind about the proceedings' fairness 
and scope. They asked for three or four days to call witnesses and 
raise questions about the legal and constitutional basis for the inquiry. 
In the opening passage of a letter sent to the Judiciary Committee 
on Friday evening, the two top White House lawyers dealing with impeachment, 
Charles Ruff and Gregory Craig, said the stakes were extraordinarily 
high. ``Short of a declaration of war,'' they wrote, ``there is no 
more significant or grave constitutional process than the impeachment 
inquiry currently under way in your committee. Should the House of 
Representatives approve an article of impeachment against the president 
and send it to the Senate for trial, the impact on the national government 
and on the American people as a whole would be profound. For that 
reason alone, this process must be deliberate, thorough, fair and 
expeditious.'' Rep. Henry Hyde, the Illinois Republican who heads 
the Judiciary Committee, did not immediately respond to the White 
House proposal. The tone of the White House letter signaled an effort 
to present a vigorous defense of the president against accusations 
of perjury, obstruction of justice and abuse of power raised by Kenneth 
Starr, the independent counsel. Many in the White House assume that 
the politically polarized committee will vote along party lines to 
approve at least one article of impeachment. The counterarguments 
the White House hopes to present next week appear aimed at moderate 
Republicans who are still trying to decide whether to vote for impeachment 
on the House floor. ``We made the decision that we want to go up and 
demonstrate that these proceedings have not been fair,'' said Joe 
Lockhart, the White House press secretary. ``None of the allegations 
that have been made rise to the standard of impeachment. It's that 
simple. This is not a bank shot.'' Lockhart denied that the White 
House proposal was a delaying tactic. He said the committee could 
still vote on articles of impeachment by the end of next week if the 
president's lawyers were allowed four days to make his case. The White 
House letter echoes complaints that Clinton's partisans have raised 
throughout the process. They maintain that the committee's Republican 
majority has conducted a partisan inquiry that has not provided Clinton 
an adequate opportunity to defend himself against the charges raised 
in Starr's referral. With the committee rapidly approaching a vote 
on impeachment, the White House clearly wants to slow the process 
and raise issues it says have been given short shrift in the panel's 
accelerated schedule. The White House said it wanted to present three 
panels of witnesses over three to four days to discuss what constitutes 
an impeachable offense, the standards for prosecution of the acts 
that Starr has attributed to the president, and prosecutorial misconduct. 
``We feel it is essential to the president's defense that we be able 
to call our own witnesses and present our own arguments to address 
these important questions,'' Clinton's lawyers wrote to the committee. 
The White House proposed a daylong seminar on each of those questions 
but did not disclose any list of witnesses it intended to call to 
make its case. The president's lawyers said they would present a summation 
of Clinton's defense at the end of the panel discussions. The White 
House has contended all along that Clinton's misleading statements 
under oath about his relationship with Monica Lewinsky do not constitute 
perjury, and therefore do not justify impeachment. The president has 
steadfastly denied tampering with witnesses or otherwise obstructing 
justice, and has also said that nothing he did constituted abuse of 
power. A senior White House official said the letter to the Judiciary 
Committee reflected ``enormous frustration in this building'' with 
what this official called the headlong pace and one-sided nature of 
the impeachment proceedings. As part of its defense, the White House 
wants to use the hearings next week to showcase once again what it 
calls Starr's misconduct. When Starr appeared before the committee 
two weeks ago, Clinton's lead private lawyer, David Kendall, grilled 
him for more than an hour on what Kendall contended were leaks from 
the independent counsel's office, intimidation of witnesses, selective 
presentation of testimony and deceptive investigative techniques. 
Kendall did not raise a single point in defense of the president's 
actions, however. The White House says Kendall was not given enough 
time to defend the president. ``With the exception of one hour of 
time provided to us for questioning Mr. Starr at the end of his appearance 
before the committee,'' the letter Friday evening read, the White 
House has been ``foreclosed from playing any role'' in the impeachment 
proceedings. ``We anticipate,'' the letter concluded, ``that we will 
require no more than three to four days of the committee's time to 
deal with the topics identified above, at which time counsel for the 
president will present a final argument as to why, given the law, 
the facts and these circumstances, this committee should not report 
out articles of impeachment to the full membership of the House of 
Representatives.'' 
</TEXT>
</DOC>