<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981204.0363 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Unocal Corp. has withdrawn from a consortium that planned an $8 billion 
energy pipeline system traversing war-torn Afghanistan, a company 
official said Friday. The decision was made under the pressure of 
low world oil prices, concern about the presence of the accused terrorist 
Osama bin Laden in Afghanistan, and feminist groups that assailed 
Unocal's contacts with the Taliban, the fundamentalist Islamic movement 
that rules the country. In addition, Unocal has closed its offices 
in three of the four Caspian-region republics in which it operated, 
making it the first large foreign oil company in the world to retreat 
from the area. ``The biggest reason is $12 oil,'' Scott Barber, the 
head of Unocal's remaining regional office in Baku, said in a telephone 
interview. ``You have to make priorities.'' The moves come against 
a backdrop of cost-cutting and huge mergers in the oil industry as 
world crude prices have plummeted. Unocal has responded to the difficult 
business climate by slimming down. Last month it withdrew from another 
consortium that had proposed a $2.9 billion pipeline to ship natural 
gas produced in Turkmenistan to Turkey. The company has also said 
it will cut capital spending next year by up to $650 million. ``There 
is a reassessment of activities everywhere, and especially the Caspian,'' 
said Julia Nanay, a consultant at Petroleum Finance Co. in Washington. 
``At oil prices at $10 or less, how do you make money? That is the 
question for this industry.'' Unocal's withdrawal from the Central 
Asia Gas consortium, which has yet to be officially announced, took 
effect Friday. Without Unocal, and with little prospect of another 
big company taking its place, the project is probably dead, analysts 
said. The other consortium members are the government of Turkmenistan, 
the former Soviet republic; Delta Oil Co. of Saudi Arabia; Itochu 
Corp. and Inpex of Japan; Hyundai Engineering and Construction Co. 
of South Korea, and Crescent Group of Pakistan. When Unocal joined 
the project in 1995, it was viewed by many analysts as the most audacious 
gambit of the 1990s oil rush on the Caspian. The idea was to pre-empt 
other companies trying to solve the region's greatest problem _ it 
is landlocked _ and transport oil and natural gas from Turkmenistan 
across Afghanistan to Pakistan. Turkmenistan has the world's fourth-largest 
reserves of natural gas. There was to have been a 1,005-mile oil pipeline 
and a companion 918-mile natural-gas pipeline, in addition to a tanker-loading 
terminal in Pakistan's Arabian Sea port of Gwadar. At the oil prices 
that prevailed until Asia's economic collapse, the company projected 
annual revenue of $2 billion, or enough to recover the cost of the 
entire project in five years. While many industry officials and analysts 
questioned the wisdom of planning such a huge infrastructure project 
across a war-ravaged country, Unocal opened offices in Kazakhstan, 
Uzbekistan, Pakistan and Turkmenistan. To help it sell the project 
to the many governments involved, Unocal hired retired senior U.S. 
diplomats like former Secretary of State Henry Kissinger; a former 
ambassador to Pakistan, Robert Oakley; and a Caucasus expert, John 
Maresca. Problems began with the Taliban's capture of the Afghan capital, 
Kabul, in September 1996. Unocal initially took a positive view of 
the movement's triumph, but then retreated when world attention focused 
on the ruling clerics' treatment of women, who are forbidden to work 
or attend school. The Feminist Majority Foundation, a Los Angeles 
group, petitioned the state of California to revoke Unocal's charter, 
and Mavis Leno, the wife of ``The Tonight Show'' host, Jay Leno, attended 
a company shareholder meeting last June to complain about its dealings 
with the Taliban. Finally, on Aug. 20, the United States fired Tomahawk 
missiles into Afghanistan against bin Laden, whom it accused of masterminding 
deadly explosions at U.S. embassies in Tanzania and Kenya. The next 
day, Unocal suspended the pipeline project until the Afghan government 
was recognized by the United States. Some Unocal officials said the 
company feared sanctions if it was perceived as circumventing U.S. 
policy by remaining active in Afghanistan while a manhunt was on for 
bin Laden. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>