<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981204.0471 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
For years, the police union here has pushed a proposal that would 
allow it to take its contract disputes to a state panel, where union 
leaders hope to win large raises for city police officers. While Mayor 
Rudolph Giuliani has warned of dire consequences if the proposal becomes 
law, labor experts say it may not prove as lucrative as union leaders 
hope, or quite as ruinous as the mayor fears. The state Legislature 
passed the proposal this week, and union leaders believe that Gov. 
George Pataki may finally sign it into law this time, after vetoing 
a similar proposal in the past. New York City police officers have 
long complained that they earn far less money than their suburban 
counterparts, lagging police officers on Long Island by more than 
$10,000 a year in salary, for instance. The Patrolmen's Benevolent 
Association, the union representing the city's 29,000 officers, hopes 
that having the state panel settle contract disputes will give New 
York officers salaries comparable to those in the state's other police 
departments. Giuliani has long maintained that giving the state the 
power to award raises to police officers could bankrupt the city by 
starting a chain reaction in which the city's other municipal unions 
would call for similar raises in the name of parity. A 1 percent raise 
for police officers would cost the city about $15 million a year, 
one mayoral aide said, but a 1 percent raise across the board would 
cost it $100 million. A similar bill passed the State Legislature 
in 1996, only to be undone by a stunning series of reversals of fortune. 
First, Pataki vetoed the bill, and then the state Legislature took 
the rare step of overriding the veto. But the law was struck down 
after the Giuliani administration challenged its constitutionality 
and won in court. Pataki kept his intentions to himself Friday, saying 
that he would not comment on whether he would sign the bill until 
he had seen it. Privately, mayoral aides said they were concerned 
that the governor would sign it. Publicly, Giuliani put pressure on 
the governor to veto the bill, saying, ``It violates every principle 
that he stands for.'' Signing the bill could erode the cordial relations 
that the two men have enjoyed in recent years, which culminated in 
the mayor's endorsement of Pataki in the governor's recent re-election 
campaign. And it could resonate in the future. As both men weigh their 
ambitions for higher office, they are trying to consolidate their 
reputations as fiscal conservatives. But some labor experts and union 
leaders said that even if the bill became law, it might not help police 
officers as much as some expect. Under current state law, most police 
departments that cannot agree on a contract can go before the state 
panel, the Public Employment Relations Board, for arbitration. New 
York City, whose police union must go before the city's Officer of 
Collective Bargaining to settle impasses, is one of five local jurisdictions 
with its own panel. In 1997, the city's panel ruled that the police 
union had to accept a contract without raises for the first two years. 
The new legislation would give the police union _ and the unions in 
the other four jurisdictions _ the option of going before the state 
panel, which can consider the salaries of other police departments 
in the state when making its decision. ``I would caution people that 
this does not mean that they will be making salaries comparable with 
Nassau and Suffolk right away,'' said Lou Matarazzo, the president 
of the Patrolmen's Benevolent Association. ``But it would be unlikely 
that we would get double zeroes.'' In fact, there is wide disparity 
among police departments around the state, even among departments 
that can bring impasse talks to the state panel. Suburban departments, 
which benefit from healthy tax bases, tend to pay their officers more. 
Urban departments, often struggling with dwindling tax bases and higher 
expenditures for social services, pay far less. In Albany, for instance, 
the starting salary for new police officers in 1997 was $28,334 a 
year, according to statistics provided by the United States Department 
of Justice. In Schenectady, it was $28,433 and in Buffalo, $31,792. 
Suburban departments paid more: Suffolk County had a $40,404 staring 
salary, Nassau County $30,336 and Rockland County $35,915. Police 
officers in New York City, by comparison, had a starting salary of 
$27,838, despite the city's entrance requirements, which are more 
rigorous than many departments'. They include two years of college 
or military experience. Daniel Collins, a professor at New York University 
who serves on the board of the city's Office of Collective Bargaining, 
said that there was no guarantee that arbitrators chosen by the state 
panel would award higher salaries than arbitrators chose by the city's 
panel. In fact, he noted, both panels use many of the same arbitrators. 
When arbitrating a contract dispute, the state panel can weigh the 
salaries and working conditions of police officers in comparable communities. 
But, by law, the panel must also consider ``the financial ability 
of the public employer to pay.'' Nonetheless, the police union is 
counting on the state panel to win better contracts. Matarazzo noted 
that securing this legislation had consumed most of his efforts for 
the last three years. The union endorsed Pataki and donated more than 
$160,000 to state candidates and committees in the last two years. 
``It would be my crowning glory,'' said Matarazzo, who is leaving 
the union presidency this year. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>