<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981204.0232 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
In the 1970s, composting was all the rage, an earth-friendly way to 
get rid of ``garbage'' and to create a material in which plants would 
revel. Lots of people took up the cause, and lots of them stopped 
doing it. True, composting is a natural, self-regulating process, 
bound to succeed. Even so, problems sometimes arise along the way. 
Perhaps the main complaint voiced by composters is that raw materials 
turn to compost too slowly. This can usually be traced to a limiting 
factor in what a pile is fed (that is, the raw materials), water or 
air. Compost piles work most quickly if the two most important foodstuffs 
_ nitrogen and carbon _ are in balance. Old, usually brown and dry 
plant materials, like autumn leaves, straw, hay and sawdust, are rich 
in carbon. The older the plant material, the richer it is in carbon. 
Nitrogen-rich materials include succulent green plant parts, like 
tomato stalks, vegetable waste from the kitchen and grass clippings, 
as well as manures. Nitrogen fertilizers are concentrated sources 
of nitrogen. They commonly are the active ingredients in commercially 
available compost ``activators.'' In autumn, the garden and yard generally 
yield an excess of compostable materials rich in carbon, so to speed 
up compost piles built now add supplemental nitrogen. Don't even attempt 
to balance out nitrogen and carbon materials too precisely, though. 
It's unnecessary, because microorganisms will eventually balance out 
an excess of one or the other by themselves, albeit slowly if the 
excess is of carbon foods. Attempts to be too precise are also unfeasible, 
because other factors come into play, like actual carbon and nitrogen 
concentrations and the particle sizes of the raw materials. Chopping 
up the raw materials is another way to speed up composting, giving 
microorganisms more initial surface area at which to chew away. Gasoline 
or electric-powered shredders will do the job, but I find a machete 
to be the most convenient tool for chopping coarse materials, everything 
from corn and broccoli stalks to a springy layer of bean plants. The 
machete does not leave materials uniformly fine, but it takes up little 
storage space (it's stuck in the ground near my compost pile) and 
needs no more maintenance than an occasional filing of the blade. 
How fine you chop the pieces is up to you, but the finer they are, 
the faster they'll compost. Another frequent cause of a sluggish compost 
pile is insufficient moisture. Sun and wind dry out piles that are 
freestanding or enclosed by wire mesh. A solid-walled enclosure not 
only helps speed things along by holding in moisture, but also retains 
generated warmth, so decomposition can continue even as outdoor temperatures 
cool. Water can be especially limited at this time of year, when you 
gather quantities of often dry materials, like autumn leaves. The 
cure for insufficient moisture is, of course, to add water, and the 
most effective way to do this is to layer raw materials, watering 
each layer as you build, just enough to make the surfaces glisten. 
The opposite condition, too much water, can also result in slow composting. 
And soggy ingredients lead to two other common composting problems: 
offensive odors and flies. When too much water gets into a compost 
pile, air is displaced and a whole new set of microorganisms goes 
to work, ones that work slowly and malodorously. The cure for a waterlogged 
pile is aeration, accomplished either by stirring the pile or by turning 
and rebuilding it. Rotating drum bins make it especially easy to stir 
ingredients. My bin, made of boards notched to stack like Lincoln 
Logs, also makes turning easy because the sides go down and up as 
I remove or add ingredients. To keep moisture at the right level, 
I water my compost pile as I add ingredients; then, when the bin is 
full, at about a four-foot height, I cover the top with black plastic 
film to seal in the moisture and keep out excess water from rainfall. 
Odors due to poor aeration also result when piles contain an excess 
of dense, succulent raw materials, like grass clippings or kitchen 
wastes. With either of these materials, the odor problem is compounded, 
because they are so rich in nitrogen. Any materials rich in nitrogen 
vent off the excess as ammonia gas, unless some carbon-rich materials 
are present to combine with the nitrogen. In this case, turning the 
pile and adding some fluffy, high-carbon material, like straw, puts 
everything in order. Some gardeners actually build compost bins out 
of straw bales. As the bales disintegrate, the straw conveniently 
balances out nitrogen-rich materials in subsequent piles. To monitor 
compost progress beyond what your nose or time will tell you, allowing 
you to make adjustments to an existing pile or to know what to do 
differently next time, slide the long probe of a compost thermometer 
deep within a pile's innards. Temperatures within a pile that is at 
least 27 cubic feet and that is built over the course of a few days 
can quickly soar to 140 degrees Fahrenheit, or higher. No heat is 
an indicator of insufficient moisture, nitrogen or air, or too small 
a pile. Under carefully controlled conditions, composting can go from 
start to finish in as little time as two weeks; I aim for finished 
compost in two to three months in warm weather; seven to eight months 
for piles built now. Whether progress is fast or slow, and whether 
or not intense heat is generated, any pile of living or once-living 
materials will eventually turn to compost, and a few benchmarks signal 
just when. Take the pile's temperature. Heat will no longer be generated. 
Look at the compost. Most raw materials will have been transmuted 
into a dark brown, crumbly fudge. Smell it. Finished compost has a 
pleasant, woodsy aroma. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>