<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981204.0435 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Following is the text of a letter signed by Charles Ruff, the White 
House counsel, and Gregory Craig, the special White House counsel 
who is coordinating President Clinton's defense, about plans for impeachment 
hearings: Short of a declaration of war, there is no more significant 
or grave constitutional process than the impeachment inquiry currently 
under way in your committee. Should the House of Representatives approve 
an article of impeachment against the president and send it to the 
Senate for trial, the impact on the national government and on the 
American people as a whole would be profound. For that reason alone, 
this process must be deliberate, thorough, fair and expeditious. We 
realize that the full committee has conducted two public hearings 
about impeachment-related issues _ one in which the committee heard 
testimony from Mr. Starr, one in which the committee heard testimony 
from witnesses about perjury. We also know that the Subcommittee on 
the Constitution conducted a public hearing on constitutional standards. 
We have been told that the committee issued subpoenas and took deposition 
testimony and, further, that the committee has held other proceedings 
in executive session. With the exception of one hour of time provided 
to us for questioning Mr. Starr at the end of his appearance before 
the committee on Nov. 19, however, we have been foreclosed from playing 
any role. We are grateful for the opportunity now to do so, and the 
purpose of this letter is to inform you of our intention to call witnesses 
to appear and testify as part of the committee's impeachment inquiry. 
It is our view that the proceedings to date have been inadequate and 
incomplete in their exploration of certain important issues relating 
to the proposed impeachment of President William Jefferson Clinton. 
For that reason, we propose to call panels of witnesses about some 
of the very issues that the committee has considered. We feel it is 
essential to the president's defense that we be able to call our own 
witnesses and present our own arguments to address these important 
questions. We plan to call witnesses to testify about the following 
topics: _ Constitutional standards for impeachment. _ Standards for 
prosecution for perjury, obstruction of justice and abuse of power. 
_ Prosecutorial misconduct and the impact of tainted evidence. The 
committee has set aside Dec. 8 for the purpose of hearing from the 
president's counsel, and our request may require some modification 
of the committee's plans. We take comfort, however, in the representation 
that Chairman Hyde made to the full committee at the beginning of 
the proceeding on Nov. 19, when he assured the members of the committee 
that ``the president's counsel will have unlimited time to present 
his witnesses at the end of our hearings, when they are ready to do 
so.'' We anticipate that we will require no more than three to four 
days of the committee's time to deal with the topics identified above, 
at which time counsel for the president will present a final argument 
as to why, given the law, the facts and these circumstances, this 
committee should not report out articles of impeachment to the full 
membership of the House of Representatives. We believe that, beginning 
on Tuesday, Dec. 8, our presentation could be concluded by the end 
of the week. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>