<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981204.0293 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
When Melissa Hacker was an elementary school girl growing up in New 
York City, she remembers feeling that her relationship with her mother, 
Ruth Morley, a successful costume designer for Hollywood films, was 
different from the relationships other children had with their parents. 
``I grew up knowing there were things she was afraid of that had to 
do with her refugee experience,'' Ms. Hacker says. ``Even when I was 
a little girl I would try to protect her from this big, bad, dangerous 
world. I felt that since so many scarier things had happened to her 
when she was my age than had happened to me, I shouldn't bother her 
with my little child's troubles.'' It wasn't until many years later 
that Ms. Hacker, now 37, learned the full story of her mother's separation 
from her parents at the age of 13 in Vienna at the outset of the Holocaust. 
Ms. Morley, along with thousands of other Jewish children from Germany 
and Central Europe, was sent away to England where for the next year 
and a half she was shuttled among various foster homes. The story 
of Ms. Morley's emigration in January 1939 and its reverberations 
on Ms. Hacker's relationship with her mother, who died of breast cancer 
in 1991, form the core of Ms. Hacker's debut documentary film, ``My 
Knees Were Jumping: Remembering the Kindertransports,'' which is playing 
at Anthology Film Archives through Dec. 13. The Kindertransport is 
the name of the movement, organized by British Jews and Quakers, to 
rescue some 10,000 mostly Jewish children from the Nazis in the nine 
months before the outbreak of World War II. In Europe word spread 
quickly through the Jewish community that there was a rescue program 
for Jewish children, most of whom ranged in age from 5 to 17. Parents 
would bring their children to local Jewish community centers, where 
information and photographs were collected and sent to committees 
in England. A few weeks later transit papers would come back for some 
but not all of the children who applied. Usually the parents had only 
24 hours to prepare their children and say goodbye. Many of the trains 
left at night, and parents were not allowed on the platforms to see 
the trains off. The children were taken to the Netherlands, then transferred 
to ferries that took them to Britain. Roughly 80 percent of the children 
never saw their parents again. Ms. Morley was one of the lucky ones. 
She was reunited with her parents in England a year and a half later, 
and the family sailed to New York in the fall of 1940. The quirky 
title of Ms Hacker's documentary refers to an incident Ms. Morley 
recounts in the film. On Kristallnacht, Nov. 9, 1938, she was hiding 
in a back room with her older half-sister, Lily, when Nazi officers 
stormed into the apartment, smashed furniture and arrested her father, 
a pharmacist. When Ms. Morley began to scream, Lily muffled her cries 
with a pillow. After being held in prison for 10 days, Ms. Morley's 
father was brought home by two Nazi officers. Listening through the 
wall in the next room as one of them telephoned headquarters to inquire 
whether they should leave her father there or return him to prison, 
Ms. Morley fainted. In the film, she recalls feeling as though her 
knees were jumping out of her skin. It was then and there that her 
parents decided they had to get their child out of Austria. When Ms. 
Hacker started planning her film 10 years ago, the story of the Kindertransports 
was just beginning to be told. In the 1950s, Lore Segal, the novelist 
and children's author, who appears in the movie, had written a book, 
``Other People's Houses,'' about her experiences as a child refugee 
in England, but it was out of print. (It was reprinted in 1994). Ms. 
Hacker had originally planned to make a movie about her relationship 
with her mother (whose costume-design credits include ``The Miracle 
Worker'' ``Taxi Driver,'' ``Annie Hall'' and ``The Prince of Tides'') 
and began interviewing her. As the details of Ms. Morley's childhood 
came out, Ms. Hacker realized there was a larger story to tell. She 
did extensive research at the Library of Congress and National Archives, 
where she discovered one of the movie's most haunting film clips _ 
a woman waving goodbye _ in the back of a file of Universal newsreels. 
Her first major shoot was in the fall of 1990 at the first American 
Kindertransport reunion in the Catskills. More than 300 people attended 
this intensely emotional gathering, shown in the film, where Ms. Morley 
spoke publicly for the first time about her childhood experiences. 
Ms. Hacker, while filming, was moved to tears. ``All around there 
were people who hadn't seen each other in 50 years finding each other,'' 
she recalls. ``Many had brought their children and their grandchildren.'' 
While Ms. Morley was in temporary remission from her cancer, she and 
her daughter traveled together to Vienna and visited the house where 
she had grown up. But because the Nazis didn't want the Kindertransport 
to be a public relations spectacle, the archival material in Vienna 
proved to be scarce. Ms. Hacker, who studied film at New York University 
after attending Oberlin and the University of Washington, paid for 
the movie mostly from her earnings as an assistant film editor. The 
total cost was around $110,000, and it took her seven years to complete 
the film. Even before it was finished, she had begun to show it at 
Kindertransport reunion meetings as a work-in-progress. In addition 
to looking at the lives of those who were saved by the Kindertransport 
movement, ``My Knees Were Jumping'' examines the complicated feelings 
of the next generation. Ms. Hacker was not alone in having grown up 
sensing a traumatic parental experience without ever being told exactly 
what had happened. Yet somehow the next generation knew. Ms. Hacker 
used to brood about what she would do if confined in a concentration 
camp, and her sister, Emily, who is two years younger, had nightmares 
about storm troopers. Such anxieties, Ms. Hacker discovered, are shared 
by many of the second generation of the Kindertransport. She now belongs 
to a second-generation organization called KT2, which has about 200 
members in the United States. They gather three times a year to share 
their experiences and have begun compiling a collection of videotaped 
oral histories as part of an archive. Ms. Morley died before she could 
see her daughter's movie. But the making of the film had already brought 
them closer. ``It was wonderful to get it all out in the open and 
to share everything,'' Ms. Hacker says. ``One thing I want the film 
to do is to open up communications in families. What has impressed 
me is the strength of the Kindertransport people and their ability 
to create new lives and new families. And I'm simply in awe of their 
parents, who had the strength to send their children away not knowing 
where they were going or what would happen to them.'' 
</TEXT>
</DOC>