<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981204.0351 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Attorney General Janet Reno is leaning against the appointment of 
an independent counsel to investigate whether President Clinton and 
his aides evaded federal election laws when they directed a multi-million 
dollar political advertising campaign in the 1996 election, law enforcement 
officials said Friday. The officials said that senior advisers to 
Reno, who must make a decision by Monday, have urged her not to seek 
the appointment of a special prosecutor. Speaking on condition of 
anonymity, the officials reasoned that a successful criminal prosecution 
on the advertisements would be unlikely because Clinton and his aides 
relied extensively on lawyers' advice in planning and carrying out 
the advertisements campaign. The Democrats funneled millions of dollars 
to state parties to finance the campaign advertisements, which under 
the law could only publicize generic party messages, not specific 
candidates. But auditors at the Federal Election Commission concluded 
that the advertisements did directly benefit the Clinton-Gore campaign 
with electioneering messages on behalf of the President. Accusations 
that the issue advertisements violated election laws were among the 
first to reach Reno after Clinton's re-election. Groups like Common 
Cause, a public interest group, said that both Democrats and Republicans 
ignored the law and spent millions to help their presidential candidates. 
Earlier this week, the election commission's staff said that Democrats 
and Republicans each should repay millions. The auditors Tuesday released 
a report concluding that the campaigns of Clinton and Republican nominee 
Bob Dole had illegally benefited from issue advertising. The staff 
recommended that the Clinton campaign committee be forced to repay 
the government $7 million and that the Dole campaign repay $17.7 million. 
But the FEC, made up of three Democrats and three Republicans beholden 
to their respective parties, is unlikely to accept the staff findings, 
several officials have said. It's also unclear whether the Justice 
Department will issue a separate finding on the legality of financing 
the advertisements. To prove a crime occurred, prosecutors would have 
to show ``specific intent,'' meaning whether Clinton and his aides 
knowingly violated the law. They said that would be an impossible 
burden given the heavy input from lawyers who said that the advertisements 
were legal. As a result, they said, Reno lacks a basis to find probable 
wrongdoing, a requirement of requesting an independent counsel. The 
question of whether Reno would seek an outside prosecutor to investigate 
the issue advertisements is the third independent counsel matter Reno 
faced in recent weeks. Campaign finance lawyers have predicted that 
her decisions would determine whether an independent counsel would 
ever investigate how the Democrats financed Clinton's re-election. 
Late last month, Reno found insufficient evidence to seek and independent 
prosecutor to investigate whether Vice President Al Gore lied about 
his role in campaign fund raising during the 1996 campaign. And earlier 
this week Reno delayed a decision on whether former White House deputy 
chief of staff Harold Ickes lied about his actions in labor dispute 
at a California walnut processing plant in behalf of the teamsters 
union. Reno obtained a 60-day extension that could postpone her decision 
until late January. What Reno decides on the issue represents a potentially 
pivotal decision because it touches on Clinton's own activities, rather 
than his aides. The president managed the details of the campaign, 
at times supervising the writing of scripts for the advertisements. 
The FEC auditors reviewed dozens of the issue ads and found that three 
of the Democratic Party's ads were the same as Clinton's ads. The 
auditors found that 37 ads appeared to convey electioneering messages 
in behalf of Clinton. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>