<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981204.0258 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Single men and women beware. It's mistletoe season yet again, which 
means it's time for your annual holiday endurance test: trying to 
dodge meddling relatives who insist you call the son or daughter of 
a friend (``One dinner won't kill you!'') and cocktail parties where 
no one will let you drink in peace (``There's this woman from my office 
I've been wanting you to meet''). Finally there is the blessed release 
of January, when the nasty truth about so many of those happy couples 
touting togetherness comes out and the single population gets a fresh 
infusion of blood. The good news, here at least, is that not everyone 
is despairing, starting with the 3,500 members of Single Volunteers 
of D.C. This organization, founded in March 1997 by Dana Kressierer 
and Catharine Robertson, has a different take on the dating game: 
if you're going to spend time and effort to meet someone but have 
no luck, your energies won't have been wasted if you've done good 
works while looking. And that means all kinds of work, everything 
from delivering meals to homebound people with AIDS to building houses 
to pulling ivy off the monkey house at the National Zoo. ``There's 
a stereotype to singles groups,'' Ms. Kressierer, 29, says. ``That 
women are only interested in dressing up and guys are only there to 
pick up women. In our group, the superficiality of singles bars and 
dances isn't there. People are meeting with no makeup on and up to 
their knees in mud. You meet in your natural state, so it's about 
who you are, not what you look like or how much money you make or 
what kind of car you drive.'' Ms. Kressierer runs Single Volunteers 
alone these days. At the group's first meeting, lightning struck. 
Ms. Robertson met Patrick Savolskis, fell in love, and the couple 
are to be married next year. This automatically disqualifies her since 
members are required to be single and available. On this Saturday 
afternoon, Ms. Kressierer stops for lunch at the Capital City Brewing 
Company before heading for the Capital Area Food Bank. While sipping 
a beer and chain-smoking (``It keeps me sane''), she is greeted by 
a morning shift of Single Volunteers, a dozen men and women who have 
come from Bright Beginnings, a day care center for homeless people, 
where they have built cribs before lunch. It is Single Volunteers' 
policy that all work be followed by a social event. ``It gives everyone 
a chance to mingle,'' Ms. Kressierer says. ``The work gives them an 
initial topic of conversation.'' Seated at the table are men and women 
who seem to be in their late 20s and early 30s, dressed in sweaters 
and jeans, talking comfortably, if not amorously. ``People are shy,'' 
Ms. Kressierer says. ``The first time they come they think, `This 
must be a bunch of losers,' then they see, `Oh, they're just like 
me.' We have beauty queens and non-beauty queens, every size and shape. 
I've never seen a group with more lawyers in my life. There are a 
lot of computer people. And I think every Hill staffer is in the group, 
too. You can make a lot of friends here. People write and tell me, 
`I've gone out on a couple dates and haven't met the right guy, but 
I've met my best friend.''' The same afternoon, at the Capital Area 
Food Bank, more Single Volunteers are split into sections, some sorting 
donations, others assembling Thanksgiving care packages. The latter 
dozen work so quickly that Food Bank personnel are summoned to bring 
more supplies. In one afternoon, 700 boxes are assembled. In this 
instance, shyness seems to be a great motivator. Most of the men concentrate 
fiercely on their work, while the women seem more chatty, with each 
other at least. The day's team leader is Mary Pletcher, who is all 
of 21. ``I'm the young one,'' she says, blushing. ``I've been doing 
this for six months and I've really enjoyed it. I've had a couple 
of good dates and met some really neat people. I think if you volunteer, 
you generally meet quality people. No creeps.'' This is the fourth 
project for David Piccirilli, 28. He's had no dates yet, but says 
gamely: ``That's what I'm hoping for. At least everybody's in the 
same boat, which is good.'' Most Single Volunteers events are scheduled 
on the weekends and all are organized to include a minimum of 12. 
While single men everywhere have figured out that volunteering can 
be a fertile meeting ground, it is only because the ratio of women 
to men tends to be so overwhelming. It is Single Volunteers' policy 
to divide members equally, so the women have a fighting chance, too. 
The organization averages 40 events a month. Women sign up first, 
Ms. Kressierer says, while ``men wait until the last minute.'' She 
adds, ``If they did it quicker, we could do more projects, but there's 
a lack of planning on the part of men.'' The group does not screen 
membership, nor does it charge fees or accept phone calls. All communications 
are through the Internet (www.singlevolunteers.org). Since most projects 
require only 20 to 30 volunteers, Ms. Kressierer says the chances 
of meeting new people each week are high. The group also sponsors 
a cocktail party once a month that draws between 300 and 500 members. 
The minimum age is 21, though the group's average age is early 30s. 
``The 35-and-older group is particularly active,'' she says, organizing 
additional social activities for themselves. ``It doesn't feel at 
all like a meat market the way traditional singles things do,'' says 
Meg Spencer, 38, who has dated men through the group. ``It's also 
great for people, who work at home who don't have a steady way to 
meet people.'' Carol Rogers, who would say only that she was over 
40, did her first project with Single Volunteers in August for Trash 
Force, and spent an afternoon picking up garbage on the Washington 
Mall with David Kerlin. ``I hadn't been on a date in years,'' she 
says. ``We walked and talked and went to lunch and ate and talked 
and I guess we got lost, because I don't know where the rest of the 
group went.'' They've been seeing each other ever since, and Ms. Rogers 
refers to him fondly as ``my trashy date.'' Among its projects, Single 
Volunteers has built a house with Green Home, an organization that 
builds environmentally friendly homes, and Habitat for Humanity, and 
has worked on the American Horticultural Society's annual fund-raiser 
and its Chili Pepper Festival. Another popular activity is the Equine 
Rescue and Rehabilitation Program. ``It's for horses people don't 
want or who have been abused,'' Ms. Kressierer says, ``and they nurse 
them back to health. We have people fighting for the privilege of 
mucking stalls and oiling fences. If a project like this closes early, 
I'll usually get disappointed e-mails saying, `I was waiting for this 
for six weeks.' '' Other than that, complaints are few, Ms. Kressierer 
says. When she does need counsel on issues concerning the group, she 
contacts Anne Lusk, who started the original Single Volunteers in 
Stowe, Vt., in 1993. Ms. Lusk, now 50, was then newly separated from 
her husband, and her children were grown. She spent her first Thanksgiving 
alone, working in a local restaurant that was feeding the homeless 
and that later fed the volunteers, most of whom were single, with 
a communal meal. The idea of combining singles and volunteerism stuck, 
and Ms. Lusk was in a position to do something about it. A design 
instructor at the University of Vermont, she was also a gubernatorial 
appointee to the Vermont Board of Forests, Parks and Recreation and 
knew all the right people to get volunteer work. The only thing she 
was missing was men, so she joined a local dating service, got its 
list and called all the men on it, cold. They came. Last year, Ms. 
Lusk moved to Ann Arbor, where she is pursuing a Ph.D. in urban planning 
and landscape architecture at the University of Michigan. Since her 
departure, the Stowe chapter of Single Volunteers has folded. The 
amount of work it takes to keep a chapter going can be daunting; Ms. 
Kressierer says she spends 20 hours a week on her group, in addition 
to her full-time job as a quality control expert at HT Medical Systems 
in Rockville, Md. (It is a job she got through a man in Single Volunteers 
who had praised her organizational skills and urged her to apply.) 
Single Volunteers continues to flourish, however, in Bucks County, 
Pa., South Florida, Cleveland, Dallas-Fort Worth and western Massachusetts. 
And Ms. Lusk still advises people on how to set up chapters (AnneLusk(AT)aol.com). 
Ms. Kressierer says she has received numerous inquiries from people 
in New York to start a chapter, in spite of the active volunteerism 
there already _ and its own resulting social scene. ``Those groups 
are all the same with way more women,'' she notes. ``When you finish 
a project, it's over. There is no team leader dedicated to making 
sure people are introduced around and have someone to talk to. And 
there's the age issue. We now have groups for people 40 and over because 
they don't want to have to hang out with 20-year-olds. They meet people 
in their age group who they know are interested in dating.'' For all 
her group's success, she adds, it still has some glitches. ``A girl 
might think she's in a committed relationship, but the guy is still 
in the group,'' she says. ``I once saw a guy at an event who wasn't 
supposed to be there, but I was glad since we had gone out the week 
before and had such a good time. But he was with a woman who thought 
he was seeing only her. I didn't know about her and she didn't know 
about me.'' Ms. Kressierer shrugs and smiles philosophically. ``It's 
up to the individual to determine if he or she is available,'' she 
says. ``Every couple of months, I'll send out a message asking, `Is 
there anyone still here who has met someone?' And I'll get answers 
saying: `Yes, but don't kick me off the list. We're dating, but we 
may break up.''' 
</TEXT>
</DOC>