<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981204.0478 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Homicide detectives were questioning a Brooklyn woman and her boyfriend 
Friday in the death of the woman's 20-month-old daughter, whose body 
was found in Gravesend Bay shortly after she reported the toddler 
kidnapped, the police said. The woman, whose name was withheld by 
police, reported her child's disappearance to officers around 8:30 
a.m. Friday after screaming about the toddler's abduction as she stood 
near the F train subway station on 9th Street and Fourth Avenue. The 
woman, 20, told them that her child, Victoria Maria Santiago, had 
been ripped from her arms by a heavy-set Hispanic man as she walked 
up the steps to reach a Manhattan-bound F train at the Park Slope 
station, police said. They added that she described the man as being 
5-feet-6-inches tall, weighing more than 200 pounds, and wearing a 
black and white checkered shirt and new Nike tennis shoes. Officers 
immediately rushed to the next stop on the line at Ninth Street and 
Smith Street in Red Hook to search for a suspect, whom they expected 
to be carrying a toddler in a pink dress and shiny white shoes. But 
as they scoured the area, the woman's account began to vary, as did 
her boyfriend's, said law enforcement officials, speaking on condition 
of anonymity. Officers at the 68th Precinct began to ask about other 
possible explanations for the child's disappearance, and detectives 
searched other sites, this time along Gravesend Bay, the officials 
said. At 11:55 a.m., a detective called the precinct with a grisly 
discovery. Out past a pier off of Bay 44th Street, a young child lay 
near the shore, its feet poking out of a black garbage bag. Next to 
the body, a baby carriage bobbed in the receding tide nearby. Police 
detectives, speaking on condition of anonymity, said they believed 
the woman killed her child at the couple's Bay Ridge apartment Wednesday 
afternoon, slapping and shaking the girl after becoming angered. Police 
said they believed the child remained in the apartment until Thursday 
night, and that the couple then wrapped her diapered corpse in a trash 
bag, placed it in a stroller and walked it to the end of the pier 
before dumping it into the bay. No charges had been filed as of Friday 
night, and police said they are still investigating the death. Police 
officials said that the woman, who came to Brooklyn from Texas only 
a few months ago, has no history of arrests or record with the city's 
Administration for Children's Services. They added that her Brooklyn-born 
boyfriend, who is not the child's father, is on probation, though 
they were not certain for what sort of crime. Neighbors in couple's 
building said they knew little about the recent arrivals, who paid 
$30 a night for a small room there. But most agree with the building's 
superintendent, Pablo Huazhco, that nothing had seemed amiss. ``She 
stayed home and took care of the baby while he worked,'' said Huazhco, 
as he stood outside the four-story brick apartment complex. ``They 
were nice people and she was nice to the baby. Of course, all of this 
has come as a surprise.'' 
</TEXT>
</DOC>