<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981204.0460 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
A former top official of the city's largest municipal union has told 
investigators that he and other union executives tampered with the 
1996 ratification vote on the city labor contract because they thought 
opponents of the pact were also committing fraud, say lawyers and 
officials who have been briefed on the investigation being conducted 
by the Manhattan District Attorney's office. Martin Lubin, who resigned 
as the associate director of District Council 37 last month after 
admitting that he knew about the tampering, told investigators how 
union officials stuffed ballot boxes with thousands of fraudulent 
votes after early returns convinced them the contract would be rejected 
by city workers, the officials said. The five-year contract, which 
included an unpopular wage freeze in the first two years, was ultimately 
approved in February 1996, although opponents immediately denounced 
the balloting as rigged. People familiar with the investigation said 
prosecutors have not found evidence of vote-tampering by opponents 
of the contract, as Lubin alleged. Lubin, who had been second in command 
at the union, is one of the highest-ranking officials of the union 
to be interviewed by investigators directing the inquiry into embezzlement 
and kickbacks in the 120,000-member union. He is the third union official 
to tell investigators about ballot tampering on the contract, which 
set the pattern for ensuing settlements with other city unions. Those 
unions, angered by the revelations of fraud, have demanded that the 
mayor renegotiate their contracts, without success. The council's 
executive director, Stanley Hill, was forced to take an unpaid leave 
of absence a week ago after the fraud was revealed. The council is 
now being run by a representative of the parent union. Lubin told 
investigators that Hill never knew about the vote fraud scheme, the 
officials said. Witnesses have told investigators that most of the 
fraudulent ballots were cast in a local representing clerical workers, 
where the official tally showed 10,002 votes for ratification and 
2,265 against. The huge margin in that local cemented ratification 
of the contract, which was approved 19,513 to 14,438. The lawyers 
and officials, who spoke on the condition of anonymity, said prosecutors 
were told by witnesses that Lubin and others initially became concerned 
the ratification vote would fail after steaming open several hundred 
completed mail ballots from several locals and finding that most members 
were voting against the contract. In response, the union leaders began 
a large-scale effort to submit fraudulent ballots in the clerical 
workers union, some in the names of workers who had not voted. Lubin 
told investigators that allies of Hill were particularly concerned 
when, during the weeks of balloting, the hospital workers union reported 
a huge vote against the contract, 4,402 to 34, officials said. They 
said allies of Hill believed that tally may have been rigged, and 
they decided to cast fraudulent ballots of their own. James Butler, 
the leader of the hospital workers local, denied any irregularities 
in the voting by his members. ``I had no reason to fix anything,'' 
he said. ``My members were mad as hell. They didn't have job security 
and they were on fire.'' A week ago, after Lubin and his assistant, 
Mark Shaplo, admitted knowing of the vote fraud, District Council 
37's parent union, the American Federation of State, County and Municipal 
Employees, took control of the council, forcing Hill to step aside. 
A few days later, Lubin's lawyer, Pamela Hayes, a former prosecutor 
in the Brooklyn district attorney's office, accompanied her client 
to his meeting with investigators. Ms. Hayes would not comment on 
whether her client had been interviewed. ``I can't tell you if he 
said anything, for obvious reasons,'' she said. Ms. Hayes said that 
Lubin, 57, was upset that he had had to resign his union post. ``It's 
just unfortunate,'' she said, ``because aside from this particular 
instance, he has not been involved in any kickbacks or anything like 
that. He's a decent guy.'' Associates of Lubin said they thought he 
acted out of concern for Hill, since rejection of the pact would have 
been a personal embarrassment and a setback in his relationship with 
Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani. They called his role in the fraud limited, 
and said he had been asked by others to go to the district council's 
offices on a Saturday, when he marked some ballots. ``He was not the 
mastermind,'' said one associate. Lubin has not been charged with 
any crime. Tampering with ballots could result in charges of falsifying 
business records. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>