<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981204.0422 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Renee Couture earns about $21,000 a year as owner of a struggling 
Domino's pizza franchise in Danville, Ky. Single, 37, the mother of 
a 5-year-old daughter, Ms. Couture also has diabetes, though thanks 
to her health insurance from Anthem Blue Cross and Blue Shield, she 
said, ``My diabetes is in the best control it's been in my whole life.'' 
Then, in October, Anthem notified Ms. Couture that it was more than 
doubling her premium, to $498 a month _ nearly 30 percent of her salary 
_ from $197, a little more than 10 percent. All other options, she 
said, are at least as expensive: ``The clincher for me is diabetes. 
Once an insurance agent hears that, it's uh-oh.'' At more than 100 
percent, the size of Ms. Couture's premium increase may be extreme, 
but many others among the 16 million people under 65 who have to buy 
their own health insurance are facing increases of 40 percent or more 
this fall. Self-employed, unemployed, working for small employers 
who do not offer health insurance, or retired early, often because 
of poor health, these people are a step away from joining the nation's 
43.4 million uninsured, too young for Medicare, the federal insurance 
for the elderly, not poor enough for Medicaid. Premiums are also rising 
for many of the 160 million Americans covered by employers' group 
policies, with increases in the next year projected at 8 percent to 
20 percent. But individuals who buy their own insurance already pay 
far more because no employer subsidizes them, and now their soaring 
premiums are creating a dynamic that appears certain to send prices 
even higher. The dynamic works this way: As premiums for individual 
health coverage rise, the youngest and healthiest holders of those 
policies, like people just out of high school and college, decide 
to do without insurance. That leaves insurance companies with a shrunken 
pool of customers who are older and less healthy _ and whose health 
care costs cannot be spread across the general population. The result 
is that premiums for the people who need health insurance most are 
raised higher and higher to cover the cost of their own care. For 
years, these people have been paying about 40 percent more for their 
care than the great majority of insured Americans because they pay 
the full cost, said Deborah Chollet, vice president of the Alpha Center, 
a nonpartisan health care research organization here. Now the gap 
is widening. In general, state regulators report, individuals' premiums 
are climbing at least twice as much as the increases in group-policy 
premiums that employers face next year. Premiums for the individual 
policies are even rising faster than health care costs at the start 
of the 1990s, a phenomenon that stirred President Clinton's effort 
to overhaul the health care system. Last year, Clinton proposed helping 
uninsured individuals with the highest medical bills, those aged 55 
to 64, buy Medicare coverage. ``The president proposed the Medicare 
legislation,'' said his economic policy adviser, Gene Sperling, ``precisely 
because he has long recognized that there is a growing and often severe 
access problem for countless Americans in this age group.'' In the 
eyes of patients' advocates, many regulators and some health care 
organizations, the eruption of individuals' premiums suggests that 
the administration's and Congress' alternative to an overhaul has 
not worked. Their alternative left the system to the marketplace, 
although they did make some modest repairs. No two states are alike 
in how they regulate the industry or in their experience with premiums. 
But for all, the direction is up. Washington state says the average 
rate for unsubsidized, middle-class subscribers to a state-administered 
health plan rose 72 percent this year and will rise 62 percent next 
year. Maryland Insurance Commissioner Stephen Larsen reports increases 
in the ``20-, 25-, 30-percent range'' for individuals' premiums. Tightly 
regulated New York, with increases of less than 10 percent, and New 
Jersey, with 14 percent, are exceptions. In Texas, said Ana Smith-Daley, 
deputy commissioner for life and health insurance, ``The range we're 
seeing is 7.5 percent all the way up to 40 percent.'' Connecticut's 
individual premiums rose 15 percent to 25 percent this year and will 
rise by the same amount next year. The increases, furthermore, are 
averages, obscuring the experience, for example, of Ms. Couture, whose 
increase was much higher. ``The increases in the individual or direct-pay 
market are sizable and significantly more than in the group market,'' 
said Scott Serota, executive vice president of the Blue Cross and 
Blue Shield Association, a federation of 55 insurers and health maintenance 
organizations. Initiatives by Congress and the administration for 
incremental intervention, with laws to help expand coverage for uninsured 
children and other groups, have had little effect on individual subscribers' 
costs. The two-year-old Kennedy-Kassebaum law, for example, enables 
people who leave jobs and lose their employers' health coverage to 
get individual policies or immediate coverage in other jobs, but the 
law does not regulate premiums. In an assessment this year, the General 
Accounting Office reported that insurers are using high premiums and 
other devices to drive away applicants, especially the sick. Among 
the implications, Ms. Chollet says, is that many people may continue 
to stay at jobs they want to leave, rather than start their own businesses 
or retire, because they fear losing their employer-subsidized insurance. 
Managed-care organizations succeeded in one respect: they captured 
85 percent of the insured work force. But their costs still rose and 
most are now losing money. With the magic of managed care still unproven, 
they are trying to get back in the black by raising premiums. Individuals 
are taking even bigger jolts. One reason, some state regulators say, 
is that they offer the path of least resistance. To raise group-coverage 
premiums, insurance companies must negotiate with employers, and employers, 
with their own finances on the line, drive hard bargains. Serota of 
the Blue Cross association said a more likely reason was a sea change 
in how the industry grouped individual subscribers. Normally, health 
insurance companies seek the widest possible mix of customers, young 
and old, sick and well. A wide mix of thousands of subscribers permits 
them to spread the cost of one subscriber's bout with cancer to the 
others who pay premiums but make few demands for care. This system, 
known as community rating, is breaking down, however. Most healthy 
working people, for example, are covered under employer group policies, 
setting them apart from less healthy, often older consumers, who typically 
need individual policies. Lacking the cushion of legions of healthier 
subscribers, the companies insuring individuals spend more for their 
care and therefore must charge them more. It was this development, 
said Kaiser Permanente, the biggest nonprofit health maintenance organization, 
that forced it to take age into account when calculating subscribers' 
premiums this year and then order large increases in individuals' 
policies. In part because it stuck with community rating longer than 
most organizations, Kaiser said, it lost $270 million last year and 
$150 million in the first half of this year. ``We're saying that community 
rating is not possible,'' said Beverly Hayon, a Kaiser spokeswoman. 
Now the demise of community rating is fueling an insidious spiral 
that drives premiums still higher and throws more consumers off the 
rolls. ``It's called, `Sick people in, healthy people out,''' said 
Dean Rosen, senior vice president and counsel for the Health Insurance 
Association of America. The sicker the individual subscribers are, 
the greater their incentive to keep buying insurance. Healthier subscribers 
balk at high premiums and drop out. Then the insurers, left with fewer 
and sicker subscribers, must spend more per client for care. To avoid 
losses, they raise premiums again, giving the spiral another spin 
and chasing away the healthier of the sick. State legislatures, more 
than the federal government, are grappling with these conditions. 
Few have tried harder, and with unhappier results, than Kentucky. 
To see that all individuals had access to affordable coverage four 
years ago, the state prohibited insurers from taking an applicant's 
health into account in calculating premiums. As a result, more than 
40 insurers bailed out of the state's direct-pay insurance market. 
``Now I have two,'' said state Insurance Commissioner George Nichols. 
This year, the Legislature reversed course and, within limits, permitted 
the companies to use health conditions in setting premiums. That is 
what led to Ms. Couture's notice from Anthem. ``Some people are seeing 
100 and 200 percent'' increases, Nichols said. Lawrence Ford, Anthem's 
spokesman, said the company had little choice if it wanted to avoid 
more losses. Twenty-six states, including Connecticut, California, 
Florida, Illinois, Minnesota and Washington, have found another device 
to accommodate people whom insurers reject because of their health 
or scare off with high premiums: high-risk insurance pools. The pools 
are no bargain. They charge premiums that range from 25 percent to 
100 percent above those that other people pay for comparable commercial 
coverage. But because the pools' subscribers tend to be old and sick, 
the cost of their care usually exceeds the higher premium, so the 
states make up the difference with assessments on insurance companies 
or with tax revenues. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>