<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981204.0470 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
So does President Clinton arrive in the Palestinian lands on his big 
747, or on a little helicopter? Does he balance his visit to the Gaza 
Strip with one to Masada, the Alamo of Israel? And would he then balance 
that with a quick look at Bethlehem? (After all, it's Christmastime.) 
If the problems of the Middle East are about land and blood, the diplomacy 
is often about language and symbolism. In the case of Clinton's trip 
to Israel and the Palestinian Authority, beginning next weekend, it 
is also about airplanes and sightseeing. Clinton is making the trip 
to promote the three-stage agreement reached in October at Wye, Md., 
that was meant to propel the Israelis and Palestinians toward a substantial 
peace settlement. But a strong undercurrent was never settled: whether 
the Palestinians will declare statehood on May 4, 1999. The Oslo peace 
process formally ends then, and a settlement on time is very unlikely. 
The statehood issue has now broken into the open in earnest, complicating 
the Clinton trip. Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu, struggling to 
keep his government together over the Wye agreement, was taken aback 
by the warm reception given last week to Yasser Arafat in Washington. 
Not only was Arafat showered with money at an international donors' 
conference; he was treated indulgently when he spoke frankly about 
his intention to declare Palestinian statehood. Other Palestinian 
officials have done the same at the United Nations and elsewhere, 
which the Israelis regard as a violation of the Oslo accords and of 
promises at Wye not to take unilateral steps that would foreclose 
negotiations. In response, Netanyahu has halted further steps to carry 
out the very agreement that Clinton is going to Israel to celebrate, 
causing the Americans to criticize the Israeli for setting ``new conditions.'' 
An Israeli Cabinet statement said the Palestinian Authority needs 
to commit itself ``unequivocally to abandoning its intention to unilaterally 
declare a Palestinian state'' and ``to conducting continuous negotiations 
with Israel until an agreement is concluded'' before Israel can carry 
out the Wye agreement. But American officials have done little to 
criticize Arafat or his officials, other than to say things like ``unilateral 
steps are not helpful'' and ``Palestinian statehood must be addressed 
in the negotiations.'' The Americans have refused to say what they 
will do or say if Arafat does declare statehood. One senior American 
official said Friday: ``There's a difference between saying you're 
going to declare statehood and actually doing it. There's a lot of 
posturing on both sides.'' But what is clearly bothering Netanyahu 
is that Clinton's visit will provide powerful new symbolism of a new 
American-Palestinian relationship, including the arrival of the American 
president at a new Palestinian airport that was opened in Gaza with 
great fanfare as a result of the Wye accord. Netanyahu's chief spokesman, 
David Bar-Illan, has now formally asked Clinton not to arrive in Gaza 
in his big baby-blue Boeing 747, with its huge seal of the United 
States. American officials said Friday that they are likely to heed 
the request, but on the grounds of pragmatism. The trip from Tel Aviv 
to Gaza City is short, like flying from Washington to Baltimore, and 
``chances are we wouldn't use a 747 but a helicopter,'' one official 
said. To use the larger plane, the official said, would also require 
``bringing in a lot more people to upgrade the airport.'' Similarly, 
when the Israelis suggested a presidential visit to Masada, a heroic 
scene of Jewish military sacrifice in Biblical times, to balance the 
Gaza visit, the Americans agreed. But now Clinton is contemplating 
another stop in Palestinian lands, at Bethlehem, further upsetting 
the Israelis. The Wye agreement set a three-month timetable under 
which Israel would withdraw from another 13 percent of the West Bank 
in return for specific, phased steps by the Palestinians to combat 
terrorism. It was supposed to be followed immediately by intensive 
negotiations on a final settlement between Israel and the Palestinians, 
which would resolve fundamental questions like whether the Palestinians 
will have a state, and if so, what kind, and the future of Jerusalem. 
Under the original Oslo timetable, that final settlement was supposed 
to be complete by May 4, 1999. But the final talks have not begun. 
One quiet procedural meeting between Israeli and Palestinian officials, 
with no Americans present, has been followed by nothing at all. Israeli 
and American officials concede that with all the furor over carrying 
out the Wye agreement, there has been little energy to focus on the 
final talks, which are the best answer to Arafat's claims. After all, 
one American official said sardonically, ``May is months away.'' Instead, 
American officials are worrying about the few days of the Clinton 
visit and what exactly will be celebrated in Gaza. At Wye, Netanyahu's 
demand that the Palestinian National Council formally revoke all the 
clauses in their charter calling for Israel's destruction was handled 
with an Israeli-originated compromise. Arafat would gather a quorum 
of the council, surround them with lots of less radical Palestinians 
and confirm the revocation of the old charter in some form of mass 
vote, by hand or voice. But since then the Israelis have called for 
something more formal, and an American official said, ``We want to 
make sure that what happens in Gaza meets the Israeli needs.'' At 
the same time, however, the Americans are nervous that Netanyahu will 
continue changing his requirements. Yoel Marcus, writing Friday in 
the Israeli newspaper Haaretz, described Netanyahu as being ``in a 
panic'' to consolidate his political position, broaden his government 
and act tough ``while the Palestinian state is being established right 
under his nose.'' But Netanyahu, said Marcus, ``will not be able to 
halt the hurricane known as Clinton's visit and the American recognition 
of a Palestinian state that it implies.'' American officials insist 
the visit implies no such thing. Yet the symbolism argues otherwise, 
Marcus suggested. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>