<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981204.0354 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Britain accepted a longstanding French proposal Friday that calls 
for the 15-nation European Union to be able to conduct military actions 
on its own in situations where the United States and other NATO allies 
do not want to become involved. The agreement, called historic by 
Prime Minister Tony Blair, marked a shift from traditional British 
reluctance even to consider any defense arrangements outside NATO. 
The British defense minister, George Robertson, said that a stronger 
European defense was something the United States and other NATO allies 
had long been calling for. He said the agreement ``means a strengthening 
of NATO.'' British officials said the accord, reached as Britain and 
France prepared for meetings of NATO foreign ministers and European 
Union leaders next week in Brussels and Vienna, would not lead to 
the creation of a new military power to rival the alliance. But because 
it represents a substantial concession to President Jacques Chirac 
of France, who failed at a European summit meeting in Amsterdam last 
year to get Blair to commit Britain to a timetable for creating a 
full-fledged defense arm for the European Union separate from NATO, 
French officials were ecstatic. ``We wanted to make a major step forward,'' 
Chirac said after the meeting with Blair in the French port of St.-Malo 
Friday. The French leader called the agreement ``an affirmation of 
the European Union on the international scene.'' In a five-point statement, 
the two nations asserted that ``the European Union needs to be in 
a position to play its full role on the international stage.'' ``To 
this end,'' the statement said, ``the Union must have the capacity 
for autonomous action, backed up by credible military forces, the 
means to decide to use them and a readiness to do so, in order to 
respond to international crises.'' It added that European Union countries 
like France and Britain that are also members of NATO would act only 
in conformity with their obligations to NATO. It left open how any 
distinct European defense capability would be built up. ``The Union 
must be given appropriate structures and a capacity for analysis of 
situations, sources of intelligence and a capability for relevant 
strategic planning, without unnecessary duplication,'' the agreement 
said. The European Union could get those things, the agreement said, 
as part of a European pillar within the NATO alliance, something the 
United States and the allies have been working to strengthen for years. 
But some members of the European Union _ Ireland, Austria, Sweden 
and Finland _ do not belong to NATO and are not likely to join anytime 
soon. Alternatively, a European defense structure could emerge from 
the 43-year-old Western European Union, a long-dormant group awakened 
by the end of the Cold War, though only 10 of the 15 European Union 
countries belong to it and it has few military assets. In theory, 
the European Union could undertake military actions by itself with 
the forces of its member states. But since building up an effective 
command structure would be redundant and take billions of dollars, 
which no member state has, the most likely course, both French and 
British officials privately agree, is to use the military headquarters, 
communications systems, command structures and forces that NATO already 
has, and put some of them under European command during operations 
that the United States prefers to stay out of. In a sense, what Britain 
and France called for Friday was an idea France vetoed in 1954: a 
``European Defense Community'' whose inclusion of German armed forces 
was too much for the French to accept so soon after World War II. 
The United States and Britain then agreed to bring Germany into NATO 
instead. To some NATO diplomats in Brussels, the agreement Friday 
showed that the United States would be making a mistake if it assumed 
that Europe had no alternative except to follow Washington's lead 
in finding a strategy to deal with problems like those in Bosnia, 
Kosovo and Iraq. ``It is a French-British declaration, not a European 
position, and probably a lot of people in Bonn, Rome and elsewhere 
are puzzling about just what it means,'' said a diplomat, speaking 
on the condition of anonymity. ``The United States has been calling 
for years for a stronger European defense capability, with budgets 
to back it up and the political will to deploy it,'' the diplomat 
said. ``But an `autonomous' defense capability, that is something 
that will worry Washington a little bit.'' Blair, for his part, appears 
to have learned some sharp lessons from Europe's performance in dealing 
with the crisis caused by Serbian attacks against civilians in the 
province of Kosovo this year. He told his fellow European leaders 
in Austria in October that Europe had shown itself to be ``dithering 
and indecisive,'' all too often forced to turn to the United States 
for help in convincing President Slobodan Milosevic of Yugoslavia 
that he would face devastating NATO air strikes if he did not order 
Serbian forces to stop their attacks. Throughout the Balkans crisis, 
the Europeans followed a pattern in which vows of unity have been 
splintered by disagreements, leaving the United States to step in 
and take a leadership role. European Union leaders agreed in Amsterdam 
in June of last year to keep trying to achieve unity in dealing with 
security issues. But, as one British leader said Friday: ``I'm absolutely 
certain Tony Blair would never agree to arrangements that gave Europe 
or anybody else veto power over British decisions on when to use British 
military force, any more than the French would agree to it over their 
use of their own military decisions.'' 
</TEXT>
</DOC>