<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981204.0332 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Today, with stock markets stronger and bond markets quietly going 
about their workaday business, it hardly seems possible that less 
than three months ago some of Wall Street's smartest and most powerful 
people thought the problems of one giant hedge fund, Long-Term Capital 
Management LP of Greenwich, Conn., might push the world's markets 
to the brink of disaster. In fact, the 14 Wall Street banks and brokerage 
houses that pumped in $3.6 billion and took 90 percent ownership of 
the fund when it was only hours away from collapse may now see windfall 
profits on what seemed like a desperate roll of the dice, a daring 
bailout encouraged by nervous regulators at the Federal Reserve Bank 
of New York. The fund's recovery does not itself resolve the argument 
over whether the Fed should have brokered the arrangements that rescued 
Long-Term Capital from bankruptcy on Sept. 23. Supporters say the 
Fed saved the day and laid the groundwork for the current rebound, 
while critics say the rebound proves that markets do just fine without 
such heavy-handed interference. But the larger lessons of Long-Term 
Capital's crisis may not be as fleeting as the recent dip in the Dow. 
The fund was once so impressive that it garnered billions of dollars 
from some of the biggest names in finance. When it almost collapsed, 
it tested some fundamental assumptions of the investment world _ and 
found them severely flawed: _ Diversification, the elementary precaution 
of not putting all of one's eggs in a single basket, failed utterly. 
The fund had spread its bets among many markets in various countries 
around the world. But the strategy did not protect it from the chain 
reaction that hit global markets in August. Indeed, the complexity 
and diversity of its holdings made the last-minute rescue effort complicated 
and difficult. In the aftermath, hedge fund managers and other professional 
investors have been left wondering whether a diverse portfolio offers 
any protection from future financial storms. _ The markets for financial 
derivatives and many other new kinds of investments, which have been 
hailed as ways for global investors and multinational corporations 
to offset many of the risks of doing business, suddenly behaved like 
gawky adolescents _ big enough to seem mature but clumsy and prone 
to panic when things go awry. Investors who expected to be able to 
exit these new markets as easily as they had entered them found that 
the only way out was through a fire sale that devastated the value 
of their assets. _ Most worrisome, the use of borrowed money for speculation, 
a mainstay of many professional investors in today's markets, occurred 
on a scale so much larger than most anyone thought possible, and involved 
credit arrangements so complex, that none of the players _ not lenders, 
not trading partners and not regulators _ could respond to the fund's 
troubles as they had expected. ``We have had a whole series of structural 
changes in the financial markets in the past 20 years so that today, 
when you come to the edge of risk-taking, you find the old formulas 
no longer work,'' said independent market strategist Henry Kaufman. 
``That is what this crisis was about.'' Despite the return of confidence 
and liquidity to most markets, both Federal Reserve Chairman Alan 
Greenspan and New York Fed President William McDonough have suggested 
in recent speeches that an emergency like the one at Long-Term Capital 
could occur again. The return to more normal market conditions in 
the last month ``leaves unanswered the question of why such episodes 
erupted in the first place'' and why they spread so rapidly, Greenspan 
recently told a gathering of Wall Street executives. He offered his 
own theory: ``It has become evident time and again that when events 
become too complex and move too rapidly, as appears to be the case 
today, human beings become demonstrably less able to cope.'' Because 
Long-Term Capital was hardly unique in its approach to investing, 
the risks of the global marketplace look far sharper today than they 
did before that long, edgy week in September when so much suddenly 
seemed to depend on the fate of one giant fund in Greenwich. Broken 
Eggs In Every Basket Long-Term Capital _ established in 1994 by John 
Meriwether, a legendary bond trader formerly with Salomon Brothers, 
and his partners, including Robert Merton and Myron Scholes, who shared 
the Nobel Prize for economics in 1997 _ is often described these days 
as having been speculative and risky. But from the beginning, it tried 
to reduce its risks by spreading its investments around. It held almost 
every major type of security and many minor ones, from blue-chip American 
stocks to Danish mortgage-backed securities to Latin American government 
bonds. Thus, by every traditional measure, Long-Term Capital hedged 
its bets _ across markets, currencies and types of assets. In theory, 
losses on one investment would be offset by gains in another, providing 
ballast that would allow the fund to ride out any financial storm. 
It did not turn out that way. ``As markets around the world moved 
in the same direction at the same time, the diversification on which 
Long-Term had previously relied failed it utterly,'' said McDonough, 
in subsequent congressional testimony about the fund's rescue. The 
fund's core investment specialty _ a technique called convergence 
trading, used primarily by large banks and brokerage firms _ was also 
a supposedly low-risk strategy. But it, too, did not turn out to be 
impervious to market gyrations. Rather than betting that stocks or 
bonds will go up or down, convergence traders bet that the prices 
of certain related securities will move closer together. They identify 
securities whose prices have deviated slightly from their historical 
relationships to one another and place bets that those prices will 
return to their normal patterns. The strategy can be applied to many 
investments _ stocks, government securities, corporate bonds, options, 
foreign currencies. In one common convergence trade, Long-Term acted 
after spotting a Treasury bond that matured in 30 years and another 
maturing in 29 years that were trading at prices slightly further 
apart than usual. Since Uncle Sam's ability to pay his debts is unlikely 
to change between 2027 and 2028, that price gap would no doubt narrow, 
the partners believed. The fund bought the 29-year bonds, betting 
that their price would rise. It also bet on a price decline in the 
30-year bonds by selling short _ borrowing the bonds from a big institution 
and selling them, wagering that they could be replaced later for less 
money. If the price gap closed, the fund would make money on both 
trades. If the gap did not close, the fund had some protection, because 
it had bet on both declining and rising bond prices. Other opportunities 
for convergence trades were found in foreign bond and government securities 
markets, including the markets for Latin American debt, Italian bank 
notes and British government securities. In theory, the fund had further 
reduced its risks by scattering its investments among so many markets 
and among so many different types of investments. But in real life, 
anxiety began to spread through most foreign markets after Thailand's 
currency collapsed in the summer of 1997. Prices fell and businesses 
failed all along the Pacific Rim. In response, by early 1998, investors 
worldwide began seeking a haven in U.S. Treasury markets. That remarkable 
flight to safety had unexpected consequences for Treasury bonds, the 
bread-and-butter market for Long-Term Capital. Playing to form, the 
30-year bonds climbed in price, but the nearly identical 29-year bonds 
did not share in the rally; their lower trading volume made them look 
riskier to nervous investors. The divergence hurt Long-Term Capital, 
of course, because the fund had bet heavily that the bonds' prices 
would move closer together. In Europe, too, investors sought safety. 
That affected Long-Term Capital's bets in Italy, where it had been 
anticipating that the prices of Italian government securities would 
move closer to those of securities issued by Italian banks. Instead, 
the prices moved even farther apart as investors flocked to the government 
securities. Then, when Russia decided to halt debt payments this past 
August, developing markets around the world went into a tailspin. 
Long-Term Capital had bet millions on the convergence of garden-variety 
bonds issued by Brazil, Mexico and other Latin American governments 
and so-called Brady bonds, issued by the same nations but secured 
by U.S. Treasury securities. Those convergence bets also became losers, 
as issues backed by the Treasury took on more appeal. The allergy 
to risk quickly afflicted the markets for corporate bonds, mortgage 
bonds and junk bonds. Again, Long-Term Capital was directly in the 
line of fire. It had a collection of securities, for example, that 
entitled it to collect the future interest payments from a pool of 
home mortgages. The prices plummeted on these instruments, which are 
considered highly risky because of their sensitivity to changes in 
mortgage rates, and the value of Long-Term Capital's holdings went 
down. Prices and trading volume also fell in the junk-bond market, 
where Long-Term Capital had invested several hundred million dollars. 
By the end of August, investor nervousness had spread to stocks, with 
sharp market declines in the United States and elsewhere. Despite 
its reputation as a bond specialist, Long-Term Capital had an estimated 
$6.5 billion in the stock market. Part of that money was in the stocks 
of companies involved in mergers. Some was invested in a convergence 
trade on the stock of Royal Dutch Petroleum and Shell Transport. Because 
each company relies for income on a third, related company, Royal 
Dutch/Shell Group, the fund had bet that the prices of those two stocks 
would move toward each other. As the stock market tumbled, though, 
Shell Transport's stock fell faster and further, causing the gap to 
widen. The stock market turmoil also created losses in the fund's 
multibillion-dollar collection of total-return swaps, a form of financial 
derivatives. (Derivatives are financial instruments whose value is 
based on the value of another asset _ for example, a stock option 
whose price is derived from an underlying stock.) In a typical swap 
of this kind, the fund entered into a contract with a bank or brokerage 
firm that owned a block of stock. The bank agreed to pay the fund 
all future gains and dividends on that stock, and the fund agreed 
to pay the bank a fixed fee equal to a small percentage of the initial 
value of the stock. If the stock rose, the fund kept the gain; if 
it went down, the fund owed the bank the difference between the original 
price and the new one. The swaps allowed the fund to benefit from 
rising stock prices without actually owning the stocks. But stock 
prices fell and remained unsteady into September. By mid-September, 
the only things converging on Long Term Capital's partners were their 
losses _ losses so diverse that they made it harder for the fund's 
creditors and their regulators to respond, because the fund's troubles 
were affecting so many far-flung markets. Regulators got their first 
look at the scale of the portfolio on Sunday, Sept. 20, when a team 
from the New York Fed drove to Greenwich to meet with the beleaguered 
fund's partners. It was then, McDonough of the Fed later testified, 
that officials ``came to understand the impact which Long-Term Capital's 
positions were already having on markets around the world.'' Long-Term 
Capital's experience, Kaufman said, shows that ``international diversification 
works in bull markets, but it fails in bear markets.'' ``We now live 
in a much more homogeneous financial world,'' he said. ``We all talk 
to each other and share the same information and have the same biases.'' 
As a result, Kaufman explained, world markets now tend to move in 
lock step _ a line dance that tramples on the basic concept of portfolio 
diversification. Teen-Aged Markets In a Grown-Up Crisis Putting money 
in mature, well-established markets with lots of investors, like the 
market for 30-year U.S. Treasury bonds, is one thing. Placing bets 
in younger, less mature markets _ those in developing countries and 
those for complicated financial products _ is quite another, as Long-Term 
Capital soon discovered. Indeed, the markets for some products in 
the fund bore little resemblance to traditional forums for trading 
securities. While stock options and some other standardized derivatives 
are traded on exchanges, Long-Term Capital favored swaps and other 
custom-tailored contracts that were designed specifically for its 
own investment strategies. These customized contracts change hands 
only in private transactions _ making the market in them more like 
the market for homes or luxury yachts than the one for stocks, or 
even for stock options. In addition to arranging its total-return 
swaps in the stock market, the fund also made heavy use of a derivative 
called an interest-rate swap, in which one investor agrees to pay 
another a sum equal to the amount that, say, $100 million would earn 
if invested at a floating interest rate for three years. In return, 
the second investor agrees to pay the first the amount that the $100 
million would earn if invested at fixed rates. Neither party owes 
the other $100 million; that amount, called the notional value, simply 
provides a tool for measurement, since it is unknown in advance how 
much money will actually change hands under the swap agreement. The 
scope of Long-Term Capital's use of swaps and other financial derivatives 
was remarkable. Its derivatives portfolio had a notional value of 
$1.25 trillion, representing 1/30 of the worldwide notional value 
of these investments, according to the International Swaps and Derivatives 
Association. One person with firsthand knowledge of the fund's portfolio 
said the reliance on these exotic derivatives was based on the assumption 
that Long-Term Capital could quickly and easily sell its holdings 
whenever it wished. But that assumption was profoundly flawed. To 
be sure, the markets for swaps and other privately traded derivatives 
have grown enormously in the last 15 years; businesses and investors 
use these tools to offset risks from things like interest rate changes 
and currency fluctuations. But the trading value of these markets 
still pales in comparison with that of the stock and bond markets, 
and it can shrink sharply in times of uncertainty. These markets have 
fewer participants than the traditional ones and no public disclosure 
of prices or volume; they also lack a clear regulatory structure. 
The ability to absorb large volumes of business quickly without experiencing 
substantial swings in prices _ a quality Wall Street calls liquidity 
_ is one good measure of a market's maturity, and it is a quality 
that relies in part on the presence of speculators like Long-Term 
Capital. In the stock market, for example, when buyers and sellers 
are abundant, an investor can easily sell 10,000 shares of a $50 stock 
on a single day without pushing down the price more than a few pennies. 
In a market with fewer buyers, the price might plunge to $25 before 
the shares were all sold. If a market becomes completely illiquid, 
there is simply no one willing to buy that much stock that quickly. 
That is where speculators like Long-Term Capital come in. When many 
people want to sell, the speculator steps up to buy, contributing 
to the liquidity of the marketplace by taking the unpopular side of 
transactions. But in many small, specialized markets for swaps and 
other exotic, privately traded derivatives, Long-Term Capital's scale 
of operation had made it the dominant speculator. Thus, when it needed 
to sell in the shaky days of early September, speculators who were 
willing to buy were scarce. ``Some of these more exotic swaps were 
already trading by appointment only,'' one investment manager said. 
Reflecting the economic crisis that swept Asia, the volume of worldwide 
swaps activity fell nearly 40 percent in the second half of 1997, 
compared with the first half, according to the International Swaps 
and Derivatives Association. Activity in the markets for swaps recovered 
somewhat in the first half of 1998, but when Russia shocked world 
markets by stopping payments on its debt, liquidity in these markets 
quickly evaporated again. Exact figures will be months in coming, 
but one industry newsletter, Swaps Monitor, estimates that trading 
revenues _ a figure closely tied to trading volume _ fell as much 
as 24 percent during the third quarter of this year. A result was 
a market in which swaps and other derivatives could be sold quickly 
only at fire-sale prices _ a condition that apparently had not been 
anticipated by Long-Term Capital or other participants in the market. 
Before this crisis, few people even focused on the issue of liquidity 
in the swaps market, said Paul Spraos, editor of the Swaps Monitor 
newsletter in New York. ``It's not a question of whether it was less 
liquid than anybody thought,'' he said. ``It's a question of whether 
people ever sat down and thought about this issue at all. And a lot 
of people didn't.'' But that hardly lets Long-Term Capital off the 
hook, one Wall Street risk manager said. ``They should have realized 
they would not have the liquidity they needed,'' this person said, 
speaking on condition of anonymity. ``In many of these markets, they 
were the liquidity.'' By the third week in September, as the markets 
reeled and Long-Term Capital's losses grew, regulators and Wall Street 
executives began to worry. McDonough, the New York Fed president, 
later told Congress that he feared that a number of these already 
nervous markets ``would experience extreme price moves and possibly 
cease to function for a period of one or more days and maybe longer'' 
if Long-Term Capital failed. ``This would have caused a vicious cycle,'' 
he continued, in which panic-driven selling would push down prices, 
causing further losses and increasing the risk that the panic would 
spread. Moreover, thousands of hedge funds were active in these markets. 
Their lenders were growing nervous, and lines of credit might have 
been cut if Long-Term Capital collapsed. At the very least, these 
funds would have temporarily abandoned their important role as speculators; 
at worst, many might have failed _ tipping over a new row of dominoes. 
New Forms of Debt, New Breeds of Risk Long-Term Capital would never 
have posed such a threat to the financial markets if it had not found 
easy ways to speculate by using borrowed money _ an amount borrowed 
in such intricate ways that the results defied the investment world's 
assumptions about the limits on credit and the protection of lenders 
in today's marketplace. Speculation with borrowed money has been a 
flash point for regulators since the eve of the 1929 market crash. 
In 1928, the Federal Reserve tried to discourage stock market speculation 
by pushing up interest rates on loans made for that purpose, but it 
met open defiance from some Wall Street lenders who simply refused 
to raise their rates. After the crash, the Federal Reserve was put 
firmly in charge of regulating how much stock could be bought on credit 
_ on margin, as it is called on Wall Street. Today, no more than half 
of the purchase price of a stock may be borrowed. But those Depression-era 
rules do not address loans made to those who speculate in foreign 
currencies, government securities, bonds and derivatives markets. 
Hedge funds and other speculators can borrow as much as they dare, 
and brokerage firms and banks are free to lend as much as they wish 
within broad regulatory limits. Besides the fund's considerable reliance 
on traditional loans, its use of derivatives contracts had the same 
practical effect as investing with borrowed money. The total-return 
swaps, for example, allowed the fund to control considerably more 
shares of stock than it could have bought outright with the same amount 
of money. Similarly, interest-rate swaps allowed the fund to speculate 
on changes in bond prices just as if it had owned the bonds, but at 
a tiny fraction of the cost. Though Long-Term Capital was not alone 
in its use of credit, known on Wall Street as leverage, it appears 
to have borrowed far more than its lenders or their regulators thought 
plausible or even possible. Some hedge funds use leverage to double 
or triple the size of their bets; Long-Term Capital used leverage 
to increase its bets 25 times over. Of the fund's $125 billion in 
assets, more than $120 billion had been acquired with borrowed money. 
Lenders of all types were so eager for the business of the star-studded 
firm that they lent freely and on generous terms, without much apparent 
concern about how much others were lending to the fund. They viewed 
the vast majority of their loans as safe, because they held collateral 
_ the securities involved in the fund's various trades _ that they 
assumed they could sell if necessary. But in fact, if they had all 
tried to dispose of that collateral quickly, they might have had billions 
and perhaps tens of billions of dollars in losses, as they sold into 
illiquid markets that Long-Term Capital dominated. The fund's bankers 
had also waived their usual requirement for something called initial 
margin, an up-front deposit similar to the down payment on a car. 
Most bankers require a down payment; if borrowers cannot repay the 
loan, the banks rely on the down payment to cover any decline in the 
value of their collateral. But people who have studied Long-Term Capital's 
trading practices said the fund usually got 100 percent financing 
for its purchases, the equivalent of buying a car with no money down. 
The fund did pay its banks money to cover day-to-day declines in the 
market value of its investments, and it had to post cash collateral 
on its stock investments. As markets moved against it, the fund satisfied 
those obligations by drawing down most of the $4.7 billion nest egg 
it had held at the beginning of 1998. By mid-September, it was dangerously 
close to running out of cash. If the fund had run out of money and 
collapsed, the bankers would have had to seize its stocks, bonds and 
derivatives. And because they had not required Long-Term Capital to 
pay initial margins, they would have had no cushion if the value of 
those securities had continued to decline. The lenient borrowing arrangements 
that Long-Term Capital had enjoyed caused other migraines for its 
bankers. Most hedge funds have a banker or two to arrange their trades. 
Long-Term Capital had dozens _ at least 75, according to McDonough 
of the Fed _ because it shopped relentlessly for the best derivatives 
contracts. The sprawling network of lenders served the fund well, 
but it created a portfolio filled with what bankers call unpaired 
trades. When banks lend money to finance the purchase of two related 
investments in a convergence trade, they encourage borrowers to finance 
both legs of the trade through one bank. For example, a bank that 
finances a hedge fund's purchase of 29-year Treasury bonds would prefer 
to handle its short sale of 30-year bonds, too. That way, if the hedge 
fund collapsed, the bank could step into its place, relatively secure 
in the knowledge that it now controlled bets on both rising and falling 
bond prices. But because Long-Term Capital had clout, bankers allowed 
it to spread its business widely in search of the best prices. That 
left most of the banks financing single legs of two-way bets. Long-Term 
was the only glue holding together a puzzle-like portfolio, increasing 
bankers' anxiety in the dark days of September. A sudden collapse 
of Long-Term Capital would have left many of them with risky one-way 
bets on their own books. As the fund's losses grew, its managers tried 
desperately to appease bankers by pairing up trades _ persuading the 
bankers who had financed one part of a trade to get together with 
those who had financed the rest of it. But the task proved fiendishly 
complicated. Consider the difficulty if three banks had financed the 
bet on 30-year Treasury bonds and five banks the 29-year Treasury 
bet. ``We quickly discovered that getting them to pair up the trade 
could take something like six months, and we had more like six days,'' 
one Long-Term Capital manager said. A Blip, or a Sign Of Crises to 
Come? When Fed officials arrived in Greenwich, they identified unpaired 
trades as one of the most worrisome problems. And if the fund had 
failed to make good on even one small payment to a single banker, 
it would have effectively defaulted on its entire $120 billion in 
borrowing, thanks to cross-default provisions in its contracts. A 
cross-default provision requires that a borrower remain current on 
all its debt repayments, not just on those to the lender itself. If 
a default had occurred, some lenders would have been able to seize 
collateral and sell it, but not all. The fund's trading partners, 
the parties with which Long-Term Capital had contracted for its swaps, 
would have been in trouble, too. They would have almost certainly 
sought to reduce their risks by doing offsetting transactions with 
other speculators. At the moment of a Long-Term Capital default, those 
offsetting contracts themselves would have become unbalanced risks 
on their books. When that happened, a senior Wall Street banker said, 
``it would be sensible in the extreme to go out and get the contracts 
you need to replace those defaulted ones.'' The effect of such a sudden 
scramble on the various swaps and derivatives markets would have been, 
at least, extremely disruptive and, at worst, more than those markets 
could have handled. Those were the fears that prompted the rescue 
of the giant hedge fund in late September _ fears that have since 
faded with each upsurge of the Dow. But even as markets grew calmer, 
Greenspan and other regulators, including McDonough, continued to 
worry aloud that broad structural changes in the financial marketplace 
_ including the spread of derivatives, the increasingly global nature 
of investment and the immaturity of some developing and specialized 
markets _ encourage financial panic to spread from market to market 
and from country to country. This time, at least, people coped. And 
if Long-Term Capital was simply a casualty of a once-a-century financial 
storm, the crisis may well deserve to become a footnote to financial 
history. But if what happened was, as some regulators fear, a result 
of developments that have permanently changed how modern markets work, 
then investors ignore the lessons of the crisis at their own peril. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>