<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981204.0358 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Tens of millions of Nigerians are expected to vote in local government 
elections on Saturday in the first of three elections that the military 
rulers have promised will lead to democracy. The borders will be closed 
during the voting hours, officials said, to prevent candidates from 
paying foreigners to vote illegally. In Lagos, the largest city, the 
authorities announced that most cars would be banned from the streets 
and that pedestrians would be limited to areas near voting centers. 
As dancers and musicians hired by candidates to drum up support played 
their last songs Friday in the neighborhoods of Lagos the mood seemed 
to vary from deep skepticism about the fairness and relevance of the 
election to great hope that Nigeria, where 1 in 6 Africans live, is 
finally turning a new page. Many residents, though, appeared more 
preoccupied with the price of fuel, which has skyrocketed, to $4.30 
a gallon from $2.60 a few days ago. The sudden long lines at gasoline 
stations seemed to symbolize the problems of the sixth-largest oil 
producer in the world, but where widespread corruption has led to 
chronic gasoline shortages. ``I registered and will vote because I 
want the present system to change,'' Faith Omozejele, 27, a shop owner, 
said. ``Do you like the system we are running? No fuel, no light, 
no roads, no water. Transportation is too costly.'' At stake in the 
elections are seats in 774 municipal governments. Nigeria will hold 
elections for statewide seats next month and for the presidency in 
February. But the results from the voting on Saturday will determine 
which parties qualify to run in the bigger races, and they should 
provide an early glimpse into how fair the presidential elections 
will be in this country of deep ethnic, religious and regional divisions. 
The elections are being held after six months of turbulence. Gen. 
Sani Abacha, who ruthlessly ruled for five years and turned Nigeria 
into an international pariah, died suddenly in June. Adding to the 
chaos was the sudden death in July of Moshood K.O. Abiola, who had 
appeared set to win a presidential election in 1993 before the military 
annulled it. Abiola was imprisoned on charges of treason in 1994. 
Discontent has been spreading in southeastern Nigeria, where the oil 
is produced but which has been badly neglected by the northern military 
rulers. Members of ethnic groups in the Niger River Delta seized oil 
stations that belong to Western oil companies, and members of the 
Ijaw group in one oil town, Warri, have threatened to disrupt the 
elections. Abacha's successor, Gen. Abdulsalami Abubakar, pledged 
a transition to a civilian government by May, released political prisoners 
and undertook other changes that have earned him good reviews in the 
West. Abubakar also created the Independent National Electoral Commission, 
appointing as its chairman a respected judge, Ephraim Akpata, to oversee 
the elections. Irregularities have been reported in registering voters. 
Almost 60 million voters' cards were issued. But the commission said 
it could not account for 20 million, suggesting that some candidates 
stole cards. Margaret Ehiakhame, 32, a student, was one of many people 
who said she had been unable to register. ``I made several attempts 
to register,'' Miss Ehiakame said. ``But each time I was told that 
there were no cards. I wonder why, because sometimes I got to the 
voters' registration center as early as 10 o'clock in the morning. 
I wonder why I have to be disenfranchised.'' Western officials who 
are observing the elections predicted that difficulties might arise 
from logistical problems and some corruption, though not extensive 
fraud. Clement Nwankwo, chairman of the Transition Monitoring Group, 
an umbrella organization of 45 Nigerian monitoring groups, said he 
thought that the elections would generally be fair. ``But there's 
no doubt that there's some credibility problem,'' Nwankwo added. Segun 
Jegede, director of a human rights organization, the Committee for 
the Defense of Human Rights, said his organization would not participate 
in the elections because he believed that the process was fundamentally 
flawed. ``There is no constitution on which the election is going 
to be based,'' Jegede said, voicing the common criticism that the 
government has not called a national convention to settle on a constitution 
and other problems. ``I think monitoring will only be giving credibility 
to this fraudulent process.'' Monitoring organizations and Nigerian 
newspapers have complained that the candidates of the nine parties 
have talked little about the issues, focusing instead on the well-known 
figures that head each party. Some politicians have even acknowledged 
the criticism, though typically about their rivals. ``We in the Alliance 
for Democracy are more concerned about raising the fundamental issues 
of restructuring, because it's at the heart of the problems of this 
country, while the other parties prefer to skirt it,'' said Adeola 
Adefolabi, who is running for chairmanship of a district here. Adefolabi's 
party is one of nine parties that are running candidates. Made up 
of longtime opponents of military rule, the party is considered strong 
support in the southwest. That party and two others, the People's 
Democratic Party and the All People's Party, have the greatest national 
appeal. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>