<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981204.0411 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
The reasons Mamdouh Mahmud Salim gives for coming here a few months 
ago are at once prosaic and touching: he wanted to buy a Mercedes, 
and find a wife. At least that is what Salim told FBI agents who questioned 
him for four days in September, when he broke into tears several times, 
expressed concern about his children's report cards and asked for 
a pistol so he could shoot himself. In the eyes of U.S. authorities, 
Salim is an international terrorist who came to Germany to carry out 
an attack on the U.S. consulate in Hamburg. The Americans also say 
he is a member of Al Qaeda, the terrorist group led by Osama bin Laden, 
who is suspected of organizing the bombings of U.S. embassies in Kenya 
and Tanzania in August. Salim, 40, emphatically denies that he belongs 
to any terrorist group. He says he was born in Sudan, but U.S. officials 
believe he is an Iraqi who served in the army during the war with 
Iran. He speaks English and has traveled to more than 20 countries 
in the past four years. Since he was arrested on his arrival here 
three months ago, he has been fighting extradition to the United States. 
But on Friday his lawyer, Leonard Walischewski, said Salim was resigned 
to going to the United States, possibly as early as next week. ``He's 
really naive,'' Walischewski added. ``He can't understand the difficult 
situation he's in.'' But Salim now believes he knows who put him there: 
Sidi Tayyib, a top financial aide to bin Laden and once a close associate 
of Salim. A federal criminal complaint against Salim charges him with 
conspiracy to carry out attacks against U.S. military installations. 
The accusations, including one that he tried to buy material for nuclear 
weapons, come from a person identified only as ``CS-1,'' for confidential 
source. Government officials have refused to identify CS-1, but court 
papers quote a suspected member of Al Qaeda as expressing alarm over 
reports in 1997 that another member, Tayyib, had become an informant 
for Saudi Arabia and Western intelligence. Salim did not at first 
believe it possible that Tayyib would inform on bin Laden, Walischewski 
said; Tayyib was married to one of bin Laden's nieces. Tayyib, who 
also went by the name Abu Fadl, was chief financial officer for some 
of bin Laden's companies in Sudan, the base of bin Laden's operations 
for several years. He was Salim's boss, according to Salim, who was 
also a senior employee in the companies. According to a transcript 
of the interrogation, which was first disclosed in the national daily 
Suddeutsche Zeitung, Salim said that whenever he needed to pay a bill 
of more that $1,000 he had to ask Tayyib for the money. One of the 
companies of which Tayyib was director, and which Salim managed, was 
Taba Investment Trading, which dealt in palm oil and cattle, Salim 
told interrogators from the FBI. One of the suspects in the bombing 
of the U.S. embassy in Tanzania, Mustafa Mahmoud Said Ahmed, set up 
a branch for this company in Kenya in 1994. That was the year when 
an Al Qaeda cell began to operate there. Ahmed has been indicted in 
connection with the bombing of the embassy in Tanzania and is being 
held in prison there. Salim also told the FBI that he worked for bin 
Laden from 1992-1994, but that he had not seen or had any contact 
with him since. U.S. authorities say that Salim was a major figure 
in bin Laden's network. ``Are you supposed to be building an infrastructure 
in Germany that is able to carry out terrorist actions?'' one of the 
FBI agents asked. ``That's laughable,'' Salim answered, in English, 
which was the language the interrogation was conducted in. ``Allah 
is my witness. If bin Laden wants to do something he already has people. 
Why would he ask me?'' He also said that he was against the violent 
actions of bin Laden. ``What believer of Mohammed would do such a 
thing? It is unimaginable for me that anyone should kill innocent 
civilians.'' Far from being in Germany to carry out terrorist activities, 
Salim told his interrogators, he was there to buy a Mercedes, which 
he would take back to Dubai, and above all to find a wife. ``I look 
in every country for a wife,'' Salim told his interrogators. ``My 
friends all know that I am looking for a wife.'' He is reportedly 
already the father of six children, aged 4 to 15. Salim was a prolific 
traveler. Between 1994 and his arrest, he visited more than 20 countries, 
from Russia to the Philippines to Canada. From Canada, he tried to 
enter the United States to buy radio equipment, he said, but he could 
not get a visa. When the interrogators asked him why he had been in 
the Philippines, where bin Laden reportedly supported an Islamic guerrilla 
movement, Salim replied that he was looking for a wife there, too. 
When asked why he was in Russia, he said it was to look for a wife. 
Salim then made some unflattering remarks about his current wife and 
noted that it is no violation of the Koran to have more than one. 
Walischewski, Salim's lawyer, who visited his client briefly on Friday 
because he said he was concerned his psychological state, said the 
only thing Salim was worried about was his wife and children, who 
had returned from Dubai to Sudan after Salim was arrested and were 
without any money. ``The only thing that hurts is his heart,'' Walischewski 
said about his client. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>