<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981204.0407 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Florida child welfare officials plan to revamp workers' training and 
the way they handle child abuse cases after failing to act on signs 
of abuse in a six-year-old girl who ultimately was beaten to death 
by her father, the secretary of the state Department of Children and 
Families said. ``In my judgment, it could have been avoided,'' Secretary 
Ed Feaver said. ``That's what makes it so difficult for us.'' More 
than 500 volunteers aided law enforcement officials in searching for 
Kayla McKean after her father reported her missing on Thanksgiving. 
Five days later, the father confessed to fatally beating her and led 
officers to the remote area where he had buried the child. The father, 
Richard Adams, 24, of Clermont in Lake County north of Orlando, was 
charged with murder after confessing he beat the girl the night before 
Thanksgiving when she soiled her pants, authorities say. His wife 
and the girl's stepmother, Marcie Adams, 22, has been charged with 
a felony count of aggravated child abuse by neglect. The death was 
apparently the culmination of abuse that had been documented in several 
reports to child welfare officials since April 1997, but that inexplicably 
prompted no action to protect the girl, Feaver said. Typically, the 
father would attribute his daughter's injuries to accidents and she 
would be released back to him. Adams had been given informal custody 
of the girl since April 1998 by her mother, Elizabeth McKean, officials 
said. Feaver said the case is still under investigation but enough 
is known for his department to institute changes in the handling of 
child abuse investigations. He said, for instance, that investigators 
will be prohibited from relying on anything but their own examination 
of the child to determine whether injuries are accidental or inflicted. 
He said that in Kayla's case, a child protection team relied on a 
telephone consultation with emergency room doctors to determine that 
her injuries were consistent with an accident. Feaver also said that 
department workers will now have to turn over their entire case files 
to the court when judges are considering whether to place the child 
in protective custody. That way, he said, a judge would have enough 
information to assess whether the child should be kept from the family. 
In Kayla's case, a judge complained he would not have returned her 
to the home had he known all the facts. Feaver said training will 
also be revamped to emphasize the supervision of cases. He said Kayla 
first came to the attention of his department last year when her school 
reported she had a bruise under her left ear and was shy and withdrawn. 
He said the girl's family said the injury had been caused by spider 
bites or anemia and a department doctor referred the girl to medical 
follow-up. This May, after Kayla had moved in with her father and 
his wife and the couple's one-year-old child, she was taken to an 
emergency room with injuries that included black eyes and a fractured 
nose and hand. Adams explained she had fallen off her bicycle. Feaver 
said that after a telephone consultation, workers with his department 
accepted the view of emergency room doctors that the injuries were 
consistent with a fall. At a subsequent court hearing, a department 
lawyer recommended the girl be returned to her family. In October, 
prompted by a report from Kayla's school, child welfare workers investigated 
more injuries to the girl, including a bump on her head and black 
eyes again. The father said she had fallen in the bathtub and the 
family's dog had stepped on her face while she slept. An investigator 
determined a low risk of harm to the child after Kayla herself reported 
she was treated well at home, Feaver said. He said there were several 
other reports that met similar fate. ``Our staff should have seen 
that pattern,'' said Feaver, who said disciplinary action is being 
considered. ``That's the thing that drives me crazy. Over and over 
again there was just too much that happened. Our first instinct should 
have been let's protect the child.'' There are up to 300,000 reports 
of child abuse in Florida each year. Seventy-five thousand reports 
were found to be substantiated last year, reflecting a 10 to 15 percent 
increase in abuse cases over the previous two year, children and families 
department officials said. The state records about 100 child-abuse 
deaths a year. The department has a $3.4 billion budget, $550 million 
of that for child protection services. Gov.-elect Jeb Bush Bush has 
said that the system needs reform, mostly through privatization of 
foster care, and more involvement from local law enforcement agencies. 
``He wants the local sheriff's office to work hand-in-hand with child 
abuse investigators,'' said Bush's spokesman, Corey Tilley. Cindy 
Kinat, principal of Minneola Elementary School in Lake County north 
of Orlando, which Kayla had attended since last April, said her death 
caused ``a lot of anger'' among adults in the school. ``When the situation 
was investigated it was just passed over too lightly,'' she said of 
the state probe into the reports of the girl's injuries. Ms. Kinat 
said good may come out of the case, however, if it serves to remind 
everyone involved with children of the need to be vigilant of their 
well-being. She described the first-grader as ``fairly quiet and shy 
but loving.'' ``She did not have a lot of interaction with the other 
children,'' Ms. Kinat said. But, she added. ``It was a safe place 
for her to come to school and she seemed to enjoy it.'' 
</TEXT>
</DOC>