<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981204.0346 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
An unexpected jump in new jobs and an even more surprising drop in 
the unemployment rate helped stabilize Wall Street and slow the decline 
in emerging stock markets Friday. The market was led higher by bank 
and computer stocks after the Labor Department reported that nonfarm 
payroll jobs increased by 267,000 in October and that the U.S. unemployment 
rate dropped to 4.4 percent. Forecasters had expected an increase 
of 169,000 jobs. The positive news on the economy's strength _ which 
investors see as improving the troubled outlook for corporate earnings 
_ helped stocks recover most of the losses of Thursday, when selling 
was accelerated by the plunge in the Brazilian stock market after 
lawmakers rejected a key element of President Fernando Henrique Cardoso's 
fiscal reform package. Investors were worried that a failure of reform 
in Brazil would lead to economic turmoil across Latin America that 
would be very negative for Wall Street. But the major stock indexes 
still finished below their recent highs and down for the week. The 
bullish economic news could not fully offset the investor concern 
that led to this week's selling: negative earnings announcements and 
projections at a time when the stock market was back near its record 
highs. And the Wall Street rally was not enough to stabilize Brazil's 
market. While the Mexican stock market finished 1.6 percent higher 
after a 3 percent plunge Thursday, Brazil's Bovespa index ended lower. 
After falling 8.9 percent Thursday, it opened higher Friday, rising 
as much as 3 percent but finishing with a 1 percent loss. The Dow 
Jones industrial average rose 136.46 points, or 1.5 percent, to 9,016.14 
while the Standard &AMP; Poor's index of 500 stocks climbed 26.60 
points, or 2.3 percent, to 1,176.74. The Nasdaq index jumped 48.83 
points, or 2.5 percent, to 2,003.16 while the Russell index of 2,000 
smaller company stocks finished 3.37 points, or 0.9 percent higher, 
at 398.37. For the week, the Dow was down 3.4 percent, the S&AMP;P 
1.3 percent, the Nasdaq 0.7 percent, and the Russell 0.9 percent. 
Bond prices fell as investors figured that the stronger-than-expected 
job growth would delay any further cuts in interest rates by the Federal 
Reserve Board. The price of the 30-year bond fell 12/32 to 103 8/32 
while the yield, which moves in the opposite direction, rose to 5.04 
percent from 5.00 percent Thursday. The volatility of the stock market 
over the last two weeks reflects the difficult position investors 
are in right now. Those in the stock market have had a tremendous 
ride back from the lows of the summer, with the Nasdaq index up 41 
percent since Oct. 8. The Federal Reserve has been cutting interest 
rates and the key European central banks did the same on Thursday. 
Inflation is below 2 percent. But at the same time, these investors 
are afraid that the rebound was probably too fast and that the problems 
in the global economy that triggered the summer plunge are not resolved. 
The corporate earnings outlook is also a problem, as was made clear 
again with Boeing's announcement this week that its profits could 
be 25 percent lower next year than those forecast. The recent announcements 
of layoffs, including Boeing's 20,000 and Johnson &AMP; Johnson's 
4,100, could point to sluggish growth ahead. And the setback in Brazil's 
deficit-cutting efforts Thursday is a stark reminder that the improved 
environment of the last two months can change quickly. Richard Berner, 
the chief economist at Mellon Bank in Pittsburgh, said he wondered 
why the new layoff announcements had not yet raised concern on Main 
Street. ``Maybe it is because people don't think they will have trouble 
finding a job, with unemployment so low,'' he said. But he predicted 
that the corporate earnings slowdown would continue and that, despite 
the employment reports, there would be signs of a U.S. economic slowdown. 
Thomas Galvin, the chief investment officer at Donaldson Lufkin &AMP; 
Jenrette, argued that this week's sell-off was positive. ``It shows 
that investors have their feet on the ground and eyes and ears open 
to the global issues that remain serious,'' he said. He also said 
it proves that the ``tulip mania in Internet stocks has not spread.'' 
He said there are two remaining risks that could prevent the stock 
market from continuing to rally. One is Brazil. Failure to implement 
its deficit-reduction program could lead to a run on the currency, 
a devaluation and an even bigger global financial crisis. The second 
is Japan, which has been moving to reform its banking system and is 
trying to invigorate its economy. But, he said, that effort remains 
an ``episodic adventure.'' Galvin argued that the problems will be 
dealt with, allowing stocks to move higher again near the turn of 
the year. Until then, he expects a trading range of 8,800 to 9,300 
for the Dow. Desmond Lachman, the director of emerging-markets economic 
research at Salomon Smith Barney, said the setback in Brazil is not 
as bad as the initial stock-market reaction made it appear. ``I wouldn't 
regard this as a knockout blow to the Brazilians,'' he said. ``It 
could be contained to a bump in the road.'' Lachman said it may be 
the ``wake-up call'' Cardoso needed, because it appeared that he was 
overconfident about the prospects for his package of $23.5 billion 
in spending cuts and tax increases. But he said the defeat would keep 
investors guessing for some time, because substitute measures for 
the pension tax that was defeated would not be acted on until next 
year. In addition, the delay of the complete Brazilian reform plan 
will slow the cutting of interest rates that had been begun by the 
central bank. This, in turn, is likely to make Brazil's current recession 
worse. ``And as the recession gets deeper, the politics will be more 
difficult,'' he said. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>