<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981204.0453 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
With Republican leaders looking unlikely to allow a vote on censure, 
President Clinton's fate in the House hinges on the decisions of a 
small group of Republican moderates who could tilt an impeachment 
vote either way. The House Judiciary Committee is expected to vote 
along party lines by the end of next week for at least one article 
of impeachment _ on perjury _ against the president. The full House 
is slated to vote the following week, and Republicans and Democrats 
alike say the vote is too close to call. They say it could well shift 
against the president if a censure measure is not allowed on the floor 
as an alternative option. Rep. Tom DeLay, the House majority whip, 
and other Republicans who have been canvassing GOP sentiment say that 
censure's chance of coming to the floor, even if impeachment fails, 
is now very slim. Such a no-censure scenario would give wavering Republican 
moderates, who disapprove of Clinton's behavior in the Lewinsky scandal, 
the unpalatable choice of impeachment or nothing. If the House was 
complicating matters for the president, the White House threw a roadblock 
of its own into the House on Friday night, signaling that it wanted 
to put on a full defense that could last most of next week and push 
the impeachment vote behind schedule. Rep. Henry Hyde, R-Ill., the 
chairman of the House Judiciary Committee, had no immediate reply 
Friday night to the new request. Republicans said they saw the White 
House move as an effort to stall the proceedings until January, when 
a new Congress, with five more Democrats, convenes. ``Clearly this 
is a desperate last minute ploy to move the impeachment inquiry into 
next year _ this after demanding from the beginning that the inquiry 
be finished this year,'' said one committee official. He added, ``They 
are looking at the votes, and they don't like what they see.'' Even 
Democratic strategists were surprised by the White House's tone. One 
said the president's aides seemed to have forgotten that they were 
no longer fighting for public opinion but ``fighting for 20 Republicans.'' 
Even before the plans for Clinton's defense were made public, Rep. 
Christopher Shays, R-Conn., said the White House was overplaying its 
hand. ``Right now they're pushing people into impeachment,'' he said. 
Earlier in the day, the White House press secretary, Joe Lockhart, 
sharply criticized the Republicans' drive toward impeachment. ``This 
is perhaps the most serious thing Congress can do,'' he said. ``This 
isn't a process where the House of Representatives can throw it to 
the Senate and let them deal with it.'' Of the Judiciary Committee, 
he said, ``Their actions have been chaotic, partisan and irresponsible, 
fundamentally limiting the president's ability to present a coherent 
defense.'' Hyde replied by mocking the Democrats' constant criticisms 
of his panel. ``In sum our inquiry is either too broad or too narrow, 
too slow or too fast,'' he said. ``Judge Starr is either talking too 
little or too much. Now that's my definition of chaos. One gets the 
impression from the Democrats that the left hand doesn't know what 
the far left hand is doing.'' How the White House handles the next 
few weeks could be vitally important because enough Republicans are 
on the fence, and refusing to declare themselves, that both parties 
say no one can say for sure what will happen in the House. ``I don't 
think anybody can have a precise vote count right now, because there 
are large numbers of undecideds and undeclareds,'' said Rep. Michael 
Castle, R-Del. He said he was undecided on impeachment and would like 
a censure option if impeachment is defeated. ``I've spoken to a lot 
of people who just simply haven't said which way they're voting, and 
I've talked to people clearly up in the air.'' Another Republican 
moderate, Rep. Marge Roukema of New Jersey, said she thought that 
if the House was presented with a straight up or down vote on impeachment, 
without the option of censure, most moderates would vote for impeachment. 
She said she staunchly opposed censure. ``I don't want censure used 
as a dodge or escape from the direct vote on impeachment,'' she said. 
``That is our constitutional obligation to have that vote and not 
have a plea bargain on the floor. It will be a travesty if any form 
of censure is used.'' Lockhart said Friday that the White House was 
``willing to listen to any proposals relating to censure.'' Democrats 
are working to assemble a censure proposal that could draw the support 
of most of their party and some Republicans. And several Republicans 
have their own proposals. Rep. Peter King, R-N.Y., has proposed a 
censure plan, which he has sent to the White House for review, that 
would include a requirement that Clinton agree to a financial penalty. 
That would need Clinton's consent to clear constitutional hurdles. 
Rep. Rodney Frelinghuysen, R-N.J., has sent a censure proposal that 
would reduce the president's pension. And another New Jersey Republican, 
Bob Franks, recently pleaded with the president in a letter. Franks 
said he was now inclined to support an article of impeachment on perjury. 
``For the sake of the nation,'' he wrote to Clinton, ``I urge you 
to come forward, admit you lied under oath and indicate that you are 
prepared to face the consequences of your action.'' He said such an 
admission would ``create an atmosphere in which a penalty other than 
impeachment could be actively considered.'' But King acknowledged 
Friday that the biggest hurdle could be getting his censure proposal 
to the House floor. ``The idea is to try to build up pressure,'' he 
said. ``DeLay does not want it to go to the floor, no doubt about 
it.'' Although Democrats say they are prepared to use parliamentary 
maneuvers to get at least an indirect vote on a censure alternative, 
such a move would be difficult for Republicans to support. The current 
House leadership has long warned Republicans that a vote with the 
Democrats on procedure is considered a heretical stand against the 
party and the House leadership. As the debate intensified, conservative 
groups were working to keep Republicans from breaking ranks. The conservative 
weekly Human Events, in its new issue on Monday, carries a front-page 
editorial imploring Congress to impeach the president. And its editors 
continued to go on talk radio shows in the districts of Republicans 
who are undecided or leaning against impeachment. King, who has become 
perhaps the most outspoken Republican against impeachment, said his 
office began receiving 150 phone calls an hour in favor of impeachment 
on Monday and Tuesday. ``We had to shut down the phones and put on 
the voice mail system,'' he said. In preparation for next week's debate, 
the Judiciary Committee staff is now drafting three articles of impeachment 
charging the president with perjury, obstruction of justice and abuse 
of power. The articles closely track evidence that Kenneth Starr, 
the independent counsel, submitted to Congress concerning the president's 
affair with Monica Lewinsky and his efforts to cover it up. The perjury 
accusation is the one that is considered to have the best chance of 
passing the full House. Republican officials said it would cite Clinton's 
deposition in the sexual misconduct suit brought by Paula Jones and 
it would cite the president's August testimony before a grand jury 
in which he answered questions about his remarks in the deposition. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>