<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981204.0297 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
The bank where Salvatore Bellu works is strongest in Italy's dynamic 
northern industrial belt, filled with mighty little multinationals, 
like Zanussi and Rex, washing-machine makers in Sweden's big Electrolux 
appliance group. Come January, Electrolux is shifting its business 
to Europe's new single currency, the euro, and Zanussi and Rex are 
under orders to do likewise. Even though Sweden will be outside the 
euro zone, Electrolux, by adopting the single currency, expects to 
reduce costs and avoid having to hedge against currency fluctuations, 
all of which should pay off in increased competitiveness. So if Electrolux 
wants to pay bills in euros, or transfer funds from one bank to another, 
Bellu's bank, Cariverona Banca SpA, will be ready for it to do so. 
For two years the bank has been throwing money and people at the task 
of getting ready for the euro, or risk seeing lucrative customers 
flee to better-prepared competitors. Cariverona is caught in a rush 
that is reaching a crucial stage as the date for introducing the new 
currency, Jan. 4, nears, pitting bankers, software specialists and 
consultants against the guts of a banking system that serves 290 million 
Europeans. If it works _ and major banks are reasonably sure it will 
_ Europe will take a further giant stride toward overcoming traditional 
economic fragmentation by operating under the umbrella of a uniform 
monetary policy on most of the old Continent. Indeed, by cutting short-term 
interest rates simultaneously on Thursday to a nearly uniform 3 percent, 
the central banks of the 11 nations that will join the euro essentially 
opened the door to the new era this week. Of the 15 countries in the 
European Union, three qualify but are staying out for now: Britain, 
Denmark and Sweden. Greece has not met the requirements. The participants 
are Austria, Belgium, Finland, France, Germany, Ireland, Italy, Luxembourg, 
the Netherlands, Portugal and Spain. For starters, banks in the euro 
countries will be required by law to keep track of day-by-day operations 
_ deposits, withdrawals and the like _ in euros as well as the local 
currency, and to make all bank-to-bank transfers in the new single 
currency. Regular reporting to national central banks, which will 
function under the new European Central Bank somewhat as regional 
Federal Reserve Banks operate in the United States, must be in euros. 
And since securities markets like the stock exchanges in Paris, Milan 
and Frankfurt, Germany, must operate in euros, the banks' brokerage 
units will have to be equipped for euro-denominated investments. Thus, 
brokerage firms, banks and financial-service companies, spurred in 
many cases by euro-prone customers, are racing to get ready. Most 
will use the long weekend in early January to fine-tune systems for 
the start of business on Monday, Jan. 4. ``Sure, there will be some 
problems,'' said Bellu, who has overseen his bank's drive to the euro, 
with a sigh of realism. ``Monday the 4th will tell us if it works.'' 
Christian Noyer, deputy chairman of the European Central Bank in Frankfurt, 
said the central banking system appeared ready to go. ``All the systems 
have been tested and retested,'' he said in a recent interview. ``The 
worst has been imagined, along with the solutions.'' Euro coins and 
bills will not be introduced until the end of 2001, but starting in 
January the marks and francs and lire in circulation will simply be 
fixed units of the new euro, the banking system's fundamental yardstick. 
And since much commerce in Europe, as in most modern economies, is 
conducted without cash, hotels, department stores and most other consumer-oriented 
businesses are moving to list prices and take payment in both euros 
and local currencies. American Express will offer credit-card and 
banking services in euros and local currencies; in January it will 
start selling euro traveler's checks in 21 countries, including the 
United States. ``Early indications are that large department stores 
and hotel chains are ready to price in euros and accept payment,'' 
said Keith Meyrick, spokesman for the traveler's-check program in 
London. For American travelers to Europe, the advantage is clear. 
With 11 European currencies locked together in the euro, euro traveler's 
checks will be exchangeable for all 11 currencies at a predictable 
rate, reducing the need to exchange dollars into local currencies 
along the way and thus the risk of losing money if the dollar-euro 
exchange rate shifts. ``Anyone who sees a competitive advantage in 
the euro will use euros,'' said Bruno Leresche, who heads the transition 
to the euro at Paribas, the big French financial-services group. The 
biggest question for bankers is the extent to which ordinary consumers 
will switch to euros. Will customers want bank accounts denominated 
in euros, or request monthly statements in both euros and local currencies? 
Partly, that will depend on how soon, say, employers begin transferring 
salaries to employees' bank accounts in euros, or how soon landlords 
require that rents be paid in euros. Given their druthers, many customers 
do not appear eager to switch, bankers say. Recently, Paribas surveyed 
its private clients, and few even bothered to reply, Leresche said. 
Customers reacted, he said, as they do to a new model television set. 
``When I see my neighbor get one,'' he said in describing the common 
attitude, ``I'll buy it.'' Still, banks that want to be competitive 
are striving to be ready. They are tailoring computers and software 
to enable monthly statements to be issued in euros, or in a combination 
of euros and local currencies. Thus, a bank customer who regularly 
receives deposits on a French franc account in German marks and Spanish 
pesetas might request that monthly statements give the total euro 
amounts plus a breakdown into local currencies. Some banks are already 
gearing their computer software to be able to provide such information. 
And well-prepared banks are trying to persuade customers to make the 
switch to euros sooner rather than later. Paribas, Leresche said, 
spent $71 million preparing. Come January, it will offer all services 
in French francs, euros or a combination of currencies. Over two years, 
Cariverona invested $8 million to overhaul 30,000 software applications, 
said Bellu, including some that prepare monthly statements and others 
for making interbank payments, and to train personnel to explain the 
benefits. By the year 2002, Deutsche Bank will have spent $295 million 
for euro conversion, according to Victor Bruns, its euro project manager. 
He figures the bank has burned up ``1,200 man-years'' on the project. 
``We believe we will make it, but a switchover of this magnitude is 
a unique thing,'' he said. Gartner Group, the U.S. technology consultants, 
estimates that Europe's total investment between 1996 and 2002 to 
introduce the euro will be as much as $400 billion. Experts agree 
that much has already been accomplished. ``It's been mostly a people 
and systems challenge, and overall, it's been very well met,'' said 
Keith Stock, head of A.T. Kearney's global financial institutions 
group in New York. Given the costs, many banks are trying to kill 
two birds with one stone, eliminating the so-called Y2K millennium 
bugs from computers while preparing for the euro. Despite shortages 
of consultants and software experts that have driven up the cost of 
services, what makes the situation manageable, bankers say, is that 
not everything must be done at once. Banks have concentrated efforts 
on absolute requirements, like interbank payments. Paribas' Leresche 
said French banks had done ``virtual transfers'' on recent weekends 
to test transfers among banks. The banks, he said, distinguish between 
fundamental snags in the system and those that simply make it slower 
or less efficient. ``There have been no fundamental bugs,'' he said, 
reflecting a widespread impression in other European countries. What 
troubles bankers much more, however, is the euro's impact on their 
income, a problem not fixable with new software. Earnings from foreign 
exchange, traditionally a lucrative source of profit, will dry up. 
Italy's banking association predicts that gross profits in the industry 
will drop an average 37 percent after the euro. Cariverona says it 
will shed 80 percent of its foreign-exchange trading. Moreover, the 
fiscal belt-tightening required to qualify for the euro has led to 
lower interest rates, narrowing the spread between the relatively 
low interest banks pay on deposits and what they earn by reinvesting 
the deposited assets in high-yielding securities, like government 
bonds, thus squeezing a second major source of bank income. To offset 
this decline in traditional income sources, many banks hope to expand 
investment banking. But experts agree that the process will create 
many winners and losers, leading to further bank concentration. In 
France, small rural banks with few corporate customers are moving 
more slowly than banks in Paris. In Italy, banks in the south, still 
struggling with losses accumulated in the early 1990s, are far from 
ready. Experts say most will be able to execute essential functions, 
like interbank transfers, but may not be prepared to offer customers 
extra services, like dual currency statements or other euro-denominated 
services. Rome's Banca Nazionale del Lavoro, the government-owned 
bank whose executives have been getting it ready for an offering of 
shares on the stock market, will be ready to meet the requirements 
for the euro, but they have had little time to push a euro strategy 
much beyond that. Often small banks are under little pressure from 
corporate customers to change. ``Among Italian small businesses, the 
degree of preparation is very low,'' said Angelo Peretti, an economist 
at Cariverona. They view the euro, he said, ``mainly as an accounting 
and monetary problem, not as a strategic problem.'' Earlier this year, 
General Motors' European unit told 15,000 suppliers across Europe, 
many of them small and medium-sized companies, that they should be 
ready by January to quote prices in euros. Hans De Vriese, director 
of cost management for GM's European purchasing, said that 95 percent 
replied that they were ready to do so. In Germany, big corporate customers 
have told Volkswagen that they want prices in euros as soon as possible. 
Beginning in January, VW will comply, and it has passed the message 
to its suppliers. Brigitte Dietz, who heads VW's push to the euro, 
said the company hoped to switch from dollars and German marks as 
its operating currencies to the euro. Still, she said, ``We won't 
force anyone.'' Paradoxically, the very governments that imposed the 
euro are the biggest obstacles to its wider use. Earlier this year, 
Italy said its tax-collecting and social-security offices would not 
be ready to deal in euros until 2002; in Belgium and Germany, local 
and federal tax offices and benefits agencies have said the same. 
Thus, for internal accounting, VW will introduce the euro ``at the 
latest possible date, in order to spare resources,'' Ms. Dietz said. 
Moving sooner, she said, would mean ``still having to do everything 
in German marks, and that would cost two to three times as much.'' 
</TEXT>
</DOC>