<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981204.0280 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
At first glance, Bernice Jones is not your typical college student. 
At 33, she is a little old, and she arrived for her criminal-justice 
class at Rutgers University straight from work at the Essex County 
Prosecutors Office, neatly dressed in a navy blue suit, blue pumps 
and matching handbag. There is also what she delicately calls ``my 
family background in the criminal-justice system.'' Her two brothers 
served time in prison for drug convictions (one of them has since 
died), and the father of her 2-year-old daughter is serving a 10- 
to 15-year sentence for armed robbery. But both her job and her family 
situation make Ms. Jones representative of the multitude of students 
flocking to criminal-justice courses, making criminal justice the 
fastest-growing major in the United States, according to the Academy 
of Criminal Justice Sciences, a professional organization. From an 
obscure discipline scorned by most academics, with only two small 
doctoral programs as recently as 1970, criminal justice has exploded 
to 350,000 undergraduate majors at colleges and universities, said 
Freda Adler, a professor of criminal justice at Rutgers and a former 
president of the American Society of Criminology. In part, the appeal 
of criminal justice is a result of the huge growth in crime since 
the 1960s, the prison-building boom and the fascination with criminals. 
These factors have combined to create a major new job market for police 
officers and prison guards. For some students, like Ms. Jones, criminal 
justice also offers a way to understand the lives of those around 
them better. But at another level, the flood of new courses and students 
is a reflection of the intellectual success of criminal justice. Ten 
to 20 years ago academic criminologists and law-enforcement authorities 
thought the police could do little to fight crime, but now many new 
ideas have proved successful in reducing the country's high crime 
rate. Among these seminal theories was the suggestion by James Q. 
Wilson of the University of California at Los Angeles and George Kelling 
of Rutgers University that the police concentrate on ``fixing broken 
windows,'' meaning that they could avert more serious crimes like 
murder by arresting people for petty crimes like vandalism. At the 
same time, Herman Goldstein of the University of Wisconsin pioneered 
the concept of community policing, which means that police officers, 
instead of sitting in their patrol cars waiting for a 911 call after 
a crime has occurred, get involved in their communities, thereby preventing 
crime. Some of the ideas have come directly from the police themselves. 
Foremost among these is the management strategy introduced by William 
Bratton when he was police commissioner of New York City in the '90s, 
in which he insisted on the rapid collection of crime statistics and 
then held his local police commanders responsible for crime control 
in their areas. Like community policing, this got his officers more 
involved in their neighborhoods. On a different track, Gerald Patterson, 
a psychologist at the Oregon Social Learning Center in Eugene, demonstrated 
that early intervention with troubled children, particularly getting 
their parents to do a better job of monitoring and supervising their 
behavior, could prevent delinquency. And John Braithwaite at the Australian 
National University in Canberra has introduced a less punitive alternative 
to jail and prison by bringing criminals together with their victims 
to mediate a resolution, an idea being rapidly copied in cities around 
the United States. The popularity of criminal justice on campus has 
cut deeply into traditional fields like sociology and psychology. 
And it has emerged as a ``cash cow'' for college administrators, said 
Donna Hale, a professor of criminal justice at Shippensburg University 
in Pennsylvania and past president of the Academy of Criminal Justice 
Sciences. At Shippensburg, criminal justice has become the second-largest 
major, after education, with 409 undergraduates in a total enrollment 
of 6,700. ``We could easily be the largest, if the administration 
gave us the resources, because there are so many students transferring 
here for criminal justice and there are so many students on the waiting 
list,'' Ms. Hale said. One of the factors that set criminal justice 
apart from some traditional fields is the makeup of the student body. 
At both urban, inner-city schools like Rutgers, where many of the 
students are black or Hispanic, and rural universities like Shippensburg, 
where most of the students are white, the majority of those majoring 
in criminal justice are from working-class backgrounds and are the 
first members of their families to go to college. The appeal is jobs 
as police officers, prison guards, probation officers, private security 
company employees or FBI agents. ``I'm interested in the private prison 
field,'' said Michael Bonavota, a 22-year-old senior who took Ms. 
Adler's class. ``It's a growth field with good job opportunities. 
As long as there are criminals, there will be prisons and jobs.'' 
Ms. Hale and other specialists in criminal justice are quick to admit 
that their field has also benefited from movies, television and widely 
covered trials like that of O.J. Simpson. ``The largest single impact 
on criminal-justice enrollment in the past 10 years was ``Silence 
of the Lambs,''' said Timothy Flanagan, dean of the College of Criminal 
Justice at Sam Houston State University in Texas. Rebecca Thaxton, 
a student who was also in Ms. Adler's criminal-justice class at Rutgers, 
is an administrator for an investment bank by day but wants to become 
a profiler for the FBI. Her inspiration comes from watching the NBC 
show ``Profiler,'' which is about a beautiful, blond FBI agent who 
solves gruesome murders through psychological analysis of demented 
killers' minds. ``When I'm teaching,'' Ms. Hale recounted, ``I ask 
students why they take the class and what they want to be. It used 
to be they wanted to be police officers or state troopers. Now they 
all want to be FBI profilers. They see it on TV; it's very glamorized.'' 
Criminal justice as a subject dates back to the 1890s when the University 
of Chicago's famous School of Sociology began studying deviance in 
society. But it remained the poor stepchild of criminology until the 
late 1960s when President Lyndon B. Johnson's Commission on Law Enforcement 
and Criminal Justice recommended that police officers be college graduates 
to cope with the explosion of violent crime in the nation. In 1968, 
as a result of the commission's findings, Congress created the Law 
Enforcement Assistance Administration, which spent $7 billion, much 
of it going to new departments of criminal justice at colleges and 
universities to improve education for the police, Ms. Adler recalled. 
As part of this surge, Ms. Adler helped create a School of Criminal 
Justice at Rutgers in 1974. While the border between criminology and 
criminal justice is sometimes hard to define, Lawrence Sherman, chairman 
of the Department of Criminology and Criminal Justice at the University 
of Maryland, describes criminal justice as ``applied criminology, 
that portion of criminology that specializes in studying the police, 
the courts and prisons.'' The broader, older field of criminology 
is more focused on the study of what causes crime and criminal behavior, 
issues like poverty, the family, neighborhoods, gangs and, increasingly, 
biology. Criminal justice is still looked down on by some academicians 
and is still not taught at some prestigious schools like those in 
the Ivy League. But Sherman says it has ``really become a liberal 
art,'' explaining that ``it combines sociology, psychology, history, 
economics, politics and statistics'' and uses the scientific method. 
With all the interest in crime, criminal-justice studies have taken 
on a gold-rush feel. At Franklin Pierce College in New Hampshire, 
the administration long lobbied the faculty to create a criminal-justice 
major because it was one of the most frequently requested majors at 
college job fairs and looked like a way to attract applicants. ``The 
administration presented a message that we had to respond to the market 
demand and offer a criminal-justice major,'' wrote Forbes Farmer, 
a professor at Franklin Pierce, in a bulletin for the Academy of Criminal 
Justice Sciences. ``Like other small liberal arts colleges, the administration 
was promoting strategies to survive the enrollment and financial crunch 
of the 1990s.'' In 1996, the faculty finally and reluctantly approved, 
Farmer said, a decision he said was greeted ecstatically by school 
officials. At Rutgers, Kimberly Robinson, a sophomore from Newark, 
is thinking about majoring in criminal justice. A major reason, she 
said, is that she ``grew up around crime.'' Her brother is in prison, 
her three uncles are each serving life sentences and her father has 
been incarcerated four times. ``At a personal level, I felt I just 
didn't understand the criminal-justice system,'' Ms. Robinson said. 
But now, she added, ``I'm so interested in criminal justice, it's 
the only class where I stay awake.'' 
</TEXT>
</DOC>