<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981204.0479 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
George Steinbrenner likes Roger Clemens, likes his grit, likes the 
way he tries to intimidate hitters. Steinbrenner acknowledges that 
the addition of the five-time Cy Young Award winner would improve 
his team's pitching staff. But liking Roger Clemens and being willing 
to trade for and pay Clemens are entirely separate issues. Unless 
Steinbrenner decides to push his club's payroll in the vicinity of 
$90 million, logic suggests the Yankees will not seriously pursue 
Clemens. Steinbrenner, at the All-Star Cafe on Friday for the formal 
introduction of the re-signed free agent Bernie Williams, said the 
team would examine the feasibility of dealing for Clemens in the days 
to come. The Yankees might have been in a better position to trade 
for and pay Clemens had they not felt compelled to sign Williams to 
a seven-year, $87.5 million contract last week. Steinbrenner said 
Friday that Williams turned down a greater offer to return to the 
Yankees; in fact, Williams apparently rejected two more substantial 
deals. Williams told others that the Boston Red Sox dangled a seven-year 
contract that would have been worth a guaranteed $91.5 million, and 
according to a major league baseball official, the owners' labor relations 
office informed the Yankees that the Arizona Diamondbacks offered 
Williams an eight-year, $100 million contract. The Boston and Arizona 
offers each would have established a new contractual benchmark, surpassing 
the seven-year, $91 million deal the Mets gave Mike Piazza on Oct. 
26. However, the Diamondbacks' offer included a significant portion 
of deferred money, which would have driven down the real value of 
the contract to less than what the Yankees and the Red Sox were offering. 
Nonetheless, Williams said Friday that in the last hours before he 
reached an agreement, the possible ramifications of leaving the Yankees 
hit him rather suddenly. There were ``a lot of reasons'' why he re-signed 
with the Yankees, he said. ``One of the most important was just being 
here and being with the Yankees.'' Clemens apparently is feeling no 
such remorse about departing Toronto, for he has formally asked the 
Blue Jays for a trade, and Gord Ash, the Blue Jays general manager, 
has indicated he would like to facilitate Clemens' wishes in the next 
week to 10 days. Clemens, 36, went 20-6 for the Blue Jays last season, 
leading the American League in earned run average (2.65) for the second 
consecutive year; there is no question he would help the Yankees. 
Brian Cashman, the Yankees' general manager, told reporters Friday 
that he believes he has more assets from which to form a trade than 
any team in the majors _ depth on the major league roster, from pitchers 
Andy Pettitte and Ramiro Mendoza to infielder Homer Bush, and depth 
in the minors, including the infielders Mike Lowell and Alfonso Soriano. 
A package of Pettitte, Bush and Soriano very well could be enough 
to get Clemens. But Clemens has the ability to control these trade 
talks like a puppeteer. On one hand, he is forcing a trade, and the 
other hand, when the Blue Jays trade Clemens, the rules of the Basic 
Agreement will provide Clemens the opportunity to demand a trade from 
his next team _ and this essentially will allow Clemens to renegotiate 
his salary of $5.5 million in 1999 and $6.35 million in 2000. In other 
words: The Yankees could trade Pettitte, Bush and Soriano for Clemens, 
but then Clemens could force them to give him a contract in line with 
other top free agents, such as Randy Johnson ($13.3 million per year). 
An executive for another team interested in Clemens called this ``a 
double-whammy. First you have to trade players for him, and then Roger 
will want to be paid like a free agent.'' Cashman was presented these 
questions of logic: _ The Yankees didn't deal for Johnson before the 
July 31 trade deadline and never placed a bid on him as a free agent 
last month because they didn't feel they could afford both Johnson 
and Williams. Now that they have spent more than they expected on 
Williams, why would they now trade players for Clemens and pay him 
as much as they paid Johnson? _ If the Yankees wanted a high-priced 
pitcher, why wouldn't they pursue the free agent Kevin Brown, rather 
than surrender three players for Clemens? Cashman nodded, smiling 
slightly. ``St. Thomas Aquinas reasoning'' Cashman said, would suggest 
those are legitimate questions. ``We're going to sit down and talk 
about some of these things.'' Cashman placed a call to Ash last night, 
but on the face of it, it appears that unless Steinbrenner becomes 
personally invested in the acquisition of Clemens, the Yankees won't 
become involved. Executives with other teams believe the Houston Astros 
will eventually develop into the front-runner for Clemens' services, 
offering a package of outfielders Carl Everett and Derek Bell, and 
pitcher Scott Elarton. Williams, sporting a goatee that would not 
be allowed if the season were in progress, laughed when asked if the 
addition of Clemens would help the Yankees. ``I wouldn't have to face 
him,'' Williams said. During the post-season, the Yankees' center 
fielder referred somewhat bitterly about past negotiations with the 
team. But having gained perspective on how teams negotiate, Williams 
seemed more at peace with the process, and unfazed by the Yankees' 
courtship of Albert Belle. ``The Yankees are established, they have 
a lot of tradition, and as an organization, they are just huge,'' 
he said. ``As long I keep playing the game as I have been playing 
the past eight years, I'm not going to have any problem with them, 
and that's one thing I've got to realize.'' Manager Joe Torre encouraged 
Yankee officials to consider Belle, assuring them he could deal with 
Belle if Williams could not be re-signed. Williams indicated he understood 
Torre's role in this, and says he ``can't see why'' it would have 
any bearing on their relationship. ``He's a great manager, a great 
guy, I love him to death,'' Williams said. ``He's a great person, 
he's helped me a lot _ not only a lot in the professional level, but 
on the personal level, and I've got a lot to thank Joe for.'' 
</TEXT>
</DOC>