<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981204.0430 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
With the prices of some generic drugs soaring to record levels this 
year, the federal government is preparing to accuse one of the world's 
largest producers of tripling its prices after trying to corner the 
market on the drugs' raw materials, lawyers involved in the anti-competition 
case said Friday. The company, Mylan Laboratories Inc., has been notified 
that the staff of the Federal Trade Commission has recommended filing 
a civil lawsuit accusing the company of anti-competitive practices 
after it raised the price of several generic medications, including 
lorazepam, an anti-anxiety drug that is known popularly by its brand 
name, Ativan. Generic drugs have historically been more attractive 
to consumers, particularly people on fixed incomes and the elderly, 
because the drugs are no-name knock-offs of more expensive brand names. 
But this year, prices of many popular generic drugs have risen dramatically, 
far outpacing increases in the brand-name drugs. Industry analysts 
say Mylan has been the most aggressive of the price raisers. In fact, 
the swift increases this year in the costs of Mylan drugs have been 
so big and widespread _ in some cases more than tripling _ that they 
largely contributed in one month to a record increase of 10.7 percent 
in the prescription-drug portion of the producer price index, an important 
measure of inflation. Later this month, the company plans a new round 
of price increases, ranging from 44 percent to 71 percent, on 20 of 
its products. In recent years, the federal government has taken steps 
to encourage competition in the drug and pharmacy businesses, although 
there has not been any other case where a drug maker was accused of 
trying to control a supplier to increase prices. Earlier this year, 
the Federal Trade Commission blocked two proposed mergers involving 
four drugstore wholesalers. The wholesalers control about 80 percent 
of the wholesale prescription-drug business. Last August, the commission 
reached an agreement with Merck that prevents its drug sales unit, 
Merck-Medco Managed Care, from discriminating against drugs made by 
Merck's competitors. The government's inquiry has focused on whether 
Mylan, which fills more prescriptions than any other generic or brand-name 
drug manufacturer, sought to illegally corner the market on important 
raw materials supplied by an Italian company for some of its drugs, 
including lorazepam, and then sharply raised prices. Last year the 
company struck an exclusive arrangement with Profarmica, an Italian 
company that is a major supplier of the materials for lorazepam and 
other drugs Mylan makes. After that deal, the supply diminished and 
the cost of the raw materials to Mylan's competitors significantly 
increased. The company more than tripled lorazepam's price to $122.11 
for 100 2-milligram tablets, and smaller competitors followed suit. 
These and other increases by Mylan have led to large price increases 
by the company's smaller competitors. In response to questions on 
Friday, Mylan issued a brief statement that ``no pharmaceutical company 
in America has a better record of safety and compliance with the law.'' 
``The Federal Trade Commission has not brought a single charge against 
the company, and we are certain no credible charge can be brought,'' 
the statement said. ``Mylan has done nothing wrong. We look forward 
to making our case before the commission.'' Mylan's lawyers are now 
preparing a presentation to the agency's commissioners to urge them 
to reject the findings of the staff. The company's lawyers contend 
that the arrangement with Profarmica was proper. ``These agreements 
assured a source of supply which the commission should recognize is 
a pro-consumer result,'' said Kevin Arquit, one of the company's antitrust 
lawyers. ``The competition that existed in this market prior to this 
agreement continues to exist today.'' Victoria Streitfeld, a spokeswoman 
at the Federal Trade Commission, declined to comment. But antitrust 
lawyers who follow the commission say that in most instances the commissioners 
follow staff recommendations and are expected to do so in Mylan's 
case, an inquiry closely watched in Congress. Executives at Mylan 
have said the price increases this year were necessary to reverse 
sharp losses in many of their generic drugs. The prices had been driven 
down by growing competition, as more manufacturers have entered the 
market, hoping to profit by selling generic equivalents of the growing 
number of brand-name drugs losing patent protection. Last year, company 
executives say, Mylan lost money on 41 of the 97 drugs it sold. Jerry 
Treppel, an industry analyst at Warburg Dillon Read, estimated that 
about 10 percent of the company's earnings this year will come from 
the sale of lorazepam following the price increase. In the year ending 
in March, Mylan reported earnings of $100 million on revenues of $528 
million. The company, based in Pittsburgh, is the world's No. 2 maker 
of generic drugs, behind Teva Pharmaceutical Industries Inc., an Israeli 
company. Founded in 1961, it began making generic penicillin in 1966 
and tetracycline in 1968. It is a major maker of generics such as 
the ulcer medication cimetidine and atenolol for angina. Despite the 
company's claim that its price increases were essential for it to 
stay in the market, some consumer groups and pharmacy groups have 
said the increases are inexplicable. Earlier this year two House Democrats, 
Marion Berry of Arkansas and Pete Stark of California, urged the commission 
to launch an inquiry. ``There is no question that the drug companies 
are systematically targeting these people, jacking up prices and hitting 
the elderly the hardest,'' said Berry, a former pharmacist. He said 
he had known of at least two people who died after they stopped taking 
drugs they could no longer afford. The pharmacy industry has also 
complained to the Federal Trade Commission about the price increases. 
``No one could understand why the products had gone up so precipitously,'' 
said Todd Dankmyer, a spokesman for the National Community Pharmacists 
Association, which represents 25,000 independent pharmacists. Dankmyer 
said that after the association met with Mylan representatives earlier 
this year to discuss the price increases, ``the explanations were 
never satisfactory.'' Dankmyer said the association was told by Mylan 
that the new price rates still put their drugs at about 50 percent 
of the price of their brand-name equivalent, which was probably true. 
``But before the price increases, it was probably 5 to 10 percent,'' 
he said. ``Why they chose these products and why their prices went 
through the roof is an interesting question.'' 
</TEXT>
</DOC>