<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981204.0457 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Majorca, the lush, mountainous island of Spain, is one of those stunningly 
beautiful places that are best known for who slept there. Its history 
always begins with a long list of occupiers _ Romans, Vandals, Christians, 
Moors, Spanish conquistadors, Napoleonic generals. Majorca's modern 
reputation is also shaped by its celebrity invaders. In 1838, George 
Sand and her lover, Frederic Chopin, spent a winter there. (Miserably, 
as it turned out, but that had more to do with their dimming romance 
than the sea breeze). The English poet Robert Graves moved there in 
1929, remained 50 years, and is buried in the village of Deya. Starting 
in the 1960s, however, Majorca became synonymous with mass tourism, 
a balmy paradise despoiled by concrete forests of high-rise hotels, 
tour buses and charter flights. Worried that tourism there was being 
hurt by overdevelopment, the Spanish government sought to restyle 
Majorca's reputation in the late 1980s and 1990s by encouraging luxury 
hotels and villas and dynamiting the more unsightly early efforts. 
Majorca's image has in fact changed, and once again a roster of celebrities 
is associated with the island. The model Claudia Schiffer recently 
finished a sprawling, private estate. In 1987, Richard Branson, the 
English entrepreneur who created the Virgin empire, bought La Residencia, 
a hotel in the town of Deya, on the northwest coast, fashioned from 
a 17th-century manor house, which now caters to business executives, 
the fashionable and even royalty. (In the lobby, there is a framed, 
handwritten thank-you note from the Princess of Wales, dated May 13, 
1996, from Kensington Palace, which begins, somewhat spookily, ``Safely 
back in London. ...''). La Residencia's year-round success helped 
encourage another tycoon, David Stein, an American, to convert the 
17th-century mansion he bought seven years ago, into a rival luxury 
retreat, Gran Hotel Son Net, which opened in May in the little village 
of Puigpunent, on the west side of the island. In contrast to the 
cement high-rises, not all luxury hotels in Majorca are alike. Which 
is why my husband, Michael, and I found ourselves burdened with the 
responsibility of trying both La Residencia and Son Net over a single 
long weekend. Our assignment, at the end of October, was to arrive 
incognito, and rigorously check out the two hotels, everything from 
timing the help, testing the pool temperatures and keeping on the 
alert for silver plate. It sounds easy, but luxury investigative reporting 
is actually something of an art, requiring both the imperiousness 
of Lady Bracknell and the small-minded snooping of a house detective 
in reverse. No detail is too tiny. Designer soaps, for example, are 
usually a better mirror of a hotel's soul than its bathroom mirrors. 
Son Net, which is stately and elegant, offers Nina Ricci. La Residencia, 
also elegant, is more playful. It provides Molton Brown, the official 
soap of Cool Britannia. And in fact, that first hint held up. Both 
are expensive, beautifully decorated hotels with green lawns, riotous 
flower beds, orange groves, gourmet restaurants and sybaritic swimming 
pools. Son Net is arguably the grander. Though the location is rural 
Majorca, the feeling is of an English manor house _ the cleaning women 
wear long gray dresses and white ruffled aprons out of Jane Eyre. 
Each room is lovely, and different, and all offer luxurious bathrooms 
and huge canopy beds that look as if they were designed for the Infanta 
of Spain. The public rooms, which include a library and a dimly lighted 
bar, are equally tasteful and attractive, the walls are covered in 
paintings from Stein's personal collection, from Frank Stellas and 
David Hockneys to a small Chagall lithograph in the bar. The small 
touches, from fresh roses in the ladies room, antique leather blotters 
on the writing desks, to lemons piled in glass vases, were gratifying. 
Over all, however, the hushed, solemn atmosphere, diminished by less 
than expert service, left us feeling somewhat ill at ease. By the 
time we drove 2O minutes over narrow mountain roads to La Residencia, 
we felt oddly exhilarated _ as if we had fled the elegant home of 
stuffy older relatives in Bar Harbor, Maine, to rejoin our own friends 
at their place on Martha's Vineyard. Before segueing from one grand 
hotel to another, however, we first had to get to Majorca. Like most 
people without yachts, we flew in. We didn't need to read maps to 
realize that Majorca is big, (10 times the size of Martha's Vineyard,) 
because its huge white concrete international airport outside the 
capital of Palma is so dauntingly vast that even the luggage carts 
are jumbo-sized. We were there in the off-season, and sighed with 
relief as we passed rows of boarded-up charter tour booths, a sobering 
intimation of how crowded the place becomes in the high season. We 
rented a car and rather easily bypassed Palma by taking La Cintura, 
a highway that circles the city. We quickly found ourselves on narrow, 
hilly roads surrounded by pine trees and olive groves leading to Puigpunent. 
``Son'' in Majorquin (a derivative of Catalan), means ``the house 
off'' and we passed many Son-Something villas before detecting the 
signs for Son Net), or Net's Place, named for the original family. 
We made our way up a long, winding drive lined with palm trees so 
short and squat they looked like pineapples, and pulled up before 
a baronial stone building, thickly covered in ivy. ``It looks like 
Vassar, with palm trees,'' Michael said. The glass doors swooshed 
open, automatically and soundlessly, and we found ourselves in a lobby 
of vaulted stone ceilings and wooden beams overlooking a glassed-in 
courtyard that surrounds the house's original well. At the desk, a 
smiling young woman proudly informed us that our deluxe double had 
been upgraded to the royal suite. Inwardly, we blanched, worried that 
our cover was blown. But, feigning nonchalance, we accepted graciously 
and took a marble elevator to the second floor, down corridors lined 
with eclectic art, from 16th-century still lifes to an original Warhol 
portrait of Jane Fonda. The three-room suite turned out to be comfortably 
regal, opening onto a small private dining room with a blue and white 
terra cotta tile floor. That led into an equally charming sitting 
room, two wide blue and white sofas facing each other, with thick 
art books casually tossed on the coffee table. The bedroom, which 
opens onto a vast stone terrace large enough to entertain 15 people, 
was beyond regal. The four-poster blue and white canopy bed was practically 
wide enough to accommodate all 15 mythical guests for a sleep-over. 
Instead of tile, tasteful beige carpeting covered the floor. The bathroom, 
pinkish marble and pale blue pastel walls, seemed designed for an 
insecure movie star. The lighting was softly flattering and the full-length 
mirrors conveyed an almost imperceptible lengthening effect. Closets 
are cedar, each drawer lined with silky tissue paper. One of the main 
requirements of a luxury hotel is a luxurious bathroom, and even the 
humbler ones at Son Net amply fulfill it. They all have separate showers 
with pounding water pressure, bathtubs with Jacuzzi-style nozzles 
and plenty of Nina Ricci soaps, creams and lotions. The well-stocked 
minibar offered two types of Bollinger champagne, Cuvee Special and 
Grande Annee. Any fears we had that the hotel management was on to 
us evaporated when we went down to dinner. We entered the vaulted 
stone dining room, a converted olive oil cellar that still contains 
the original olive press, and which is now an elegant restaurant, 
Sa Tafona. In a half-empty room, we were instantly and expertly guided 
to a small table in Siberia, squeezed between a view-blocking pillar 
and the olive press. We waited, patiently, for 10 minutes before anyone 
came over to bring a menu or offer us water. It took 25 minutes for 
the waitress to take our order. Actually, she started to write down 
an appetizer, then suddenly bolted away to guide two arriving couples 
to their table. When she returned, Michael rewarded her with an icy 
glare and a sharp rebuke that made her almost double over in remorse. 
But the food, when it arrived, was remarkable. I had sipio, a tiny 
variety of octopus, sauteed with duck foie gras, that was as delicious 
as it was unusual. Michael's wrath disappeared as soon as he tasted 
his salad with scampi and squid. I followed with a succulent rack 
of lamb with a crust of Majorcan cheese and thyme juice, while Michael 
savored a risotto of calasparra rice with chicory, rock fish and truffle. 
Encouraged, we braved the uncertain service and ordered desserts, 
croquettes of melted chocolate with almond ice cream for me and croustillant 
of almonds with apple, saffron and lemon ice cream for Michael. We 
chose at random a Spanish white wine, a 1997 Raimat chardonnay, that 
was excellent. The dinner took three hours, but we both agreed that 
the food, prepared by a French chef, Thierry Buffeteau, was astonishingly 
good. The next day began badly. We called down for cappuccinos, orange 
juice, a fruit salad and an omelet to be brought to the terrace. I 
was scolded by the man on the phone for failing to leave the breakfast 
card on the door knob, which did not seem strictly necessary in a 
24-room hotel. Half an hour later, a maid arrived with an omelet, 
uncovered and luke warm, and an apologetic shrug instead of bread 
(no butter or jam, but then again, why would we need any). I asked 
her to set it up on the terrace, and couldn't help noticing that she 
didn't pull up chairs. We asked for more coffee, throwing the perhaps 
inexperienced kitchen into a panic. Finally, after another half-hour, 
and after Michael bellowed, a waiter arrived with a pot of coffee 
but without the clean cups we had requested. We were charged $36.39 
for the ordeal. Still, the morning light streaming in across the surrounding 
mountains was an invitation to explore the grounds. The mansion, set 
high on a hill overlooking the surrounding village and towns, is terraced 
by fragrant lemon and orange groves. Its well-manicured gardens are 
accented by fountains and bursting beds of pansies, roses and peonies, 
even in late October. The jewel of the place is its infinity pool, 
an elegant 90-foot-long rectangle. On one side, green and white striped 
chaises under striped umbrellas provide privacy while allowing a discreet 
bit of people watching. The water, however, was unheated and ice cold, 
so that the few who dove in, quickly scuttled out The hotel has a 
clay tennis court, and offers to drive guests to nearby golf courses 
and even the beach. The closest beaches, however, are rocky coves 
20 minutes away on narrow, winding roads, and the hotel usually urges 
guests to go to the public beaches around Palma, a 20-to-25-minute 
drive. It also offers bicycle tours and massage, but the gym was not 
yet completed. Our second stop, La Residencia, which is made up of 
two connected buildings, which date back to the 16th century, is also 
elegant, but it instantly conveys a more carefree mood. At the reception 
desk, an open jeroboam of Spanish champagne sits in a giant cooler 
to ease the stress of registration. The help races around in casual 
polo shirts, sweat pants and sneakers, but they are as poised as they 
are speedy. Our room wasn't ready, so we giddily raced to the terrace 
for a poolside lunch, cheered by the sunlight, bougainvillea and glinting 
wine buckets. We ate salads and drank a spanish rose, and promptly 
took an investigative nap in the room. The bathroom was more prosaic 
here, with no full-length mirrors and only one speed on the hair dryer, 
but more than adequate. There was no minibar, but an abundant fruit 
basket stood on the coffee table. All the rooms have the same basic 
luxuriant look of polished wood and white on white _ terra cotta floors, 
white walls, beds and couches. A teddy bear lay on the large white 
four-poster bed, a perverse touch for a hotel that recently banned 
children under 10 except for summer holidays and Christmas. I woke 
up after the sun had set, and found that I could swim in the heated 
kidney-shaped pool by starlight. La Residencia, which has 46 single 
and double rooms, 15 junior suites and 3 suites with private pools, 
has more of the textbook hotel offerings than Son Net: a gift shop, 
a beauty salon with every imaginable treatment, a small, but serviceable 
gym and a casual restaurant for lunch or dinner. The hotel also offers 
walking tours of Deya, group tennis lessons, and newcomers' cocktail 
parties. I chose a solitary champagne cocktail in front of a pine-scented 
fire in the library and felt blissfully alone in a hotel that was 
fully booked. Like Son Net, La Residencia also has a well-known and 
formal restaurant, El Olivo. We walked into what looked like a forest 
fire: five-branch silver candelabra blazed from every table and nook. 
The maitre d'hotel moved fast, seating us and snapping his fingers 
to summon water, bread and unstinting attention. We started with a 
tower of salmon and scallops with caviar on a potato pancake, and 
followed with leg of lamb. All the dishes, prepared by a German chef, 
Joseph Sauerschell, were excellent, and the white-glove service so 
deferential it almost veered into camp: the wines were poured from 
ornate silver wine holders. The next morning, the free breakfast came 
speedily from room service, with big pots of strong coffee, dozens 
of rolls, butter, jam, toast and four-minute boiled eggs. I then checked 
out the beach, a 10-minute drive and a steep, winding scramble down 
a cliff through olive grows and pine forests to an isolated rocky 
cove. It was starkly romantic, but I found the hotel pool more inviting 
for a swim. A quick walk through the the ramshackle stone village 
of Deya revealed funky stores and charming little cafes. But the number 
of cash machines on the narrow main street also suggested that Deya 
could become unpleasantly crowded in the high season. As soon as it 
works out its start-up kinks, Son Net would be the place for those 
who take their luxury getaways very seriously. La Residencia is for 
the lighter-hearted. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>