<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981204.0261 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
I like to call them ``Hot Docs.'' Every biographer dreams of stumbling 
upon a private archive of old letters and diaries. Interviews and 
oral histories are necessary, of course, but notoriously unreliable. 
A diary entry, a private letter or better yet, a verbatim telephone 
transcript is like gold. I first hit a vein in 1982 when I went to 
interview Averell Harriman for my first book, a biography of John 
J. McCloy, the Wall Street lawyer and perennial ``chairman'' of the 
foreign policy establishment. Harriman, the former governor of New 
York and diplomat who was then 91, gave me 30 minutes, but it was 
a lackluster interview and he knew it. His hearing aid was not working 
very well, and he couldn't remember much about his old friend Jack 
McCloy. Unhappy that he had not been particularly useful, he turned 
to his secretary and said: ``Why don't you show Mr. Bird down to the 
dungeon and see if he can find anything there?'' Escorted downstairs 
to a spare, windowless room, I was left alone to rummage through a 
score of file cabinets bulging with tens of thousands of letters, 
telephone transcripts and top-secret government documents. One file 
cabinet drawer contained papers from his stint as ambassador to Moscow 
during World War II. Another housed classified documents on the Central 
Intelligence Agency's financing of Christian Democrats in Italy's 
1948 parliamentary elections. Harriman had evidently made it his habit 
to take home with him carbons and sometimes the originals of top-secret 
State Department, CIA and White House documents from his stints as 
ambassador, as chief of the Marshall Plan in the late '40s and as 
assistant secretary of state and ambassador at large under Presidents 
John Kennedy and Lyndon Johnson. There was, for instance, a complete 
copy of Harriman's negotiations with Nikita Khrushchev in 1963 over 
the Limited Atmospheric Test Ban agreement. There were thousands of 
pages of State and Defense Department cables on the Vietnam War. There 
were reports from the Joint Chiefs on the status and number of nuclear 
weapons held by the United States and the Soviet Union. Being a rich 
man, Harriman had also made it a practice to have his own personal 
secretary when he was in government. This secretary routinely listened 
on a ``dead'' phone extension to all of Harriman's phone conversations, 
and recorded them in shorthand. These were then transcribed, typed 
up and filed chronologically. By the end of that first day, a Friday, 
I came upstairs and said that I'd found some correspondence between 
Harriman and McCloy, but that there was more material, and could I 
come back next Friday? Sure, why not? said the secretary, who is best 
left unnamed. I came back the next week, and the week after that. 
In the end, I spent literally a year of Fridays in Harriman's dungeon. 
By the end, I had filled a four-drawer file cabinet with copies of 
his documents. This file cabinet now resides in my own dungeon. Some 
of the most sensitive material came from a collection of papers _ 
memos, reports and letters _ written by Michael Forrestal, a key aide 
to McGeorge Bundy, who had served as national security adviser to 
both Kennedy and Johnson from 1961 to 1966. Forrestal was assigned 
by Bundy to report to him on intelligence matters, specifically the 
meetings of the 5412 Committee, which supervised covert action programs 
like the ``34-A'' operations against North Vietnam in 1964 that provoked 
the Gulf of Tonkin affair. Forrestal also became Bundy's chief eyes 
and ears on things Vietnamese. A few years later, I heard that Forrestal, 
who died in 1989, had gotten all copies of his papers back from Harriman. 
So last year, I tracked down a friend of Forrestal's in Manhattan 
who I had learned might have inherited some of his estate. Hoping 
to find more of Forrestal's papers, I called her up and over the phone 
she said, yes, she had some boxes of his papers downstairs in her 
storage cage. And yes, if I helped her dig out the boxes, I could 
have a look at them. On the appointed day, I arrived and was greeted 
by her and, alas, a senior partner from Forrestal's law firm, Shearman 
&AMP; Sterling. This gentleman introduced himself as Forrestal's literary 
executor. He explained that I could not look at the papers because 
they were still classified. Most of Forrestal's papers remain unpublished 
and classified. But thanks to Harriman's dungeon, I was able to publish 
numerous extracts in both ``The Chairman: John J. McCloy, the Making 
of the American Establishment'' and my new book, ``The Color of Truth,'' 
(Simon &AMP; Schuster) a biography of McGeorge Bundy and his brother 
William. Some of these still-classified documents include crucial 
evidence about such historical controversies as whether Kennedy had 
decided to withdraw from Vietnam before he was assassinated. One Forrestal 
memo, for instance, quotes Kennedy instructing his aides ``to seize 
upon any favorable moment to reduce our involvement'' in Vietnam. 
Aside from unsubstantiated oral history statements, this is the only 
contemporaneous archival document that attests to Kennedy's desire 
to find a way out of Vietnam. Harriman's papers eventually landed 
at the Library of Congress. Many of them, however, also remain classified. 
Copies from my dungeon can be found on the Web site: www.historians.org. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>