<DOC>
<DOCNO> PRI19981204.2000.0642 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
If Augusto Pinochet ever does stand trial, U.S. secret documents from 
his rule could well be Exhibit A. We say, could be, because Washington 
is hedging on releasing the materials. This week a State Department 
spokesman said the United States will declassify and make public, 
as much information as possible. Then he clarified his words, and 
said the U.S. commitment was only to review papers that may shed light 
on the Pinochet-era abuses. Peter Cornblew is the senior analyst at 
the National Security Archive, which is a nongovernment organization 
based at George Washington University in the nation's capital. Tell 
us first, Peter, how significant is the newly announced release of 
the documents, which are supposed to come not just from the State 
Department but also from the entire U.S. National Security Apparatus 
including the CIA and the Pentagon and the FBI. Well, this is potentially 
the most significant step towards real concrete documentary proof 
of General Pinochet's involvement in human rights atrocities inside 
Chili, as well as his role in acts of international terrorism in other 
countries. We are talking literally about thousands and thousands 
of pages that literally could prove Spain's case against General Pinochet. 
Tell us more about that. The Spanish Judge who wants Pinochet to be 
brought to Spain is believed to be interested in many U.S. documents 
that relate specifically to something called Operation Condor. This 
was an effort involving Pinochet's government and other Latin American 
governments to kill their opponents around the world. One of the results 
was the operation in a 1976 car bombing in Washington which ended 
up killing a former Chilean minister and his American aide. Will any 
of these documents that the U.S. is releasing relate to this case? 
This Operation Condor case? This is the central case, because Spain 
actually got General Pinochet detained in London under an international 
antiterrorism treaty. But these are also the most sensitive documents. 
We know that the CIA was aware of Operation Condor. We know that through 
a variety of other documents and testimonies that have been given 
already. Can you explain then why you think, if this kind of material 
is so revelatory and if it could have potential impact on the case 
against Pinochae, why would the United States choose to release it 
now? Particularly when the country, up to this point, has been fairly 
quiet? Well, the Clinton Administration has really been forced into 
the decision that it will conduct a full review and declassify some 
documents. It has been forced by international pressure, and it has 
been forced by petitions from the families of victims like Ronnie 
Moffat, the 25 year-old New Jersey woman who was killed in the car 
bomb attack here in Washington, D.C. But do you think that it suggests 
more than that? Do you think that it points to a change, perhaps, 
in official U.S. attitude in terms of becoming more supportive of 
prosecuting Pinochet? Well, I think overall, the Clinton Administration 
is divided on this. There are officials that want to help the Spanish 
case, but there are more officials who just do not want to rock the 
boat in U.S./Chilean relations and so far. Up until just a couple 
of days ago, the latter officials who wanted to keep the lid on all 
of this and do nothing, basically were winning the arguments inside 
the Clinton Administration and this does not mean the documents are 
going to be declassified quickly. And it does not necessarily mean 
that the follow through on this commitment to review documents will 
result in any significant information. We will have to wait and see. 
There are some people, as you know, who have knowledge of the period 
leading up to the 1973 coup, who say the the U.S. involvement was 
not nearly as great as everybody says it was. One of those people 
is the former U.S. ambassador, Edward Kory. We interviewed him earlier 
this week. He is among those who insist that it was Chileans who first 
elected Allende and then overwhelmingly backed his overthrow by the 
military in 1973. And that the CIA involvement in the coup is being 
vastly overstated. What do you say to that? Well, I do not think the 
U.S. role is overstated. Nobody has ever said that the United States 
was directly involved in the coup. I think Edward Kory's point that 
the Chilean military itself overthrew Allende is correct. But we know 
from declassified documents, and a major senate investigation in the 
mid-1970s, that the United States did everything in its power, covertly, 
to destabilize the Allende government. Including promoting a military 
coup in 1970 that those marching orders continue, the documents say, 
to try and overthrow Allende, and that only when Allende was overthrown 
were new marching orders given by Henry Kissinger to the CIA. This 
is all according to the documents. Now that the military was in power, 
to stabilize that government. Even though the documents show that 
Kissinger was well aware of the atrocities that were going on. Peter 
Cornblew with the National Security Archive in Washington, D.C. Thank 
you. Thank you. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>