<DOC>
<DOCNO> PRI19981204.2000.3182 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
The Central African nation of Congo has been engulfed by political 
violence for three years now. In 1996 and '97 forces loyal to guerrilla 
leader, Laurent Kabila, battled to overthrow longtime dictator, Mobuta 
Secesaco. For the past four months, President Kabila has been the 
target of another rebel movement. During the most trying time, the 
spirits of many Congolese were lifted by a wonderful soaring voice. 
Now that voice has been stilled. Singer, Pepe Kalle, will be laid 
to rest in the Congolese capital Kinshasa on Sunday. The World's Marco 
Worman has the story. Pepe Kalle's mother was among thousands of mourners 
who in the past five days have passed through his home where he died. 
Members of Kalle's dance troop found his 300 pound body last Sunday 
after he succumbed to Malaria and a subsequent heart attack. Tributes 
to Pepe Kalle have been the staple of radio stations across Congo 
for the past week. This track, Cocktail, the title tune from Pepe 
Kalle's most recent album released last month. Had been sitting high 
on the charts in Congo when he died. Pepe Kalle was not able to perform 
live any of his new compositions from the Cocktail recording. Just 
last week, he bemoaned the crisis in Congo that has put a damper on 
night life in Kinshasa. Right now it is really difficult. We cannot 
play any more. It has been like this for the last four or five months. 
Because of the war, you cannot play live concerts. The government 
decreed a midnight curfew, which does not allow us to practice our 
craft. Pepe Kalle appealed to audiences, not just in Kinshasa, but 
across Africa and around the globe. Bob White, an anthropologist at 
McGill University and an expert on Congolese Culture and Music, says 
that on stage, Pepe Kalle and his ensemble, the Ompeic Bacuba, were 
masters of what the Congolese call lespectac, the spectacle. They 
have got a male and female dwarf couple, Pepe Kalle himself is referred 
to as the elephant. He is oversized, there is all kinds of antics 
and circus style performance that happens in their show. That said, 
the band has been criticized in the past for creating a kind of freak 
show. Some people see this as a marketing device, other people see 
it as an expression of, what was Pepe Kalle's desire to include people 
in the spectacle of dance and performance and joy. All of the joy 
that it has brought to people through music. Pepe Kalle's life was 
held together by his joy of music. He recorded 300 songs and almost 
20 albums during a career which began in his teens. Pepe Kalle wrote 
this song, We Will Die for Congo. As a show of support for President 
Laurent Kabila war against Rwanda. Despite his sense of nationalism, 
Pepe Kalle saw himself not just Congolese, but African and was popular 
across the continent. And unlike many Congolese musicians, Pepe Kalle 
never moved permanently to Europe where record labels easily manage 
and produce African artists. Instead Pepe Kalle chose to remain a 
resident of Kinshasa. Again, Bob White. He is the kind of person who 
can sit down with anyone from any walk of life. Have a nice word to 
say to them. A kind of a politeness and a warmth that is not very 
common with the rest of the music scene in Kinshasa. Certainly it 
is a tough scene, it is very competitive. But his man was very warm, 
always kind of champion of the cause of poor people and the underprivileged. 
He would often play in poor neighborhoods, which some musicians would 
not necessarily seek to do. And I can say, and I am not just saying 
this because he passed away. This kind of paternal nurturing attitude 
that he evoked, you know, has fallen by the wayside. For the grieving 
Congolese, Kalle was more than just a musician. In a period of Congo's 
history when the country's rulers have frequently gotten rich at the 
expense of the public. Pepe Kalle was a VIP who earned fame and fortune 
through his art. Pepe Kalle was 47. He will be buried on Sunday. For 
The World, this is Marco Worman. Music from the late Pepe Kalle of 
Congo. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>