<DOC>
<DOCNO> PRI19981204.2000.1257 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
For 500 years, the Vienna Boys Choir has been making music and still 
is. But lately more adicinent sounds have been coming from the choir. 
Specifically from the woman who, until last week, was its artistic 
director. The World's Emigene Fuchs, takes us backstage. The Vienna 
Boys' Choir had hoped to end its 500th anniversary on a high note. 
A popular tour of America and Europe followed by critically-acclaimed 
performances in Vienna should have insured that. But the sudden resignation 
last week of artistic director, Agnes Grossman, claiming she could 
no longer be responsible for the welfare of the boys, has plunged 
the choir into controversy. Administrative Director, Manford Zite, 
has been fielding dozens of calls from excited members of the Vienna's 
cultural media. I must say it is very sad that the media now get the 
impression that the boys are overworked, which is not true. But fuming 
in one of Vienna's most fashionable cafes is Agnes Grossman herself. 
Appointed last year in a blaze of publicity as the first woman ever 
to direct the choir. She immediately announced plans to relax the 
boys' regime and she introduced the first girls to the choir school. 
But now she is gone. And she denies that the allegations of overwork 
are a media exaggeration. I do think that the boys should work less. 
I do think that there should not be so many commercial concerts. The 
idea that children are financing their life is, to me, a principal 
which is not acceptable. The fact is the Vienna Boys Choir perform 
around 100 commercial concerts a year all over the world. And it does 
mean the boys are away from home for long periods. Naturally enough, 
the choir's administrators were reluctant to involve the boys themselves 
in the rau. But Hans Stidlas, father of one of the boys, was prepared 
to talk. My son is in Europe for three and a half months. And I think 
this is a bit too long. Especially for parents. You do not see your 
son at the age of 10 years. For mothers, it is horrible. Agnes Grossman 
wanted to reduce the number of concerts and seek sponsorship, including 
public money to make up for the loss of income. She says the board's 
reluctance to go along with this is a sign its conservatism. The Board 
has only former choir boy members. It is still very strongly rooted 
in the past. But administrative director, Manford Zite, says it wouldn't 
be appropriate for tax payers to fund the Vienna Boys' Choir. The 
boys have got a very high standard of living here. We have got our 
own indoor swimming pool, we have got a huge park. We are living in 
a palace, we travel months of the year. We stay in five star hotels. 
And I think it would be unfair to accept public funding for that sort 
of standard of life. The debate is really over whether the Vienna 
Boys' Choir is primarily a top music school or a group of commercial 
singers. Although the Board of has promised to reduce the length of 
foreign tours, the actual number of concerts will stay the same for 
the time being. Whatever direction the choir takes now, it is hard 
to imagine that these children will have much time to be just kids. 
The BBC's, Emigene Fuchs, reporting from Vienna. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>