<DOC>
<DOCNO> PRI19981204.2000.2986 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
This is The World, I am Lisa Mullins. Everybody loves penguins, whether 
awkwardly ambling or smoothly swimming, the marine birds put on a 
great show. But while spectators smile, environmentalists worry. Of 
the 17 species of penguins, nine are endangered or vulnerable and 
two are near threatened. This morning the New England Aquarium, which 
is just a few miles from our studios here in Boston, sponsored a news 
conference to call attention to the penguins' plight. Among the experts 
present was Peter Dan who is a research manager of the Phillip Island 
Nature Park in Australia and I wonder if you can tell us first, Dr. 
Dan, nine species of penguins as we said are now considered endangered 
or vulnerable. That is up from five just a few years back. Is that 
as serious an increase as it sounds? It is a serious increase. There 
is two reasons for it. One is that in 1996, when that first lease 
was prepared, we were not as well informed as we are now. For the 
other, more alarming, part of that is that the situation of this civil 
species has deteriorated and it is clear that the term of these species 
are in much greater trouble than we thought in 1996. And what is causing 
that kind of deterioration? Semi global warming seems to be a problem 
for some of the Sadiantartic ones. If they should come further north 
in the Southern Hemisphere, than other problems become obvious such 
as interactions with commercial fisheries or introduced predators 
or incidents of oil spills. That kind of thing. And can you actually 
see this when you go and study these various populations? Where are 
you going and what do you actually witness on your own? Personally, 
the populations that I am familiar with that are declining are actually 
New Zealand, and not in Australia. And there you can see areas where 
penguins used to breed where they no longer breed, for example. And 
you can talk to people who remember numbers of penguins that were 
much greater than any you see in some of the areas where they still 
breed. And then you can go into some of the breeding areas in the 
case of the Yellow Ike Penguin. In New Zealand you actually find a 
lot of dead penguins which are being killed by ferrets where were 
introduced to control rabbits a hundred years ago. Why, of all the 
species studied in particular, the penguin. And is there a reason 
why penguins may be an especially good indicator of the state of the 
environment overall. Yes, they are an excellent indicator of the state 
of the marine environment. And they are probably one of the few species 
that you can demonstrate a reasonable negative relationship between 
their numbers and the territory of the water. So global warming is 
probably going to affect penguins before it is going to affect many 
other things. Do you use technology to try and track these penguins. 
I understand, that in some cases, when you are tracking them by sea, 
you have some kind of radio technology that sees where they go and 
what they eat. Yes, it is actually something that has developed over 
the last 10 to 15 years. When the components bought radio telemetry 
and for satellite tracking also, it becomes small enough for us to 
make packages that we can attach to penguins. And for the first time, 
really, we have been able to tell where they are going at sea. It 
used to be completely stream and you cold see them leave the shore 
of the island or the colony and not have a clue then what happened 
and often may be away for three or four weeks. So, yes, it has been 
a remarkable age for learning about penguins this last decade or so. 
Dr. Peter Dan is research manager at the Phillip Island Nature Park 
in Victoria, Australia. Thank you for coming to the studio. Thank 
you, thank you. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>