<DOC>
<DOCNO> PRI19981204.2000.0373 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
In London today, there is speculation about a possible deal involving 
Augusto Pinochet, but after all the newspaper stories and official 
denials, the former Chilean dictator's status remains status quo. 
General Pinochet is still waiting for Britain's home secretary to 
decide whether he will be extradited to Spain. A judge in Madrid wants 
to try Pinochet on murder and torture charges dating from his rule 
of Chili in the 1970s and '80s. The United States this week promised 
to help Spain's investigation by reviewing U.S. secret documents relating 
to the Pinochet regime. In a moment we will learn what may be in those 
papers, but first we turn to The World's Alahandra Martinz in Santiago 
to learn how Chileans view the role of their Armed Forces in the post-Pinochet 
era. A military tune accompanies the traditional change of the Guard 
in front of the Presidential Palace. It is a bright spring morning 
in Santiago. And dozens of by-passers stop to look at the ceremony. 
In knit uniforms and white gloves, the guards march into the palace. 
The same building that was badly damaged when the military took power 
in 1973. The palace has long been restored and the country has lived 
under a civilian government for almost nine years. But many say it 
is still far from being a true democracy. Armond Cudenjan is a military 
analyst based in Santiago. He says the military has still exerted 
powerful influence in Chilean politics. The military has set up a 
number of institutions and systems which are jointly described as 
authoritarian enclaves which allows them to exert an influence or 
an act of veto on important decisions on virtually any subject. Most 
structure is left in place, but the military are in the 1980 constitution, 
passed during the government of General Pinochet. It allowed the General 
to become a senator for life when he stepped down. It also reserves 
four senate seats for other retired military officers. But perhaps 
the most controversial of all the institutions inherited from the 
military period, is the National Security Council. Which includes 
the president, and the chiefs of the Armed Forces. Critics say the 
military uses the Council to dictate policy. But former chairman of 
the Joint Chiefs of Staff Alexander Medina, denies that allegation. 
Any government in any country can establish certain team on social, 
political, international, economical, areas to advise the president. 
The under force are under the direction and the authority of the president 
of the republic. So it is not true that they have such power. The 
Armed Forces have in recent years, tried to present a more transparent 
image. Last, year they even published details of their own budget, 
a first in Latin America. Chili is the largest spender in military 
equipment in the region, for a very simple reason. It has the money. 
By law, it gets 10 percent of the exports of the State Copper Company, 
the biggest copper exporter in the world. But what worries some people 
here is not so much the level of military spending, but the fact that 
the Armed Forces are present in every aspect of society. At an elementary 
school in Santiago, kids gathered last week to celebrate the anniversary 
of their school. And sing happy birthday to its founder, General Pinochet. 
The school is run by a military foundation. And is an example of what 
Roger Donnopapoda calls the military state within a state. They have 
all the power that a state should have, not the military. And they 
are a very particular state. Because they act, as if the country was 
of their property. It is their country. They live near us but very 
far away from us at the same time. These claims are denied by the 
Armed Forces. They see their role as simply protecting Chili and its 
institutions. As the country waits to find out if General Pinochet 
will have to stand trial, most Chileans agree that there is no risk 
of another coup and history repeating itself. But no one here doubts 
that the military will continue to be a powerful force in Chili's 
political life. For The World, this is Alahandra Martinz, in Santiago, 
Chili. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>