<DOC>
<DOCNO> PRI19981204.2000.2362 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Today is Friday, the day we ask foreign journalists based in Washington, 
D.C. about how they are covering the week's top American news stories. 
And this week we turn to Draura Pole, who is the Washington correspondent 
for IDF radio in Israel. And Jean Jach Mavelle, who is the Washington 
bureau chief for the Paris-based newspaper Le Figueroa. Both of you, 
I know, have been covering the conference in Washington this week 
that could apparently shake up the art world. Delegates from 44 countries 
develop guidelines to pressure major collectors across the world to 
identify and return art works that were looted by the Nazis to their 
prewar Jewish owners or heirs. I would like to start off by asking 
you each to tell us how you captured this story in hour headlines. 
First Jean Jach, how about for your French readers? Jewish Assets, 
Time to Pay Back. And Draura, how about for your listeners in Israel? 
This morning, Israel time, I said it is basically what Secretaries 
of States said, Knowledge is crucial in order to achieve peace in 
the present and confident in the future. Which gives more the angle 
that, if Israeli's relate much more to. Not so much assets and money, 
but knowledge and memories. Tell us more about the interest in Israel 
at this point. Did it, for instance, make page one in the newspapers? 
Or in your case, Draura, at the top of the newscast? I will be grateful 
I would have say that it was on the front page because the editors 
thought it was very interesting and important. But the public in general, 
is not very interested and is not really drawn to the money, to assets,to 
a lot of bickering and infighting that is going on. But, Israelis 
are very interested in the educational and the historical perspectives, 
lessons that you have to learn. And if you push and emphasize those 
angles, you can get through and basically cater to what they want 
to hear about. Draura Pole, you mentioned the United States Secretary 
of State, Madeline Albright, who did indeed play a major role in this 
conference. Let us hear a little bit from her now. Some of the comments 
that she made at the conference. The struggle to reveal and deal with 
this fall truth surrounding the handling of Holocaust era assets is 
wrenching, but also cathartic. Only by knowing and being honest about 
the past, can we gain peace in the present and confidence in the future. 
Could you tell us, Jean Jach Mavelle, how you covered comments like 
those for your readers in France. How do you portray it in your coverage? 
I would say I was more interested in the surrounding stories because, 
because basically what happened during the three days in Washington 
was some kind of diplomatic work. And it is not always effective when 
we are talking about money and memories. So, I would say people back 
in France were more interested in practical stories. For example, 
the this painting by Munich which happens to be exhibited in the Boston 
Museum of Fine Arts. The Water Lilies was a good example, it showed 
that inertia, red tape, disenginuity, I mean the French museum has 
not been looking for very hard for the rightful owners, but hey are 
subsequent question. Where are the owners? Who are they? Are they, 
I mean, the victims, or so the heirs of the people who represent them. 
I mean there are many unanswered question and again, I think that 
for French readers, I mean this famous Munich painting was a good 
starting point. In such a highly-charged emotional story. How do you 
report it in a fair and objective way? I think I do report a fair 
report the issue that came on to be discussed in the conference. But 
I must say that I do not feel that I have to be too neutral. Because 
I am involved and I am Jewish and I have family that was killed in 
the Holocaust, so it is a very, very charged issue and you have to 
report the facts, but I have no problem taking sides. Can you give 
us examples of how that might have influenced what you have been reporting 
back? I think it has affected both ways. I for one, think I can say 
that there are still like 110,000 pieces of art that are missing. 
Some of them may be even in, and some sacred pieces that were looted 
from the Synagogues and private homes. Some may be even in the basements 
of the Vatican and that is one anger that they were trying to address. 
On the other hand, I felt more free to report about the bickering, 
the infighting about money among the Jewish organizations and Jewish 
lawyers and lawyers and survivors. So, I felt even more free to report 
everything as is. What was also interesting in this conference is 
I would call Tom a permanent French/Jewish representative, who has 
been go through now and Second World War where he was here in Washington 
and he said to me. Who has become all the gold of the Jewish people. 
The artworks of the Jewish people, basically of the money of the Jewish 
people. But those people who have been arrested by the French police 
or the German police in Paris. I mean they were poor people. They 
were immigrants. So, I mean the money is not really the question. 
It is a reckless sell to the Israeli public. The money is not the 
issue to some degree the money even repulsive. The Israelis do not 
want to think about the memory of the Holocaust as a money war. It 
is important to make justice happen, but the average Israelis say 
that maybe even something that takes away from the real memory, from 
the precious, from the human tragedy, and we are talking about the 
genocide. It is nothing less than that. Jean Jach Mavelle, the Washington 
Bureau Chief for the Paris-based newspaper La Figueroa and Draura 
Pole, the Washington correspondent for IDF radio in Israel. We appreciate 
your speaking with us. Thank you. Thank you. Bye. Thank you. Bye. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>