<DOC>
<DOCNO> PRI19981204.2000.2014 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
The Indian film, Fire, played the art house circuit in the United 
States last year without provoking much controversy. But in India, 
where it opened last month, the film is causing riots. Directed by 
Dipa Metta, Fire is about two sisters-in-law who embark on a lesbian 
love affair. Today Deli police announced the arrest of two supporters 
of a militant Hindu party after they allegedly took part in an attack 
on a movie theater that was showing the film. We get details from 
The World's Mary Louise Kelly. A dozen stick-wielding protesters yesterday 
ransacked the lobby of the Regal Cinema in Deli. What they lacked 
in numbers, they made up for in voracity. Outside the theater, protesters 
shouted slogans and ripped down posters advertising the film. Two 
cinemas in Bombay suffered the same fate on Wednesday and some other 
theaters have stopped showing the film. G. B. Gull of the ultranationalist 
Hindu party, Shiv Sena, says his group is behind the attacks. The 
film Fire shows one woman having sex with another. This scene is an 
attack on our Hindu culture and civilization. We do all this the party's 
moral social system. Where it is done between a man and woman not 
married. But the film is trying to show something that deviates from 
this line. And it will send the wrong message to the society. Fire 
does tell a provocative story. Two sisters-in-law trapped in loveless 
marriages develop an emotional and eventually physical relationship. 
It is a shocking subject in a country where lesbian love is such a 
taboo, there is not even a word for it in any Indian language. In 
most Indian films, even married couples rarely kiss. In Fire, the 
lesbian protagonists do a lot more than that, as Indian film critic, 
Laveat Joeshi, explains. This film and certain scenes in this film 
are very, very stunning even from the Western standards. I mean there 
is a lot of open sex into the Western films, but not the way it has 
been shown in Fire. So, Dipa Metta, has done a very, very bold job 
by making this film. And her purpose has really has been to take the 
lime light and that is what she has done. What director, Dipa Metta 
has also done is offend some Indians who consider Fire an endorsement 
of homosexuality. Metta says, they are missing the point to her film 
and its characters. The choice that the women make is not a stand 
against marriage or a protagonist statement. It is that, let us live 
our lives with dignity. I do not like labels. And I think that when 
people label Fire as an anti-marriage film, or a pro-gay film. I get 
upset because they just look at one aspect of Fire. Critics have praised 
Fire, calling it breathtaking, erotic, and beautiful. It has also 
been called obscene by an Indian critic reacting to this scene. One 
woman's husband confronting her about her relationship with her sister-in-law. 
Film stars and directors in Baliwood, the Bombay equivalent of Hollywood 
are rallying in support of Fire. They condemn the violence in Bombay 
and Deli as cultural terrorism. And they point out that in the past, 
attempts to censure controversial films such as Crash and the Last 
Temptation of Christ have ended up attracting bigger audiences. Film 
critic, Lilac Joshi, predicts the same fate for Fire. Dipa Metta, 
will be trigger happy by this. I mean it will do much good to her 
film than bad because she is going to get more and more audience. 
Controversy means a lot of write-ups in the paper. A lot of write-ups 
in, you know, magazines and she would be interviewed. So, in totality, 
it is going to add to the popularity of the film. Fire is part of 
a trilogy. With two more films, Earth, and Water, still to come. Earth, 
due out in India next year, takes on Hindu/Muslim relations. If anything, 
that is an even more provocative subject than lesbianism. And a sign 
that controversy over Dipa Metta's films will not end any time soon. 
For The World, I am Mary Louise Kelly reporting. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>