<DOC>
<DOCNO> VOA19981204.0500.0740 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Coming up now on Universal Time on News Now. While people in Taiwan 
head to the polls Saturday to vote, the Chinese government has made 
it clear that it does not want to see increased support for the island's 
pro independent party. From Beijing, Stephanie Ho reports. The Chinese 
government has long made clear it will not tolerate Taiwan independence. 
The island is the centerpiece of China's grand reunification plans 
which involve the recovery of three territories. First, there was 
the former British colony of Hong Kong, which reverted to Chinese 
sovereignty last year. The Portuguese enclave of Macao will be handed 
back to China at the end of next year. That leaves the island of Taiwan 
where the nationalist government fled after losing the Chinese civil 
war to the Communists in 1949. As Chinese President Jiang Zemin pointed 
out to President Clinton during his visit to Beijing in June, Taiwan 
is a significant issue for China. The Taiwan question is the most 
important and the most sensitive issue at the core of China-U.S. relations. 
HO: Relations across the Taiwan Strait have been tense for several 
years, ever since Taiwanese President Lee Teng-hui visited the United 
States in 1995. China responded by holding missile tests in the waters 
off Taiwan. But in October this year, there were signs of a thaw when 
negotiators from Taiwan and China met in Shanghai for the highest-level 
talks in five years. To demonstrate the importance China placed on 
this meeting, Chinese President Jiang Zemin agreed to meet Taiwanese 
negotiator Koo Chen-fu at the Delu Tai state guest house in Beijing. 
But as far as Beijing is concerned, all those discussions about Taiwan 
have the goal of eventual reunification. Chinese foreign ministry 
spokesman Tang Jiaxuan this week emphasized that his government opposes 
what he called separatist forces on Taiwan gaining the upper hand 
in this round of elections. HO: He said, "China respects the basic 
aspirations of the Taiwanese people," he pointed out that, no matter 
what political activities go on in Taiwan, the island is still a part 
of China. Although the Chinese spokesman said people on Taiwan should 
be working to promote peaceful reunification with China, Beijing has 
not ruled out the use of force to take the island back. Taiwan's Nationalist 
Party, or KMT, officially calls for eventual reunification with China. 
The main opposition Democratic Progressive Party, the DPP, on the 
other hand, calls for Taiwan's outright independence. Chinese government 
spokesmen said they were too busy to accept a request for interviews 
about Taiwan, but the head of Beijing United University Taiwan Research 
Office, Professor Shu Bal Dong, is quoted by "Asia Week" magazine 
as saying a DPP victory will not be to either side's advantage. Professor 
Shu said a DPP victory will cause more uncertainty in. Stephanie Ho, 
VOA News, Beijing. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>