<DOC>
<DOCNO> VOA19981204.0500.1347 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Historic Abiquiu in the State of New Mexico is a village with mud 
brick houses surrounding a Catholic church. The village overlooks 
the Chama River Valley and the same scenery that attracted the late 
American painter Georgia O'Keefe. Vlades Ahok has the story of Abiquiu 
and its people. Galleria de Donka Cauarta is located in the main plaza 
of the old village of Abiquiu. Wood carver Leopold Garcia shares the 
gallery with Barbara Monsanatas, a seventh-generation weaver. Both 
of them have lived in Abiquiu all their lives, as did their parents 
and grandparents, and both are proud of their Indian roots. Abiquiu 
was historically a Hanisono settlement. The Hanisonos were captives. 
They were captured by the Spaniards in the Naramba Mexican government, 
and during the Spanish colonial period, they Christianized them. And 
this is another place where they did that. They became Hispanic. They 
spoke Spanish and became Catholics, but they were full-blooded Indians. 
During the late 17th and early 18th centuries, New Mexico was the 
site of many conflicts between Spanish settlers and native Americans 
who had lived there for centuries in their villages called pueblos. 
During the same period, nomadic Indians from the Northern Plains, 
especially Comanches attacked both the Spaniards and Pueblo Indians. 
As a result of these conflicts, members of different Indian tribes 
became displaced and lost the aboriginal identity, especially if they 
were captured as children. These displaced Indians called Hanisonos 
formed a new ethnic group in the already diverse population of New 
Mexico. By the mid-1700s, their numbers were so large that the government 
gave groups of them land grants provided they accepted Christianity 
and lived in a Europeanized status. Abiquiu is one of the Hanisono 
settlements formed at that time. The history and lifestyle in these 
New Mexican villages is often better traced to their numerous folk 
stories than through documents, which are rare. Although the stories 
verge on mythology, they're usually based on real-life events, and 
characters are quite realistic. Donka Cauarta, which means Mr. Peanut, 
is the main hero of Abiquiu folk stories. He's a typical Hanisono 
but, at the same time, a respected and influential leader in village 
affairs. His wife, Daniel Lagrima Acasa de Sabola, which means Mrs. 
Tear Drop Caused by Onion, is a model of domestic industry in the 
Hispano-Indian tradition of Northern New Mexico. The Cauartas live 
and grow with the village and their times. Thus, for example, when 
American annexation of New Mexico in 1846 brought Anglo influence 
to Abiquiu, Donka Cauarta, like most Hanisonos showed no resistance 
to the newcomers because the village badly needed protection from 
nomadic raiders. Language was the only major cause of misunderstanding 
because the Spanish-speaking Hanisonos and the newly arrived English-speaking 
settlers. In order to foster cooperation with the curious strangers 
and serve as a good example, Donka Cauarta decided to give his newly 
born son an English name. He picked the one he most often heard the 
Anglos call each other... Very little is known, however, as to Donka 
Cauarta reacted when the famous American painter Georgia O'Keefe bought 
a home in Abiquiu. According to some her neighbors, the artist, who 
painted the landscape scenes and architecture of the Southwest, never 
learned to speak Spanish and was not popular among Abiquiu residents. 
Because of her black robes, walking stick, and the wild animal skulls 
she collected and painted, some Abiquiu residents called her La Brewha, 
the witch. But wood carver Leopold Garcia remembers her very fondly. 
I grew up around Georgia O'Keefe for a long time. She visited our 
house a lot. She lived right next door. She treated me really good. 
She was a very beautiful person to me. A lot of people in the village 
liked her. A lot of people didn't. They didn't understand her, you 
know. She's different. However, the Abiquiu Hanisono have traditionally 
accepted newcomers, and so they also lived in peace with the late 
artist. I'm Vlades Ahok. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>