<DOC>
<DOCNO> VOA19981204.0500.2148 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
The Israeli government says it will not make any further troop withdrawals 
from the West Bank unless the Palestinians accept a list of conditions, 
but Yasser Arafat's Palestinian Authority refuses to oblige. And VOA's 
David Gullus has more on this continuing dispute in a report from 
Jerusalem. A bitter dispute over Israel's release of Palestinian prisoners 
has once again brought the peace process close to a breakdown, with 
the Palestinians calling for U.S. diplomatic intervention. Palestinians 
are incensed that most of the 250 prisoners freed by Israel last month 
in the first phase of implementing the Wye River agreement were common 
criminals rather than political and military detainees. A demonstration 
by Palestinian students near Ram Allah in the West Bank Wednesday 
ended with a stone-throwing assault on an Israeli car and its two 
passengers that was taped by a film crew and shown on Israeli television. 
Only hours later, the Israeli government said it was suspending further 
troop withdrawals until the Palestinian Authority stopped anti-Israel 
incitement, ceased talk of unilaterally declaring statehood, and acknowledged 
that Israel was not violating the Wye memorandum on the prisoner issue. 
Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu charged that the attack on the motorist 
was deliberate. This incident yesterday was not a spontaneous incident. 
The CNN cameras that were there, I venture, were not there by accident. 
This was organized, orchestrated, planned in advance and fomented 
by the Palestinian Authority. Palestinian officials said the Ram Allah 
incident was a spontaneous outburst of anger over Israel's handling 
of the prisoner issue. Ahmed Tibi, a senior Arafat adviser, told VOA 
the Palestinians have no intention of complying with Mr. Netanyahu's 
terms. These conditions are violations of the Wye River memorandum. 
They are rejected totally by us. They were rejected by the State Department, 
and we think that the government of Israel is seeking excuses in order 
not to implement the agreement. Mr. Tibi urged U.S. diplomatic intervention 
in the dispute which comes less than two weeks before President Clinton 
is due to visit Israel and the Palestinian areas. Under terms of the 
U.S.-brokered Wye agreement, another 5 percent of the West Bank is 
to be transferred from Israeli control to joint jurisdiction on December 
18th, while another 250 Palestinian prisoners are to be released. 
David Gullus, VOA News, Jerusalem. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>