<DOC>
<DOCNO> VOA19981204.0500.1829 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
The U.S. space shuttle "Endeavour" lit up the pre-dawn sky in the 
Southeastern United States early Friday morning with a perfect launch 
into space for a rendezvous in the next few hours with a Russian-made 
module. VOA Science Correspondent David Macaleary says the U.S. and 
Russian components will be hooked together on Monday, forming the 
basis for the international space station. The Russian Zarya is essentially 
an unpiloted space tugboat that will provide early propulsion, steering, 
and communication for the station's first months in orbit. Unity is 
a six-sided connecting passageway which the NASA manager in charge 
of it, Bill Bastito, says will be the attachment point for all other 
U.S. modules to come. The major functions of the Unity module are 
to provide a way to connect on orbit pressurized modules together. 
In the scheme of things, I think last time I counted we had seven 
or eight different modules that mate to Unity along the way, and its 
major function, although not glamorous, is to be the cornerstone on 
which you build off from. The process of mating Unity to Zarya begins 
when the shuttle "Endeavour" closes in on the orbiting Russian module. 
Astronaut Nancy Currie will use the shuttle's robot arm to lift the 
U.S. Unity module from the cargo bay and lock it on to Zarya, something 
like two railroad freight cars locking together. Of course, they cannot 
be unlocked for many years to come because the space station is to 
be a 10- to 15-year project. After that grapple, as they call it, 
occurs -- that will occur sometime on Sunday, I believe -- then comes 
the process of actually connecting data and power lines between the 
two compartments. This particular work will require three spacewalks 
over five days by veteran U.S. astronauts Jerry Ross and James Newman. 
The manager of the U.S. space agency NASA's spacewalk project's office, 
astronaut Gregory Harbaugh, himself a veteran spacewalker of previous 
shuttle missions, says these are the first of dozens of spacewalks 
to come between now and 2004 which will be necessary to complete the 
orbiting laboratory. There is a tremendous body of work that lies 
before us. We are about to undertake the equivalent amount of spacewalk 
activity as has been done in the history of mankind. So it's a daunting 
task, but we are well prepared and we know how to do this job, and 
working with our Russian colleagues, we are eager to get underway. 
In the end, the completed space station will consist of more than 
100 elements carried to orbit by 45 flights of U.S. space shuttles 
and two different types of Russian rockets. It will house crews of 
up to seven at a time for research on the effects of weightlessness 
on humans, plants, and animals. NASA's senior space station scientist 
Catherine Clark says the international station's appeal is that it 
will offer a site for continuous space research, unlike the shuttle 
which has remained aloft for only days a time. The access we've had 
to space has been very limited, and the space station is intended 
to solve that problem. Imagine taking one of the -- I don't know -- 
finest cancer research centers in the United States and telling the 
scientists who work in it that they could only have access to the 
laboratories for about nine days every two years. The field wouldn't 
progress very far. It's the first time we're going to be able to really 
see what can happen with space research. Everything else has been 
just a teaser, I heard one of the astronauts say the other day. Now 
next year, there are five more of these assembly flights to get the 
station together, bringing a Russian-built and -launched living quarters, 
two space shuttles filled with interior supplies, an early exterior 
framework, and the first huge solar arrays to provide power for the 
growing station. VOA Science Correspondent David Macaleary. The launch 
of the shuttle "Endeavour" had been delayed by 24 hours because of 
a technical problem. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>