<DOC>
<DOCNO> VOA19981204.0500.0450 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
As the world prepares to mark the 50th anniversary of the Universal 
Declaration of Human Rights, the United States is among nations being 
singled out for failures to ensure those rights both at home and abroad. 
In its new report, Human Rights Watch takes issue with U.S. opposition 
to a proposed international criminal court. The New York-based group 
also criticizes what it calls America's large blind spots toward abuses 
when they collide with U.S. interests. VOA's Nick Simeone reports. 
Once governments around the world would regularly ignore criticism 
of their human rights records as unwanted interference in their own 
affairs. Today, human rights have become well-established and legitimate 
concerns of much of humanity, as evidenced by genocide trials for 
atrocities committed in places like Bosnia and Rwanda. In fact, as 
the world nears the 50th anniversary of the U.N. General Assembly's 
historic proclamation, Human Rights Watch Executive Director Kenneth 
Roth believes the world may have reached a turning point. Today, there 
has been the emergence of often powerful and highly sophisticated 
human rights groups in virtually every government around the world. 
Indeed, all but the most repressive governments today allow human 
rights groups to exist within their countries, and these groups represent 
citizens who insist on holding governments accountable under the declaration's 
standards. But in its annual report, the group singles out the United 
States for blocking what it calls a tremendous step forward in human 
rights made this year, a treaty approved by U.N. members in July to 
establish an international criminal court. The Clinton administration 
strongly opposes the treaty, fearing such a court could lead to politically 
motivated arrests of Americans in countries with grudges against the 
United States. Human Rights Watch believes such fears are greatly 
exaggerated and that a permanent court set up to adjudicate war crimes 
would be a powerful deterrent to anyone contemplating crimes against 
humanity. The international criminal court would be able to set up 
common global standards, and so the U.S. fears of arbitrary prosecution 
would actually be diminished by an international court, and that's 
why its opposition to the ICC is all the more inexplicable. Despite 
perennial human rights abusers, such as governments in Burma, China, 
Iraq, North Korea, Saudi Arabia, and some African nations, Human Rights 
Watch notes a growing willingness by many countries to end impunity 
for human rights abusers. Case in point: the arrest in Britain of 
former Chilean President Augusto Pinochet who was wanted in Spain 
on genocide charges for the disappearance of thousands of people during 
his rule in the 1970s. Nick Simeone, VOA News in Washington. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>