<DOC>
<DOCNO> VOA19981204.0500.2523 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
And here in Washington, the House Judiciary Committee continues considering 
important charges against President Clinton relating to the Monica 
Lewinsky affair, but the committee apparently will not take up additional 
charges relating to Mr. Clinton's 1996 campaign fund-raising activities. 
As VOA's David Swan reports, there are efforts underway to replace 
impeachment with some lesser punishment. With the case apparently 
heading toward a decisive vote on the House floor, the number of lawmakers 
backing impeachment is highly fluid. Nearly all Democrats and at least 
a handful of moderate Republicans oppose the idea and some Republicans 
are proposing a lesser punishment. The plan calls for the House to 
censure Mr. Clinton who would pay a financial penalty and admit wrongdoing. 
But incoming speaker Bob Livingston is not saying if he will allow 
such a vote. Mr. Livingston tells reporters he will not make that 
decision until the Judiciary Committee decides whether to recommend 
impeachment. Each member of Congress has the responsibility to search 
his heart and his conscience and judge for himself the importance 
to his constituents what he should -- his vote should be, and I think 
for us to arbitrarily prejudge the conditions under which you cast 
that vote is unfair at this point. The Republican-led committee is 
expected to vote to impeach on the grounds Mr. Clinton lied under 
oath about his affair with former intern Monica Lewinsky. The panel 
may also approve other charges, including obstruction of justice. 
However, Republican sources say the case will not expand to cover 
allegedly corrupt fund-raising for the 1996 election. Lawmakers have 
decided the evidence is not strong enough for impeachment. The newly 
chosen speaker has made it clear he wants the House to finish with 
the matter this month, but he concedes it make take a bit longer. 
My preference, as I said, would be to get it over with this year, 
but if the Judiciary Committee doesn't complete its work next week, 
it will be pretty certain that it will have to carry over. Should 
the House impeach Mr. Clinton, the case moves on to the Senate which, 
under the Constitution, would decide whether to remove him from office. 
For now, key Republicans are making an effort to stay out of the fray. 
Senate Majority Leader Trent Lott says he is not laying plans for 
a trial of the president. We have rules and procedures that were approved 
years ago in the wake of Watergate. At the appropriate time, if need 
be, we will have a bipartisan effort to make sure that we know how 
to proceed if it's necessary. But we are not at that point. At the 
same time, Mr. Lott says it would be hard to evade a trial if the 
House votes impeachment. If the current schedule holds, that decision 
could come the week after next. David Swan, VOA News, Capitol Hill. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>