<DOC>
<DOCNO> ABC19981216.1830.1104 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> CAPTION </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
We're joined this evening again by three people who have their finger 
on the pulse with greater consistency than any other. Cokie Roberts, 
Bill kristol and George Stephanopoulos. If you were giving advice 
to the republican members of the House of Representatives, what would 
you tell them to do tomorrow? Go ahead? no. I would tell them to put 
this off for four or five days. I would tell them to mute their private 
thought -- their private thoughts are entirely along the lines of 
deep suspicion about the president's motives and timing. I would tell 
them to keep that to themselves for now. Support the U.S. forces abroad. 
The attitude of republicans up there was summarized by one staffer 
who said 0 to me, the attitude of every other congressman she talked 
to, very simple, bomb then impeach. Well, cokie Roberts so much for 
bipartisanship. Trent Lott, the republican leader in the Senate came 
out very quickly and said he didn't support this attack. It says there's 
a poisonous atmosphere there at the moment. People who you would normally 
suspect would support have not. Now, Orrin Hatch has given his support, 
senator John McCain has given his support. It's not all one way on 
the republican side. Even senator Hatch did express suspicion about 
the timing. That's bound to be the case, Peter. There's no avoiding 
that. We're told that tonight at 8:00 in an extraordinary moment, 
the secretary of defense will come to the chamber of the House of 
Representatives and give all members who want to come a secret briefing. 
And the purpose of that will be to convince them that this really 
was a Militarily dictated operation, not a politically dictated one. 
George Stephanopoulos, do you think the president or his team will 
try to use this attack on Iraq to his impeachment benefit? I don't 
think they'll be able to. If they tried, it would backfire immediately. 
What struck me about the president's speech, I think they are acting 
in good faith, but how remarkably defensive the speech was. He felt 
a need to enumerate all of the advisers that said we must go ahead. 
He even raised the impeachment debate himself, which some would say 
is less than presidential. The president should let his actions speak 
for themselves. Does this make any difference in the impeachment process. 
I don't think so. I don't think so. Not likely to. But this has been 
such a peculiar thing. Who knows? The attacks against Iraq continue. 
The impeachment process continues. We'll have other news when we come 
back. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>