<DOC>
<DOCNO> ABC19981216.1830.0159 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> CAPTION </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
We do not, any of us, know at the moment precisely what is going on. 
Here in Washington, the Pentagon the chairman of the joint chiefs 
and the president are very careful not to divulge much information. 
But the key phrase from the president is the one that makes the difference, 
a strong and sustained series of air attacks, most of it at the moment, 
either air or sea launch cruise missiles from B-52s flying out of 
the indian ocean or from ships in the Persian gulf. Let's go to the 
White House. Sam Donaldson has just been listening to the president. 
The president made the decision to use milg tri action with his advisers 
about 8:00 this morning. They unanimously recommended in light of 
Saddam Hussein's refusal to cooperate with U.N. inspectors, the attack 
would be launched. Earlier this evening, the president addressed the 
nation from the oval office in explaining why he did what he has done. 
Here is some of what he had to say. The inspectors are saying even 
if they could stay in Iraq, there work would be a sham. Saddam's deception 
has defeated their effectiveness. Instead of the inspectors disarming 
Saddam, Saddam has disarmed the inspectors. This situation presents 
a clear and present danger to the stability of the persian gulf and 
the safety of people everywhere. That is why on the unanimous recommendation 
of my national security team including the vice president, secretary 
of defense, the chairman of the joint chiefs of staff, the secretary 
of state and the national security adviser, I have ordered a strong 
sustained series of air strikes against iraq. They are designed to 
degrade Saddam's capacity to develop and deliver weapons of mass destruction. 
And to degrade his ability to threaten his neighbors. At the same 
time, we are delivering a powerful message to Saddam. If you act recklessly, 
you will pay a heavy price. We acted today, a swift response would 
provide the most surprise and the least opportunity for Saddam to 
prepare. If we had delayed for even a matter of days from chairman 
Butler's report, we would have given Saddam more time to disperse 
his forces and protect his weapons. Also, the Muslim holy month of 
Ramadan begins this weekend. For us to initiate military action during 
Ramadan would be profoundly offensive to the Muslim world and, therefore 
would damage our relations with Arab countries and the progress we 
have made in the Middle East. Shortly after the attack began, a number 
of republican leaders on Capitol Hill, who usually are supportive 
of military action registered their vote of nonsupport. Senator Trent 
Lott who said in part I cannot support this military action in the 
Persian gulf at this time. Both the timing and the policy are subject 
to question. The reference to timing has to do with the impeachment 
vote that was to begin tomorrow in the House of Representatives. Many 
republicans say they believe that the timing somehow had something 
to do with that. That's resented here at the White House. White House 
officials point out the attack on Saddam Hussein was brought on by 
none other than Saddam Hussein's refusal to cooperate with the inspectors. 
It was not part of the impeachment process that caused the president 
to take the military action he did today. Peter? Thanks very muc, 
Sam. This is very much tied up with the impeachment process. We're 
not precisely sure at the moment. We're trying to get a handle on 
when it will precisely unravel or come unstuck from this and go on 
with itself. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>