<DOC>
<DOCNO> ABC19981216.1830.0764 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> CAPTION </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Some Americans and people in other parts of the world will come to 
the fairly rapid conclusion that this attack on Iraq has something 
to do with the impeachment process. But we came here to Washington 
today because it is the eve of what was supposed to be the vote on 
impeachment in the House of Representatives. Before we debate the 
broader political context of it, what is happening in terms of the 
impeachment process itself. We go to Capitol Hill and ABC's Linda 
Douglass. Linda. Well, members of the House of Representatives flew 
in from all over the country to the capital tonight preparing to cast 
the historic vote on impeachment tomorrow. Now republicans are trying 
to decide whether to hold that vote tomorrow or not. They are meeting 
behind closed doors trying to make that decision. They had televisions 
wheeled in so they could see the president make his address. The incoming 
speaker, Bob Livingston will probably make an announcement about that 
decision later on tonight. As republicans wrestled with whether to 
impeach the commander in chief as he is sending Americans into battle, 
some pro-impeachment hard-liners did not hesitate to question the 
president's motives. For this sort of thing to all of a sudden seem 
to come to a head on the eve of an impeachment vote is highly suspicious, 
to say the least. He never held the military in high esteem. Now he 
uses the military to hide behind. Others urged their colleagues not 
to be faint-hearted. We want to debate this impeachment question. 
I think it's irrelevant whether there's bombing going on. GOP leaders 
tried to keep up the momentum for impeachment, as the parade of republicans 
announcing they will vote against the president continued. Illinois' 
John Porter once opposed to impeachment -- To me, the evidence is 
clear and convincing that the president lied in a Civil proceeding 
and before the grand jury. Iowa's Jim leach, known for his independence 
-- The president has committed crimes and misdemeanors. Several who 
announced said they made up their minds after watching the Judiciary 
committee make its case against the president. Last night, those findings 
were rushed to the house clerk, to be distributed to members today. 
The president's supporters made a last-minute, probably futile effort 
to stop the impeachment train, delivering hundreds of thousands of 
petitions to Capitol Hill. One of the members in that republican meeting, 
South Carolina Lindsay graham, a Judiciary committee member, emerged 
to say he doubt there's will be a vote on impeachment tomorrow, though 
the vote will be held in the next few days. Graham was suggesting 
that perhaps the house would gather on the floor to vote some kind 
of resolution. Before we got engrossed by this today, we all thought 
here in Washington that this impeachment process was pretty much done 
and the republicans had the votes. Is that still pretty much the situation? 
It really does appear to be, Peter. This appears to be at this hour 
at least it appears to be num airically impossible for the president 
to win. But of course you never know. People can change their minds 
at the last minute. Thanks very much. Linda Douglass on Capitol Hill. 
Let's go back to the White House now and ask Sam Donaldson when the 
president wasn't thinking about the attacks on Iraq today, what was 
he doing about the impeachment process. A meeting has been put off 
now because of what happened today. People here is still pessimistic. 
There's always a chance they haven't given up. They continue to say 
this is a partisan effort by republicans on Capitol Hill. Arrangement, 
he'd like to make out some sort of deal with Congress that would avoid 
impeachment. Thank you, Sam. Quite some day. When we come back, we'll 
talk about it with our resident political analyst. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>