<DOC>
<DOCNO> ABC19981216.1830.0383 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> CAPTION </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
But right now the country is very much in the middle of operation 
"desert fox" as it is called. It's hard to get a handle on its size 
and scope. What have they told you, Barry? They're being careful so 
far not to say very much. They're telling us nothing so far about 
the targets, nothing about any possible damage, nothing about how 
long this air campaign may last. The targets, they said, like the 
president did, include anything that might degrade Saddam Hussein's 
ability to threaten his neighbors or produce weapons of mass destruction. 
Defense secretary Cohen said the air strikes are Israel's own fault 
-- I'm sorry. That Iraq rather left the U.S. no choice. We have acted. 
We did not use force lightly. We did not do so today, but Iraq has 
exhausted patience. It has exhausted all options but the use of force. 
The U.S. has enough fire power in the region to carry out at least 
four days of intensive strikes and more is on the way. And more is 
on the way. U.S. forces in the area include about 200 planes and 22 
ships, including the aircraft carrier "enterprise." Eight of those 
ships are capable of firing tomahawkruise missiles. They have about 
300 of those smart guided missiles available. Another 100 or so air-launched 
cruise missiles are carried by 15 B-52s based on the island of Diego 
Garcia in the Indian ocean. Peter, the first wave of attacks today 
were carried out primarily by cruise missiles, about 100 of them reinforcements 
are on the way, including another aircraft carrier and a number of 
planes also being brought into the region. Just one question at the 
moment. Listening to general Shelton, I thought I heard hint that 
piloted aircraft were involved at the moment too. yes or no? Do you 
know? Apparently they are supposed to be. We're told that the very 
first strikes were an all-Navy affair. There may have been planes 
flown from the aircraft carrier, but it was primarily a cruise missile 
operation. Okay. Barry, thanks very much. Barry sar fin at the Pentagon. 
He said a short while ago in his briefing that Iraq, the attack against 
iraq would be carried out for as long as needed and there would be 
no time limit. While general sheldon, the chairman of the joint chief 
doesn't want to give anybody targets at the moment, we can get from 
our military analyst Tony cordesman, from sense of what it is the 
administration is trying to accomplish with this very, very strong 
attack. Tony? Peter, some targets will include the weapons of mass 
destruction facilities, suspect facilities, perhaps dual-use facilities. 
We know can quickly be converted to missile production or weapons 
of mass destruction. We'll probably hit at sensitive, politically 
important targets to Saddam like the special republican guards or 
his intelligence headquarters. His command and control facilities 
for the military. At some point we may take out a good part of his 
air defense system. Perhaps his more modern air elements. We'll probably 
hit at some of his military production facilities and throughout this, 
a lot of these strikes are going to be targeted to hit at very high 
value items that he can't replace because he can't import new equipment. 
Just one question. You speak with great confidence. How confident 
can the United States be at this moment that it will accomplish the 
goal it wants to? Well, the word degrade, Peter makes some kind of 
accomplishment virtually certain. We have to understand something. 
We're using new weapons systems. These are improved sea launch cruise 
missiles and they're likely to be fairly effective. But a 70% hit 
rate would still be an accomplishment. The last time we used air launch 
cruise missiles during the gulf war, most of them didn't work. So 
this is a system where we have to understand from observation how 
effective it really is. And a lot of the time will be striking at 
targets where we don't precisely know what's inside the targets. One 
thing we can be certain of, there are much of his equipment, the facilities, 
technology for producing weapons of mass destruction and missiles 
is so scattered throughout the country it will survive this combat. 
That's the point. Thank you very much. It's a very big country. We'll 
keep you up to date as best we can with these attacks. In a moment, 
we'll come back and deal with impeachment. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>