<DOC>
<DOCNO> APW19981216.0298 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Ten years after the wreckage of Pan Am Flight 103 hurtled down on 
the town, the big news in Lockerbie is the new Christmas lights over 
the main street. ``The media has got a hold of this, that the lights 
are being switched on again in Lockerbie after 10 years. Well, we 
never had any,'' said resident Marjory McQueen, laughing loudly. The 
town plans a single event to mark the crash's 10th anniversary on 
Dec. 21: a memorial service at 7:03 p.m. local time (1903 GMT) _ the 
moment the plane hit the ground. The commemoration will coincide with 
services in Arlington, Virginia, Syracuse, New York, and London's 
Westminster Cathedral. Normal life resumed long ago in Lockerbie, 
which lost its obscurity and its holidays the night a bomb sent the 
Boeing 747 crashing down on the town. People on the ground recalled 
a weird, rumbling noise, a streak of flame in the sky, then a mighty 
explosion and debris raining on their homes. ``The pictures were moving 
on the walls, the ornaments were bouncing up and down. I just hadn't 
a clue what was happening,'' said Maxwell Kerr, whose block was hit 
by a forward section of the fuselage and 62 bodies that fell from 
the plane. Lockerbie lost 11 of its own people along with the 259 
people aboard Flight 103, which had just reached cruising altitude 
of 31,000 feet (9,450 meters), 42 minutes after taking off from London's 
Heathrow airport for New York. The 366,228-pound (166,119-kilo) aircraft 
was felled by a small amount of high explosives smuggled on in a portable 
radio hidden inside a suitcase. The suitcase made its way as checked 
baggage from Malta to Frankfurt, Germany, and then to London. ``Can 
you imagine seeing bodies lying on roofs of buildings or all over 
a golf course? The scale of what we were facing was immense,'' Prof. 
Anthony Busuttil, head of forensic medicine at Edinburgh University, 
said in a recent interview with The Scotsman newspaper. He led a team 
of eight pathologists and eight dentists who worked long days identifying 
the dead _ just one aspect of a massive job of cleaning up a disaster 
and investigating a mass killing. Like the disaster, the 10th anniversary 
has landed on Lockerbie from somewhere else: from the necessity for 
survivors to commemorate their loss, and from the widely resented 
interest of the media. Recent moves to arrange a trial in the Netherlands 
for the two Libyans accused of the bombing keep the town's name in 
the news. Lockerbie today looks very much like it did 10 years ago, 
just before the disaster, except for the new Safeway supermarket on 
the main street and those new Christmas lights. Casual visitors wouldn't 
know that the neat garden on Sherwood Crescent marks the place where 
the crashing wings of the jumbo jet blasted a crater and killed three 
families: Tom and Kathleen Flannigan, and their 10-year-old daughter 
Joanne; John and Rosaleen Somerville and their children, 10-year-old 
Ann and 13-year-old Paul; and Maurice and Dora Henry. Across the tracks 
at Rosebank Crescent, only a small memorial serves as a reminder that 
62 bodies of Pan Am passengers fell with a part of the fuselage between 
two rows of houses, miraculously killing no one on the ground. The 
town library has a small display of disaster memorabilia, including 
the Arkansas state flag and a letter from then-Gov. Bill Clinton, 
thanking the town for its kindness to Bill and Caroline Sneed, whose 
son Sandy Phillips was one of 35 Syracuse University students killed. 
Trepidations about the 10th anniversary began a year ago, when two 
television companies began working on documentaries, said Tom Russell, 
chairman of the commemoration committee. A town meeting was held in 
February to discuss anniversary plans, and about five dozen people 
shared in the discussion. ``They wanted absolutely nothing, the BIG 
ZERO, really nothing at all. They wanted just to be left in peace,'' 
said Mrs. McQueen, a member of the regional council who volunteered 
to be the town's media contact. ``But we knew that the Lockerbie 10th 
anniversary didn't just belong to Lockerbie, it belonged to lots of 
other people as well ... and we knew there was absolutely no way we 
would be allowed to let the 10th anniversary pass unmarked,'' she 
said. Gideon Pringle, who chaired the Friendship Group that assisted 
relatives of crash victims, said townspeople feared Clinton _ and 
the attendant press corps _ might show up. Pringle had been in Arlington 
National Cemetery in 1995 when Clinton dedicated a memorial cairn 
of 270 stones. ``I've seen Mr. Clinton's entourage, his convoy _ it's 
something else. Something that you would never see here, anyway,'' 
he said. ``The word was certainly put out that we wanted to keep it 
low-key,'' Pringle said. No dignitaries were invited, and the most 
famous name at the service will probably be Scottish Secretary Donald 
Dewar. The memorial service is intended to stress that Lockerbie has 
moved on. None of the clergy who will lead the service were here 10 
years ago. Primary school students, all too young to remember the 
catastrophe, will form the choir. Russell says his abiding memory 
of the crash's aftermath ``was the incredible cooperativeness.'' ``The 
community wanted to do something.'' Volunteers worked for months to 
sort and launder clothing recovered from the plane, and return it 
to relatives. The Friendship Group was available to deal with the 
wishes of visiting relatives, including guiding them to the place 
where their loved one's body fell. ``I haven't experienced anyone 
who hasn't felt the better for coming here,'' Pringle said. ``I think 
it's the fact that when they see the area where their loved ones fell, 
it gives them some comfort _ it's green, lush,'' he said. ``When they 
come here, they are welcomed with open arms, and they know that things 
are in safe hands.'' 
</TEXT>
</DOC>