<DOC>
<DOCNO> APW19981216.1393 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
The Russian government won some promises of cash Wednesday to pay 
its huge bills: a go-ahead from parliament to print billions of rubles, 
and bids for a stake in a giant natural gas company. Russia also claimed 
Wednesday that it had reached a deal with foreign investors on restructuring 
defaulted treasury bonds _ but the deal appeared to be news to the 
foreign investors. Russia's default on the bonds in August helped 
send its financial markets into a nosedive and prompted foreign lenders 
to freeze aid to Russia. The country is now mired in its worst economic 
crisis since the 1991 Soviet collapse. Finance Minister Mikhail Zadornov 
said Wednesday that the treasury bills, or GKOs, will be exchanged 
by March 15 for new bonds with maturities of four to five years. In 
London, however, a Credit Suisse First Boston analyst said Wednesday 
that Russia's proposal to restructure dlrs 10 billion worth of GKOs 
is ``not an agreed solution between two sides.'' ``We did not agree 
to these terms,'' Kasper Bartholdy, CSFB's Russian debt analyst, told 
Dow Jones Newswires. CSFB and Deutsche Bank head the committee of 
six banks negotiating with Russia over the repayment of the treasury 
bonds. Deutsche Bank has also released a statement saying no final 
agreement had been inked, and stressing creditors' displeasure with 
comments from Russian officials about a deal. Deutsche Bank said ``a 
number of key issues'' remain outstanding. Meanwhile, Russia's parliament 
unanimously approved a bill Wednesday that allows the government to 
print 25 billion rubles (dlrs 1.2 billion) in the last quarter of 
this year. With only two weeks left before 1998 is over, the bill 
barely has enough time to clear the upper chamber of parliament and 
be authorized by President Boris Yeltsin. However, the government 
has already said it printed 13.5 billion rubles (dlrs 648 million) 
in October and November without waiting for parliament approval. Russia's 
cash-strapped government needs the money to pay off huge debts to 
foreign creditors and Russian workers and pensioners. But printing 
money could provoke more inflation, which already is running at about 
70 percent this year. With the value of the ruble declining, the government 
is trying to get its hands on hard currency. The bill approved Wednesday 
also requires Russian exporters to sell 75 percent of their hard-currency 
earnings to the government, up from the current 50 percent. In another 
good sign for Russia's struggling economy, the government received 
at least two bids from foreign companies for a 2.5 percent stake in 
the state-controlled natural gas giant, Gazprom, the Interfax news 
agency reported Wednesday. The government was asking at least dlrs 
651 million for the stake _ significantly more than its market price. 
Economics Minister Andrei Shapovalyants expressed hope Wednesday that 
Russia still may get dlrs 3.4 billion next year in loans from the 
World Bank. He spoke optimistically after the head of the World Bank 
mission to Russia, Michael Carter, met with Russian officials Wednesday. 
Russia has factored in billions of dollars in international loans 
in calculating next year's budget, despite no guarantee that the money 
will materialize. Russia's oil companies, meanwhile, are considering 
mergers because of the country's economic crisis and the drop in world 
oil prices, Deputy Prime Minister Vladimir Bulgak said Wednesday. 
He said Russia's 13 oil companies had no alternative but to consolidate, 
but did not say which ones would combine. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>