<DOC>
<DOCNO> APW19981216.0663 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Parliament approved a bill Wednesday that allows the government to 
print 25 billion rubles (dlrs 1.2 billion) _ an amount that will help 
pay the state's bills, but which may also provoke more inflation. 
Russia's cash-strapped government needs the money to pay off workers 
and pensioners, among others. But with inflation already running at 
around 70 percent this year, the fresh infusion of cash could push 
prices even higher. Parliament's lower house, the State Duma, unanimously 
passed the measure Wednesday on the final reading. President Boris 
Yeltsin's government is authorized to print the new money until the 
end of the year. The bill now goes to parliament's upper house, which 
is expected to approve it swiftly, and then to Yeltsin, who is expected 
to sign it without delay. The Russian government has already begun 
printing rubles in recent months to cover its huge budget deficit. 
As expected, the value of the currency has been declining and inflation 
has been rising. In an attempt to shore up the currency, the bill 
passed Wednesday also requires Russian exporters to repatriate 75 
percent of their hard-currency earnings, up from the current 50 percent. 
This will keep more foreign currency inside Russia. Russia is struggling 
with its worst economic crisis since the Soviet Union collapsed, and 
the government has been assembling a series of measures to guide the 
country out of its depression. In another development, Russia said 
it hopes for loans worth dlrs 3.4 billion next year from the World 
Bank. The head of the World Bank mission to Russia, Michael Carter, 
met Russian officials Wednesday, and afterward Economics Minister 
Andrei Shapovalyants expressed hope that the money would be forthcoming. 
Russia has factored in billions of dollars in international loans 
in calculating next year's budget, but there's no guarantee the money 
will materialize. International lenders froze their disbursements 
after Russia's financial markets collapsed in August. Meanwhile, parliament 
also was weighing several measures aimed at streamlining the nation's 
unwieldy tax system in advance of a debate on next year's budget. 
The proposed bills seek to lower the value added tax, currently at 
20 percent, and the profits tax, currently at 35 percent. The measures 
also call for revising the personal income tax tables to take into 
account the ruble's recent fall. The aim is to create tax incentives 
for ailing industries, and encourage more tax evaders to pay what 
they owe. But critics warn that tax cuts may only result in even lower 
government revenues. The measures are expected to win approval in 
the Communist-dominated parliament's lower house, the State Duma. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>