<DOC>
<DOCNO> CNN19981216.0130.0050 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> CAPTION </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
President Clinton has returned home to what may be an increasingly 
uncertain fate. The disks of the pending impeachment have been handed 
over to the clerk. Details are emerging from the house Judiciary committee's 
final report on four articles of impeachment that passed last week. 
It concludes -- meantime, several previously undecided republicans 
now say they will vote for impeachment. John king reports, that has 
the White House checking its strategy. The president headed home to 
a bipartisan echo that impeachment appears all but inevitable. The 
White House isn't ready to surrender. But CNN has learned the president 
is being told he must take dramatic steps if he hopes to sway the 
dwindling number of undecided republicans to vote "No" on impeachment 
and embrace a tough censure plan instead. Administration and congressional 
sources in both parties say the elements include -- admitting he lied 
to the American people about his relationship with Monica Lewinsky 
and lying under oath in the Paula Jones sexual harassment case, agreeing 
to pay a hefty financial penalty -- $2 million or more, leaving himself 
open to potential prosecution after he leaves office by promising 
not to accept a pardon. It's unclear if the president is willing to 
go that far. With a lot on the line here, his presidency and history, 
they're asking a Lot, and it's not clear what will be offered in return. 
Republican congressman Chris Shays of Connecticut is meeting with 
the President Wednesday. CNN has learned that if Shays can round up 
eight to ten undeclared republicans, democrats are promising to join 
him and make a bipartisan appeal to the president to accept this last-ditch 
censure proposal. The White House Tuesday lost two republican votes 
it had been counting on -- New York congressmen Jack Quinn and Michael 
Forbes say they will vote "Yes" on impeachment. But influential republican 
moderate Mike castle of Delaware provided a Glimmer of hope. Castle 
publicly detailed a tough censure proposal that includes a hefty fine, 
an appeal to republican leaders to embrace it as, "A solution that 
provides justice and is best for the nation." But GOP leaders quickly 
rejected the idea. I just don't think that's an appropriate response, 
appropriate discipline or exercise of the constitutional responsibility 
to impeach that is laid upon the house by our constitution. The architects 
of this tough, new censure plan say they can't guarantee it would 
bring enough votes to head off impeachment, but they describe it as 
the president's only hope. John king, CNN, the White House. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>