<DOC>
<DOCNO> CNN19981216.1600.1322 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> CAPTION </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Jamie McIntyre is watching from the Pentagon as are a lot of people 
whorx are not civilians. I'm sorry. These scenes from Baghdad, and 
the sounding of the air raid siren a few minutes ago are consistent 
with the timing that we would expect if the pentagon were to go ahead 
with the attack that we were given to believe was something that would 
happen very soon. This timing of -- in the dead of night, is the perfect 
time for cruise missiles to be launched. You may recall in the previous 
attack November 14th, if launch was scheduled much earlier, as the 
sun first went down. That was a bit of a surprise, because every cruise 
missile attack in the past against Baghdad has come about this time 
after midnight. We were anticipating an attack at any time, and when 
that air raid siren went off, it set off alarm bells. Sources at the 
Pentagon say that when the United States launches its attack, it will 
incruise -- include cruise missiles and air launch cruise missiles 
from B- B-52s based in the Indian ocean. We are waiting for any confirmation 
that any military action has begun. All we know about was the air 
raid sirens, which could be nervousness on the part of the Iraqis. 
The hearing of the sirens set off in my mind, I remember in Baghdad 
in 1991 when the war began, that we heard sirens in Baghdad, it was 
a while before you could hear any military action in the capital. 
And the sirens were triggered by Iraqi radar notification at the front. 
We don't have the exact list of targets, but we know not all of them 
are right in downtown Baghdad. So if there were strikes in the outskirts 
of Baghdad or other parts of the country, that could set off the air 
defense system, or it could be nervousness or a general alert. However, 
sources indicate that military action was likely and likely to come 
today during this time frame, so we are watching for any indication 
that a military strike is under way. In the view of the United States 
military is it likely that the large number of forces are on stage 
now? The United States feels there is a window that it was likely 
to strike if the Butler report gave grounds for that, and it was a 
time when the U.S. was rotating its bombers and moving a second aircraft 
carrier into the persian gulf. During that time, they had extra forces 
before they bring the rotating troops back, and it gives a little 
extra cushion as they think about the strikes. The strikes come as 
the U.S. feels that that report from Richard Butler gives a clear 
justification. The final paragraph says the U.N. inspectors cannot 
conduct the inspections they need to. That was a mandate to go ahead 
with military action. In addition, the fact that there is little Moon 
and light is good to launch a military strike because it makes the 
missiles hard to see. The reason they like to conduct cruise missile 
attacks at night is it's hard to see them at night. They fly low, 
they're hard to pick up on radar. At night, it's very hard to do. 
As we listen to you describe the weapons and talk about the rationale 
for an attack in this time period, we go to CNN producer James martone. 
We're going to break out from this. CNN's coverage of this. The radar 
may have triggered an alert. The sirens sounded about 17 past the 
hour. We have no Pentagon confirmation of any U.S. air strike, but 
one is said to be iminnocent. All this going with the background of 
the U.N. security council meeting all day, trying to avert such a 
U.S. strike, which might be aided by British forces as well. But the 
U.S. is on a very high state of alert, and perhaps nerves in baghdad 
caused this to occur. Sirens, again, went off in Baghdad, but there 
is no confirmation of a U.S. air strike. All this because Iraq is 
refusing to cooperate with U.N. weapons inspectors. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>