<DOC>
<DOCNO> MNB19981216.2100.0457 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> CAPTION </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
With us tonight from Washington, Alexander haig who was secretary 
of state. We heard former secretary of state Lawrence eagleburger 
openly casting doubt ton president's timing here. Do you share those 
doubts? No, I don't think I would air them if I did. I think the thing 
for us to do now is to rally behind the action that is being taken 
and being sure we minimize the risks to our young pilots and seamen. 
The same question to general Schwarzkopf applies to you, what about 
an end game, an exit strategy. How does the president declare right 
now what our objective is? Well, I think this is the real problem. 
It's the crux of the problem. I think that's what Trent Lott was really 
hinting at today, not some insane fantasy. Our problem is, we have 
never had a true objective. Today that objective is to reduce the 
so-called weapons of mass destruction inventory of Saddam Hussein. 
That's nonsense. It will be back and he'll be back. Our objective 
should have been from the outset of the gulf war, the removal of Saddam 
Hussein. George bush could have done it quite simply. Now it's a lot 
more difficult. But until the president sets about that as his objective, 
then a lot of this military fanfare could be almost counterproductive. 
What we should do is have an objective that's designed to get rid 
of this fellow, to get rid of the so-called revolutionary guard which 
is his power base. To stir up trouble in the Shiites in the southeast 
and use the Kuwaitis to do it and do what we can up north with the 
Kurds along similar lines. With all due respect, Mr. secretary, let's 
go over what Mr. Trent Lott tonight. He said he will not support U.S. 
military strikes. "Both the timing and the policy are subject to question." 
"The U.S. has squandered too many opportunities in Iraq." He says 
he'll support future operations with "clearly defined objectives, 
among them the removal of Saddam Hussein from power." I think that's 
what I just said, Brian. That's precisely what he said. Most of the 
press has picked it up as being some kind of a mindless objective 
-- objection to what the president has done based on his opposition 
to the president. What he's raise suicide the question of our policy 
and the objectives of these strikes. And until we get a clear policy 
which is designed to bring an end to this crisis, we're going to continue 
to be plagued by it. And that's what we've been done -- we've been 
plagued by it since the gulf war. General Alexander haig, former secretary 
of state. Thank you very much for coming on the broadcast tonight. 
All right, Brian. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>