<DOC>
<DOCNO> MNB19981216.2100.0203 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> CAPTION </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Again, this is an extraordinary evening. U.S. forces are at it again 
in a familiar place. We're joined tonight from the state of Colorado 
by the man who held the modern daye quive leapt of the Eisenhower 
title during the gulf war. Supreme allied commander of the combined 
forces in 1991. General Schwarzkopf is with us tonight. He's an NBC 
news analyst. We'll get right to the point of the criticism of the 
president tonight. Quote from Dick Armey -- "I would like to think 
no American president would consider using the military to help him 
remain in office." It gets worse. Trent Lott is not supporting the 
attack. What do you have to say to those people? First thing, I feel 
strongly. Once the decision is made to commit U.S. forces, everyone 
needs to support it. We have our armed servicemen and women there 
and by golly when they're there in harm's way, everybody has to support 
them. If the decision had to be made to go, now's the best time to 
make it. Ramadan is coming on. It's a sensitive time for the Arab 
war. It would have been difficult to conduct the desert fox after 
Ramadan started. We have more forces concentrated in the gulf than 
we've had for a long time because one task force was coming in to 
replace the other up with. The forces are there and if you keep them 
for a long time it would cost a lot of money. So all the things together 
say if you decide to do the attack, now's the time to do it. Saddam 
Hussein has given a brief radio address tonight to say he's alive 
and well in an undisclosed location and B that the U.S. is guilty 
of course disby using long-range weapons to strike Iraq from offshore. 
I like to think we're smart by not risking the lives of our pilots. 
We have the capability of conducting precision strikes without putting 
our troops in harm's way. I'll glad we're doing it like that. I think 
we have a serious problem if we end up with pilots shot down on the 
ground as prisoners. That would put us in a tough position. Now, general, 
the same question you raised back in 1991 is going to reemerge hours 
from now. Some people are talking about it. That is an exit strategy. 
What should the goal this time? I think that Saddam, once again, is 
only interested in the sanctions. I think he could care less about 
the inspection program. He uses the inspection program in turning 
us on and off in order to get concessions to the security council 
with regard to lifting the sappingses. Once again, I think he's looking 
to get the sanctions lifted and he'll use this to find sympathy for 
his cause. Once the end game -- the end game has been the same and 
that's try to replace Saddam Hussein but I don't see it happening 
because of the strikes. There is no organized resistance well enough 
organized in the country to overthrow Saddam. If we're lucky enough 
for him to be replaced, it will be somebody who's as bad or worse. 
It's difficult to pick an end game and air strikes alone probably 
will not accomplish the total replacement of his government. What 
it will do, I hope, is to destroy those areas we have not been allowed 
to inspect and we inspect chemical and biological systems that are 
there. What does Iraq have these days by way of anti-aircraft defenses, 
radar, and an air force. They have not much of an air force. We could 
take that out quickly. They have a sophisticated air defense network. 
If we're going to -- we did the same thing in desert storm. It shouldn't 
come as any surprise. I don't think I'm releasing classified information. 
If we send pilots in aircraft in there, we would destroy the air defense 
network. What they're using against it now are the cruise missiles. 
They hit it, no one will get hurt or captured because of that. General 
Schwarzkopf, thank you for joining us tonight from Colorado. A lot 
of this must seem familiar to you as you look at the coverage of the 
night vision cameras over the skyline of Baghdad. Thank you. Thank 
you. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>