<DOC>
<DOCNO> MNB19981216.2100.2647 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> CAPTION </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
We are covering events halfway across the world where dawn is about 
to arrive in Baghdad. The traditional call to prayer having just been 
echoed throughout the city. An attack still under way by U.S. and 
some British forces on Iraq tonight. Though the skies looking mostly 
clear and free of the anti-aircraft fire we have seen tonight. We 
are joined by the president's biographer, David maraniss, a journalist 
with "The Washington Post." He's written widely believed to be the 
best and most thoroughly researched work on Bill Clinton's life. First 
in his class. David, this calls for a judgment, I don't mean it to, 
but as people have approached you tonight beginning with your interview 
with Tom Brokaw about an hour ago, when you are asked, do you think 
there is a -- a questionable component in the president's scheduling 
of this attack on a night like tonight? What's your answer? My answer 
is that it's an unfortunate but inevitable question to be asked and 
it will be asked every time he does something for the next two years. 
I think you have to keep in mind that these two extraordinary events, 
Iraq and impeachment have been sort of rolling down a highway together 
for eight months. So that at any point where they collide, people 
would have said it was Clinton's fault or that he did it on purpose. 
With President Clinton, it's almost always true that there's a measure 
of coincidence and a measure of planning involved. So I think it's 
somewhere in the middle. As David speaks, we're going to see some 
of it rewind on the air. It's being fed back in from Baghdad. Some 
of the first damage that the Iraqi minders have let the western camera 
crews shoot. We'll put that on the air as it comes to us. David, in 
your newest book, the -- "the Clinton enigma" you take the microcome 
to his speech to the nation in PrimeTime, you look throughout the 
speech and it's making for signs as to his personality. Well, what 
are the similar signs about what is taking place here tonight in Washington 
over the past 12 hours? Well, what you saw here is President Clinton's 
ability to operate in a parallel universe. In this case, it was a 
welcome distraction for him honestly and I'm not saying that to be 
flip to concentrate on something of this magnitude and seriousness. 
He was sort of floundering around dealing with impeachment an he didn't 
have a strategy. In this case, he can focus his intelligence and all 
his concentration on this issue. I have to correct something Bill 
Bennett said earlier. He was trying to make the point that the president 
was still lobbying on impeachment while he was dealing with this. 
In fact, the Christopher Shays appointment was canceled. That never 
was held. He implied it was. There was a speaker on censure briefly. 
The president has been able to focus. You're correct. We meant to 
point it out right now. Christopher Shays said he would not head down 
to the White House in light of the events. David maraniss author of 
"the first in his class "and "the president, the enigma." 
</TEXT>
</DOC>