<DOC>
<DOCNO> MNB19981216.2100.0761 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> CAPTION </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Let's go quickly to the Washington bureau chief of NBC news, moderator 
of "meet the press," Tim russert. You raised the point earlier on 
the broadcast with Tom Brokaw. Since you made your comments, four 
separate U.S. officials, cabinet or sub cabinet level have said now 
five times, hey, this was a unanimous vote by the president's national 
security team. They all happen to be employees of the commander in 
chief. Me think you doth protest too much. A group of defensive people 
but they're concerned, obviously Brian that the whole "wag the dog" 
syndrome will be applied to the president trying to avert attention. 
They've been encouraging the president to do this for some time. The 
fact that he chose to do it before the impeachment debate infuriates 
them. The next phase is critical. They want the president to go further 
than he's planning to go. They want him to eliminate Saddam Hussein 
and bomb him to a point where he's incapable of manufacturing biological, 
chemical, or nuclear weapons. That would be a long, sustained campaign 
and take more than air power. That's not in the cards. You mentioned 
some are reluctant to criticize the president now that U.S. forces 
are in play. One who is not, Gerald Solomon, "never underestimate 
a desperate president. What option is left for getting impeachment 
off the page and maybe even respond." I've been reading faxes criticizing 
the president's timing and the number is growing. Dick Armey, the 
number two man in the House of Representatives said the president 
should resign. Trent Lott, the leader of the republicans in the Senate. 
The list goes on and on and on. Clearly the republicans do not like 
the fact they were unable to vote for impeachment tomorrow. They believe 
the momentum now will slow down somewhat. They believe it was building 
to a point not only do they have the votes in Congress but the number 
of Americans who wanted the president to resign had reached 44% in 
several different polls. They expected it was going to break 50% in 
a matter of days and then there would be enormous pressure on Bill 
Clinton to step aside rather than bring the country through a long 
trial. The activity in Iraq people fear will slow down the momentum. 
Help the president get his sea legs. He'll be impeach in the house 
but the cry for resignation will not be as overwhelming as they were 
hoping. That's where Bob Livingston comes in. About the time, early 
evening when everyone in Washington thought it would all be postponed 
until Monday now could only be postponed until Friday. Presumably, 
you'd have U.S. servicemen and women in active duty, an active attack 
on the gulf on Friday and behind us here, under the dome, an impeachment 
proceeding in the house. Brian, the republican caucus was very, very 
hostile. Many members wanted to have the vote and debate tomorrow. 
They said this is simply not right. If the president can do his job 
as commander in chief, we can do ours as legislators. Let's get on 
with impeachment. They thought better of it. They didn't want to be 
accused of not being patriotic and not supporting the troops in harm's 
way. But the vote must take place in this year. Because if it is delayed 
until next year because of a long, sustained military campaign beyond 
January 6 of 1999, it would mean no impeachment. You would have to 
start all over again. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>