<DOC>
<DOCNO> MNB19981216.2100.3122 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> CAPTION </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
The United Nations security council, as we mentioned, gathering to 
meet at this hour. There is the representative from Iraq, a man about 
to be switched out after a few years of service in New York. His remarks 
earlier today certainly seemed to telegraph to a lot of people that 
he knew what was coming, some indication from the U.S. made him aware 
that this time, apparently, it was for real. Perhaps it is the timing, 
we've been talking about tonight and the critics have been accusing 
the Clinton White House all day long. Jeane kirkpatrick served as 
an ambassador under President Reagan. She's teaching here in town 
in Georgetown University. Democratic congresswoman Jane Harman of 
the state of California, a member of the house national security and 
intelligence committees. She attended a briefing with William Cohen 
and Asa Hutchinson as we talked to earlier. She joins us from the 
hill. Congresswoman, do you think secretary Cohen made an effective 
case, especially about timing and secondarily about the need for this 
attack? Yeah. You care to go beyond one word? Congresswoman Harman? 
yes? OK, do you feel that secretary Cohen did a good job in laying 
out the case for the administration why they did this and why they 
did it today? Yes, he did. And specifically he said that all of this 
stems from actions taken a month ago at a briefing that I attended 
where five conditions were laid down. And it was made clear that without 
warning the U.S. would act if those conditions were not met. UNSCOM 
went into -- this was prearranged. They went to Iraq at the beginning 
of the month, spent two weeks which started on the 14th. Prepared 
the report yesterday, the 15th and made it clear that Iraq failed 
to comply and that's why we're acting without warning on the 16th. 
The problem, congresswoman, people have been saying all day long that 
there will be 365 days when we're done with 1998. 364 of them were 
not the eve of an impeachment vote in the house. And here we are tonight 
talking about an attack on Iraq. Do you see the problem? I see the 
problem. But I was on air force one returning from Israel with the 
president and other members of Congress last night when the news became 
first known and I think the option is clear. The president as commander 
in chief needs to act. I would put it the other way. It's not that 
Iraq is interfering with Iraq, I think impeachment is interfering 
with Iraq and the other duties that the president is executing well 
in his role of the president of the United States. Ambassador kirkpatrick 
with us? I'm listening. I mistakenly put you at Georgetown University. 
i am. Not right now? You're in the Washington bureau, correct? We're 
splitting hairs. Ambassador, how do you feel about the debate, yes, 
it's the height of cynicism in the 1990's but has gone on all day 
and will go on all day about the timing of things in Iraq. Well, I 
mean the timing is peculiar. What's, I think that can't be denied. 
It was peculiar, in my judgment, that the president called off the 
attack in November, in fact. I was very surprised by that. Because 
everything was ready and everything was go, in fact. And so, I think 
many Le were shocked by it. And I think also it was peculiar that 
secretary of state and others sought to interfere with UNSCOM inspections 
earlier this year by calling Scott Ritter. That was peculiar. So I 
think the administration's policies on Iraq have been ambiguous. But 
what's not ambiguous is the continuing menace of Saddam Hussein. That's 
perfectly clear. And the fact that he is, not simply provocative, 
he provokes again and again and again. And so I think it's an entirely 
reasonable thing that the president should have decided to attack 
tonight. It's a -- it's a reasonable move. Congresswoman Harman, I 
know you disagreed with some of what ambassador kirkpatrick said about, 
and I don't want to put words in her mouth, about let's say helping 
along the process with Saddam Hussein. Well, let me say that, and 
I'm sure that the ambassador agrees with me, that weapons of mass 
destruction are the largest national security threat in the world 
now and Saddam Hussein has used these weapons against his neighbors 
so this is probably the most dangerous leader of any country in the 
world. And I agree with her that we had enough evidence to act in 
November. The president did not act because he received this letter 
from Saddam Hussein that said he would fully and completely comply. 
That's why he did not act because he was worried about civilian casualties. 
Now there are no excuses and it was the unanimous recommendation of 
the whole national security team. And general Shelton, the chairman 
of the joint chiefs and the secretary of defense, Cohen and the head 
of the C.I.A. are briefing Congress. There are 350 members on the 
floor of Congress. It's a serious, classified briefing. It's clear 
to me, I just left it, this is a substantial attack on military targets 
and we intend to not just send a message, but we intend to do what 
we can to eliminate the threat posed by Saddam Hussein. Ambassador 
kirkpatrick, how does the United States get out? What should the exit 
strategy be this time? Look, I think more important than the exit 
strategy is what they should do while they're there. And what they 
should do is maximum damage to the -- all those installations that 
we have reason to believe are involved in the production of weapons 
of mass destruction. I think it's very important that we do real damage, 
not just simply pin prick stuff. And I think if we do real damage, 
then, you know, the rate would have justified itself, in fact. I believe 
that our exit strategy will come simply from a decision by the president, 
which is communicated and may surprise some of us as the decision 
to attack tonight also surprised some of us. Ambassador kirkpatrick, 
congresswoman, I thank you both for coming on. And congresswoman Harman, 
I don't know if you have to go back into the briefing, but thank you 
for telling us what you could about what went on tonight in the chamber. 
I appreciate your time, both of you. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>