<DOC>
<DOCNO> MNB19981216.2100.1794 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> CAPTION </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
As we look at a live picture of the Baghdad skyline, our coverage, 
our NBC news coverage continues from Capitol Hill in Washington tonight. 
An extraordinary turn of events. What was to be the eve of the impeachment 
proceeding in the full house has tonight turned into our hour after 
hour coverage of an attack on Iraq by the United States and Great 
Britain combined forces. Most of it cruise missiles from hundreds 
of miles away. We're joined this evening by former education secretary 
and most recently author of the the book "the death of outrage William 
Bennett. Sir, you heard the criticism of the president today. You 
heard, perhaps, some very defensive cabinet and sub cabinet-level 
officials saying, look, this was a unanimous choice of the president's 
national security team. We had no choice but to launch it tonight. 
How do you feel about this? The great power of presidents as you see, 
they can change the subjects if they want to. It's been said that 
presidents don't determine what people will think, but they can determine 
what people will talk about. And the president has done that tonight. 
I think the bombing was justified, but I think the questioning of 
the timing of it is also justified. I don't know if the president 
deserves the criticism, the direct criticism that he did this to save 
his skin, but he certainly has earned the suspicion. I mean, a public 
career such as he has had and we've seen documented of lying, misrepresentation, 
he cannot be shock. His allies, his aides cannot be shocked that people 
call his motives into question. This is a man who has made a career 
of misrepresenting, lying, and not coming clean with the American 
people. It's very hard for any of us who instinctively support the 
president of the United States when ever we're engaged in force of 
arms against sworn enemies overseas. And I support this decision. 
But you cannot -- you cannot say it's unreasonable for people to question 
the timing. There were reasons to do this for many weeks. And the 
choice of today does raise that question. I'll let others do that. 
Impeachment has not been canceled, it's been delayed. Well, having 
said that, let's come back around this another way. Will you be surprised 
perhaps to read in someone's memoirs two decades from now that we 
had a choice apparently in attack times and we chose the night before 
the impeachment proceedings in the house for a reason other than military? 
No, I wouldn't be surprised to read that at all or to believe it. 
I heard Larry eagleburger, former secretary of state Lawrence eagleburger 
say just a few hours ago say this decision smells to high heaven. 
Lawrence eagleburger is no right-wing Fe fanatic to get Bill Clinton. 
He's a measured guy. No, I wouldn't be surprised to read that. Look, 
I'm for bombing Saddam. I just hope we have a strategy that works 
that is consistent that works over time, that isn't just one shot 
or a shot for a couple of days or a shot long enough to, you know, 
regroup. So I'm for the bombing. But I'm also for impeachment. One 
irony I would point out is while the Congress was told to put his 
action on hold and all the American people were told they had to wait 
on the impeachment issue, apparently the president's lobbying did 
not stop. If we're on the state of crisis or close to it, why did 
he continue lobbying, Christopher Shays, republican. He's going on 
a campaign to save his skin. By the way, Larry eagleburger went a 
step further tonight and the secretary said, that, of course, in his 
view, politics played a part, was a component in the president's decision. 
Is it the height of cynicism in the 1990's that we are discussing 
this at all that? That anyone doubts the purity of a president's moment 
when committing troops in action militarily? There's a kind of cynicism 
about public figures generally. What's called the aha theory. The 
assumption that the true motive is the worst motiv the lowest motive. 
The problem with Bill Clinton is he's made a public career of making 
that true. He gives reality to cynicism. He makes the people who are 
cynical about politics seem trustworthy and reliable. That's why some 
of us feel so strongly about the example he sets for another generation. 
If you tell kids don't be cynical, a lot of people in politics are 
really honorable, they really are decent. They really do try to tell 
the truth, it's this very palpable example of the president, sad to 
say, sorry to say, that makes them question him. William Bennett has 
often been candidly alone in some of his viewpoints on President Clinton. 
Tonight he's far from it. He has the company of Trent Lott who is 
not supporting the latest strike on Iraq. William Bennett, the author 
of "the death of outrage." Thank you for coming on the air with us. 
Thank you, sir. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>