<DOC>
<DOCNO> MNB19981216.2100.0986 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> CAPTION </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
As we speak, we're going to open up our microphone on the roof at 
the ministry of information in Baghdad. We're seeing another volley 
of anti-aircraft fire or U.S. incoming fire. Let's listen. Up there. 
Hello? There's the morning prayers are beginning. This is Kevin Tibbles 
in Baghdad. There's just been a tremendous, tremendous amount of firepower 
come in here. It's coming in around the ministry of information at 
the same time that the morning prayers are beginning at the mosque 
just down the street. I believe I have just lost I.F.B. Kevin, are 
we to believe it is incoming U.S. or outgoing anti-aircraft fire from 
the Iraqi position on the roof where you are? I think what I can say 
at this point is that these thuds that have hit here now in this neighborhood 
are a lot louder than the thuds coming off the roof of this building. 
So I'm suspecting that something has come into this neighborhood. 
It's been theorized, Kevin, that some drones or other aircraft were 
sent over Baghdad, especially in the first few volleys of the attack 
to do two things, to get the Iraqis to fire off some of their anti-aircraft, 
and to light up their radar installations so the Americans could come 
in either with bombers or cruise missiles and find them S. that what 
you were watching in the early hour of this? Well, I think, Brian, 
if the experts that we've been listening to are correct, I think that's 
what we've been looking at several hours ago when the first air raid 
sirens started to go off here in Baghdad. Since that time we know 
a number of sites have been hit by cruise missiles and a number of 
those sites have been burning. What's happened here in the last few 
minutes I can't tell you what it is or what has been hit. But these 
sorts of waves have been going on for four or five hours. I guess 
I've sort of lost track myself. It seeps to come in waves of about 
every half an hour coming to a different part of Baghdad each time. 
The Pentagon is telling us that evidently the first volley contained 
about 200 cruise missiles. In a day of strange confluences, here's 
another. The traditional morning call to prayer before sunup even 
in Baghdad accompanied by the sound of triple-A anti-aircraft artillery 
in the background. Kevin Tibbles is at the ministry of information 
on one side of Baghdad. On the other side, at the Al Rashid hotel, 
a place that came to prominence during the gulf war is NBC news correspondent 
donatella lorch who joins us by telephone. What are you seeing over 
there? You said half the city had been blacked out. Well, half of 
what we can see right now, Brian, I'm staring due west at 180 degrees 
of the city I can basically see. And a good portion of that was blacked 
out. It's not clear whether it was blacked out because of the missile 
attacks or whether it was blacked out because of the standard electricity 
shortages that exist over here. Just until about a few minutes ago, 
there was very, very heavy triple-A fire out here. You were talking 
earlier about dropes. And what we saw from here was some very low-flying 
sort of like -- it looked like a missile, but I suspect it couldn't 
have been a missile. It was very low flying. It went for about two 
miles, the entire length of the horizon before I could hear an explosion 
out of sight. Now tonight, Brian, we have seen, I have seen two major 
explosions due west two miles from the hotel and another explosion 
in an area where there is a major presidential palace, Brian? We have 
had confirmation that at least one of the major palaces, and American 
viewers with any familiarity with the situation in Baghdad and Iraq 
generally know that Saddam Hussein has many, many palaces there. Their 
use has been questioned. They have almost to a building been inspected 
by the arms inspectors. One as many as two of them suffered serious 
damage tonight. At leastne had the front gate blown apart that we 
know of in what was the first volley of fire. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>