<DOC>
<DOCNO> MNB19981216.2100.2907 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> CAPTION </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
The Reverend Jesse Jackson was here with us in our studios earlier 
this afternoon. Reverend Jackson, you told us about your plans for 
a press conference this afternoon. Tell our viewers what the subject 
was? I support the president very much in his quest for censorship 
rather than impeachment. His lack of Candor, the error of his ways 
have not come up to the level of impeachable offense. For the Congress 
in a bipartisan -- a partisan way, a Lame duck Congress removing Bill 
Clinton makes us vulnerable economically and militarily. That could 
be a factor in what we're looking at to want. Tomorrow from 10:00 
to 2:00, there will be a vigil on the steps of the capitol appealing 
to God for mercy and our congressmen for some sense of a proportional 
-- some sense of proportional judgment. We shall make the appeal and 
hope Mr. Clinton will maintain the fight and presidency and keep our 
nation going. We'll have the vigil tomorrow from 10:00 to 2:00 and 
around the count . You see the critics that have come out today and 
they are being bold about saying not only was politics a component 
in the president's attack on Iraq, some are saying it's why he did 
it. To somehow postpone the impeachment process and improve his chances. 
So if you believe that, you have to then believe that that girl we 
just saw in the emergency Ward was wounded in part because of domestic 
political concerns of the American president. I think one can question 
the timing without questioning his integrity, questioning his intent. 
For while the timing may be suspicious, the threat to the Kurds is 
real. The threat to Kuwait is real. The need for some resolution with 
the U.N. inspectors to end these, the weapons build-up, is also real. 
And I te you what -- on the one hand, I'm concerned about the human 
collateral damage. It concerns me deeply. But also we must support 
our troops as well. So we're in a dilemma here. We can just hope this 
matter ends quickly. I think that throwing our suggestions of his 
motives in that way is not helpful. You say the threat to Kuwait is 
real. Do you really believe present day Iraq exists as a threat to 
Kuwait? Well, we do know not long ago Saddam Hussein was in Kuwait. 
I was there. Brought out 500 Americans and British citizens who were 
captive there. That was real. The bombing of the Kurds is real. I 
would have thought by now that if there had been some resolution with 
the U.N. inspectors that did not happen. On the one hand, those who 
would suspect Mr. Clinton's motives in terms of timing. On the other 
hand, because there was such a furious debate about removing Mr. Clinton, 
the attempt to do so, that should have made Mr. Hussein more -- more 
willing to run the risk of running out U.N. inspectors. So we at least 
need to have some time between the subtleness of this arriving at 
a judgment in the coming days ahead. Reverend Jesse Jackson who has 
shared with us tonight his plans to go ahead with a vigil pushing 
for censure, pushing against impeachment for this president. Reverend 
Jackson, thank you very much for coming in to talk to us tonight. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>