<DOC>
<DOCNO> NBC19981216.1830.1469 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> CAPTION </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
We continue with this special edition of "NBC nightly news". We go 
Charleston, West Virginia where Henry Kissinger has been making an 
appearance lately. Dr. Kissinger, a lot of people have been talking 
about having some kind of end game strategy. It's not enough to punish 
Saddam Hussein. It's what happens next. It is critical once the bombing 
stops? I think it's important, but shouldn't be used as an excuse 
not to support the bombing. I think the president has done the right 
thing. I hope he will carry it now through to its conclusion, and 
the conclusion has to be either a return of the inspection system 
or preferably the overthrow of Saddam. How in the world do you overthrow 
Saddam Hussein, who seems to control every grain of sand in the desert 
kingdom? Well, I believe that his control is based on the republican 
division. If we attack the republican divisions, his power to control 
the country will diminish. We're talking about a considerable expansion 
of American military presence in that part of the world. Well, I don't 
know whether the administration has put enough force in there, but 
it has always seemed to me that if we attack, we must dismantle the 
support system of Saddam, and I think we can probably do it with the 
present forces. But I'm no expert on that. No one knows better than 
you what it's like to conduct foreign policy when there's deep bitter 
political division in the land. Are you surprised by the reaction 
of some of your republican friends tonight on Capitol Hill? Well, 
I noticed that senator McCain had supported it, and I would call on 
my republican friends that when America is undertaking military action, 
it is not a time to argue about its merits. Senator Henry -- former 
secretary of state Henry Kissinger tonight. I almost elected you to 
the Senate. That's giving your political skills in the past, you said 
that will not happen any time soon. Thanks very much for being with 
us tonight. Pleasure to be here. Let's go to Kevin Tibbles now in 
Baghdad. Kevin? Tom, for several minutes now, we've heard loud thuds 
across baghdad. We have not seen any impacts as of yet. The anti-aircraft 
guns have fallen silent, but the first reports of damage are starting 
to come in. I must advise you this report is coming from the Iraqi 
news agency. This is the government news agency here, and the Iraqis 
are claiming in a Suburb of Baghdad a building was hit by a cruise 
missile and the Iraqis are claiming this was an apartment building, 
a place of residence for Iraqis who live here in Baghdad and not a 
military site. Again, I tell you this is coming from the Iraqi news 
agency this evening. We have heard reports of fires throughout Baghdad. 
We have also heard many of Saddam Hussein's palaces are in the Baghdad 
region. I must say he has dozens of them across the country and those, 
too, have been hit. tom? Are they on Iraqi television or radio broadcasting 
to the nation, Kevin now? No, as far as I know, they are not, Tom. 
This information is coming to me. I'm speaking to you at the moment 
from the roof of the Iraqi press center. It is the official Iraqi 
news agency that has released a statement, vis-A-vis, the apartment 
building I referred to. Again, the Iraqis were told around 9:00 on 
the evening television news. The television doesn't even come on until 
about 6:00 P.M. on the plain evening news with pictures of President 
Saddam Hussein and his council. The people here were warned there 
may be an imminent military strike from the United States, which, 
of course, has now arrived. And that people were told to be vigilant. 
They were also told that the Butler report was a lie, and they were 
shown video pictures of Saddam Hussein's personal suicide squads who 
presumably are training to protect Saddam Hussein at this point in 
time. Of course no one knows where he is. It's assumed he is not in 
Baghdad. It's probably also assumed he is not in his hometown of tikrit, 
and wherever he is, he is in hiding at this moment, Tom. I would think 
that would be the prudent thing for Saddam Hussein to do very very 
least. The power is still on there, all the electrical facilities 
seem to be working. You are able to continue your broadcast. Absolutely. 
I mean, the traffic lights even behind me are still on, although at 
this point, there aren't any cars on the street. We saw many people 
running for cover earlier this evening. We saw a lot of people just 
trying to flag down any sort of vehicle coming down the road, trying 
to come home. Now it's clear people have taken the message seriously 
and are staying indoors. Mind you, it is coming up on 3:00 in the 
morning as well. You would think if they are experiencing the kind 
of attack the president and secretary of defense outlined, that maybe 
the worst is yet to come because the streets would probably be filled 
with rescue equipment and ambulances of all kinds at this hour, and 
you'd hear a lot more. Well, I think you're absolutely right. We have 
seen a number of ambulances going up and down the street here in front 
of the press center, but again, I believe the people here feel the 
worst is going to come, Tom. Thank you very much. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>