<DOC>
<DOCNO> NBC19981216.1830.0901 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> CAPTION </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
We continue with this special edition of "NBC nightly news," operation 
desert fox is under way in the skies over Baghdad and on the ground, 
although at the moment out of the range of our cameras. Iraqi skys 
have been filled with anti-aircraft fire, but so far we have not been 
able to see any major missile or bomb attacks on facilities around 
the center of the capital. There are reports both from the Pentagon 
and people in Baghdad that the targets in outlying areas. We think 
mostly leadership facilities P that's another way of saying Saddam 
hussein's palaces and other places he may use, that they have been 
hit and hit hard. We expect this attack will go on for sometime. The 
president addressed the nation a little more than a half hour ago 
now. There are continuing questions in Washington about the timing 
of the attack. He said it was Richard Butler's report at the U.N. 
last night in which saddam Hussein closed down access to U.N. weapons 
inspector99 inspectors that prompted him to make at tack. The administration 
had been on the record of saying when all of this came up in early 
November that if he didn't cooperate one more time, they would pull 
the trigger. Tonight they have. That means that the impeachment debate 
probably will be delayed now for at least two days, possibly into 
Monday of next week. NBC's Claire Shipman is the at the White House 
now. Claire, what are the plans fort president for the rest of the 
evening? He will continue to meet with hooiz his security advisers, 
monitor the situation. I think one important point came out of his 
statement, Tom, and that is this really does effectively in the minds 
of many U.S. officials, Mark the end of the inspections regime. Really 
what the heard the president outlying was a policy of military containment. 
Some of the U.S. members of the UNSCOM team we talked to tonight say 
they think this action was justified but the United States is going 
to have to decide what, at the end of this period of bombing whether 
it's two, three, four, five days, they want fra Saddam Hussein. At 
this point, it may be just military containment. I thought the other 
interesting thing you heard and advisers are still talking about the 
political ramifications of all of this, but you heard a Clear justification 
from the president as to why he felt he had to act now, and also a 
warning to Saddam Hussein not to think that the president is at all 
weakened because of his domestic situation here at home. Those were 
two very important points advisers say, that the president wanted 
very much to make. Thank you very much, Claire Shipman at the White 
House. I now have the letter from Trent Lott and other leaders from 
the Senate, including Jesse helm, who has supported the president 
in his actions tonight, calling for actions to remove Saddam Hussein 
from power, including the indictmentment of him as a war criminal. 
First, let's hear now from the president of the United States as I 
addressed the nation from the oval office shortly after 6:00 eastern 
time tonight. I have ordered a strong, sustained series of air strikes 
zens Iraq. They are designed to degrade Saddam's capacity to develop 
and deliver weapons of mass destruction and to degrade his ability 
to threaten his neighbor99 neighbors. At the same time, we are delivering 
a powerful message to Saddam. If you act recklessly, you will pay 
a heavy price. The president of the United States tonight in the oval 
office. His only reference to the timing of all of this with the impeachment 
proceedings scheduled to begin tomorrow, came at the very end when 
he said saddam Hussein and others may have believed that the United 
States would not have the resolve to use its power because of the 
serious issues, as I remember he described them, that are before the 
Congress and the political community in this country. He said, they 
should not believe we will not have that resolved. Tim russert is 
the moderator of "meet the press," and he's been monitoring all of 
the political developments dl. Tim, earlier today, the republicans 
were stunned, and I think it's fair to say, angry and furious, but 
more ever them now seem to be coming to some middle ground on all 
of this because they know the perils for them politically if when 
American young men and women under harm's way and they are critical 
of the president. They have been urge, this president, Tom, to be 
more forceful on Saddam hussein. They can't be on the wrong side of 
that issue. One point, swis he said, I have the unanimous support 
of my foreign policy national security team. He kept trying to underscore 
that with the American people. A little defensive even suggesting 
this was just not a politically kpeed yent move opinion on the issue 
of inspectors, Tom, many republicans told Ne me this is critical. 
As you know, the inspectors from the U.N. have found a lot more of 
the chemical and biological weapons than were destroyed during the 
gulf war. They have been extremely, extremely successful in that regard. 
In August this administration downplayed and even limited the amount 
of inspections that could be undertaken by the United Nations inspector, 
and that caused Scott Ritter, our consultant to resign. Republicans 
now want to know tonight, after this bombing ends what happens? If 
Saddam keeps rebuilding his chemical and biological weapons supplies, 
how will we take him out? It can't be done from the air. More has 
to be done on the ground. T. if there's no inspectors, what have the 
recourse? We can destroy his delivery system, but we're not sure we 
can inhibit him from creating and making more of those weapons. Thank 
you very much as we continue to look at live pictures of Baghdad on 
any other night. That would seem to be just a hauntingly beautiful 
picture from a major Arab capital, but there are major air strikes 
going on against Iraq on the perimeter of Baghdad and closer in as 
well, so far, not in the center of the city. None of the dramatic 
strikes we remember vividly from the Persian gulf war. There are still 
several days to come with those kinds of strikes. NBC's consultant, 
Scott Ritter, joins us now. Scott riter is someone who did, in fact, 
resign from the U.N. inspections team. What before that, Scott Ritter. 
There will not be any more weapons inspections after this attack. 
Well, there has to be an end game, and this is one of the things that 
the clinton administration needs to resolve, you know, once the air 
strikes are done. How will this end? Legally speaking, sanctions cannot 
be lifted until the special commission issued a positive report to 
the security council on Iraq's disarmament. That means they have to 
get back into Iraq. What is the United States say big launching air 
strikes? If they've given up on the inspection regime, we're talking 
about either containment and perpetuity, which I think is unreasonable, 
or we're talking about some sort of action, which will lead to the 
removal of Saddam hussein, and that plan has not been set forth in 
any meaningful fashion so i think there's a lot of explanation due 
to the American people on what is the end game. Thank you very much, 
Scott Ritter, who was once a member of the U.N. weapons inspection 
team and resigned in protest. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>