<DOC>
<DOCNO> NBC19981216.1830.0029 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> CAPTION </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Good evening, everyone. For those of you who normally join "Nightly 
News" at this hour this is a Special edition. You're looking at NBC's 
Kevin Tibbles on a rooftop in Baghdad where operation desert fox is 
under way. Which President Clinton tonight described as a strong series 
of air attacks against leadership facilities belonging to Saddam Hussein. 
It was a surprise attack, that stunned the Washington community that 
was poised to begin impeachment debates against the president tomorrow 
and the House of Representatives. Obviously, those debates now have 
been postponed or will be officially. This is anti-aircraft fire over 
the city of Baghdad. You're watching live coverage on "NBC nightly 
news". President addressed the nation about 15 minutes ago, saying 
he launched this attack on the add vigs of his military advisers. 
He said Saddam Hussein had effectively disarmed U.N. weapons inspectors, 
and he presented a clear and present danger. Not just to his neighbors, 
but to the entire world. NBC's Kevin Tibbles. Kevin, what are you 
seeing? Tom, it's happening all around me. There's ak kak, anti-aircraft 
fire coming, along with the adjoining buildings here. It's been going 
off for a couple ofes here. Now it's quieting down. Throughout the 
evening, as you know, we have had similar circumstances. We have knowledge 
that there are fires burning in parts of Baghdad this evening. We 
understand that some sites, perhaps sensitive sites, according to 
the U.S. military, have been hit here. So far, I can tell new downtown 
Baghdad we have not seen any buildings hit as of yet. But I can tell 
you that there is a tremendous amount of anti-aircraft fire going 
on all around me here, Tom. You have seen no cruise missiles in your 
immediate vicinity incoming? No, we have not. We only have knowledge 
that there are fires burning in bag dpad, but we have not seen any 
cruise missiles visibly coming in. There's a lot of panic on the streets 
now around me here, Tom. Kevin, we were told by general Shelton that 
B-52s were involved as well and all of the aircraft off the "USS enterprise" 
so there are a wide array of weapons being used in these facilities. 
NBC's donatella lurch, are you there as well? Yes, I'm here, Tom. 
I'm at the hotel in a window facing due west. Just a little while 
ago, very heavy anti-aircraft fire. Huge explosion, I gas mile and 
a half west of the hotel, lit up the sky. Incredible red inferno. 
It is now an enormous plume of white smoke. Tom, it's in an area of 
town that about 25 minutes ago, went totally dark. Now, I don't know 
whether that means that we hit an electricity center or whether it's 
sending electrical lows here. Every neighborhood goes off about two 
hours a day. It's not clear what the situation is. It's quieted down 
quite a bit. You can see smoke in two or three areas here. tom? Kevin 
Tibbles, briefly now, are they on Iraqi television at all tonight 
telling the people of Iraq what's under way there? As far as I know, 
no. That's the answer to that question, Tom. I know on the main evening 
bulletin that went on tonight, the president saddam Hussein with his 
military command council appeared on that, and that was when the Iraqi 
people perhaps first were given an inclination that this thing would 
happen this weekend. We have seen people on the streets, many people 
perhaps even unaware this was coming. I can tell you now since the 
message went out, a long with, I must say, there were a number of 
soldiers, which we would reforeas Saddam's perhaps private suicide 
brigade, were also shown on television tonight. Perhaps the Iraqis 
flexing muscles, knowing what was coming down the pike towards them, 
Tom. Kevin Tibbles and donatella lorch in Baghdad, where it's past 
2:30 in the morning. We ask you to stay out of harm's way and continue 
to report on what you are seeing there. NBC's Jim Miklaszewski is 
at the Pentagon where a briefing still is under way. Chairman of the 
joint chiefs of staff, general Henry Shelton, and William cohen from 
main Maine have been briefing the press there, and have been saying 
effectively, what the president said, that the time had come to go 
after Saddam Hussein again because he blatantly and openly violated 
the resolution and agreements had he in terms of letting U.N. weapons 
inspections have access to their sites. Jim, Bill Cohen said he will 
be sending additional ground troops to that region as well. What does 
that mean? Well, the ground troops will be sent into Kuwait. It's 
pretty much to pacify any fears the Kuwaitis may have, just in case 
the Iraqis decide to lash out militarily. Nobody thinks that will 
happen, but the last thing any military commander wants is not to 
cover all its bases. So that's the reason for the additional ground 
troops in the area. But they are also sending in more than 100 additional 
aircraft, F-117 stealth fighters additional B-1 bombers, F-14s, F-16s. 
The aircraft carrier "ent tries prize" will be sent in to double the 
number of cruise missile capable ships in the mission. When this aircraft 
carrier group arrives this weekend. And what we're hearing from general 
Shelton, from secretary Cohen, from President Clinton, is that what 
we're seeing here tonight is only the beginning, and a very small 
beginning, of what the president described as strong, sustained series 
of air strikes. And while the president sort of indicated it would 
go on for several days, secretary Cohen when asked specifically, how 
long this would -- the air strikes would continue, he said and indicated 
it was open ended, could continue well beyond several days if it's 
decided that these air strikes have not achieved their targets. That 
is primarily according to the secretary Cohen and general Shelton 
tonight. Primarily, Saddam Hussein's ability to threaten his neighbors 
with weapons of misdestruction. That means not only chemical and biological 
weapon sites but any delivery sites. Airstrips for example. Airplanes 
can drop a chemical or biological bomb. Many missile production sites 
and there is one in particular on which we've reported before on "NBC 
nightly news," there was a prime target of the military planners here 
at the Pentagon. So I guess we're gonna have to dig in for the long 
hall for several more days and beyand that. If I may make one more 
point, you know, the president indicated in his remarks that we must 
be prepared to use action again, and he talked about a Policy of containment. 
The record he left out there, Tom, was policy of military containment. 
Since this air strike tonight will probably Mark the end of any effective 
future U.N. weapons inspections, it will probably be up to the U.S. 
now to provide some sort of long term military supervision or containment. 
So when I say the long haul, I mean the long haul. Jim Miklaszewski, 
thank you very much. We're told now that U.N. secretary-general Kofi 
Annan will make a statement in five minutes. We want to go to Houston, 
however. A man who knows that world, James Baker, who was president 
bush's diplomatic point man during "operation desert storm," all the 
negotiations leading up to that war and of course served as White 
House chief of staff for Ronald Reagan. Mr. Baker, a number of members 
of your party, the republican party, you are saying tonight are suss 
spibs spirbs of the timing of all this. Trent Lott says he cannot 
support the action. Larry eagleberger, a colleague of yours, says 
it smells. What's your assessment of the timing? I think there probably 
was some imperative with respect to speed here. The last couple of 
times Saddam has stuck his finger in our eye, we've didleed around. 
There's been one diplomatic or political solution tried after another. 
He said he would back down, then he didn't. Here we are again. It 
seems to me we probably had to act. This is the right thing, I think 
for the United States to do. You can question the timing, I suppose. 
Did we have to do it this afternoon? I don't know, but I think there 
was some imperative for speed, and I happen to believe, Tom, that 
nobody could be so craven as to risk the lives of our military men 
and women to cover their political backsides, so I don't think that 
was the reason we did it and did it now. I think the action we're 
taking substantive is the right thing to do. Mr. Baker, as senators, 
Lott, Helms, abd and Lugar all in the national security policy area 
have written a letter to the president tonight telling him to implement 
a serious policy to remove Saddam Hussein from power. That's easier 
said than done, isn't it? Considerably easier said than done. In fact, 
the only way I know you can successfully do that, Tom, would be to 
march on Baghdad and occupy the country be, something we decided back 
in 1991, we definitely were not going to do for a whole host of very 
good reasons. And something that I am confident the you'd with is 
not prepared to do. I don't know any other way you can be certain 
to remove Saddam Hussein from power. Thank you very much, James Baker 
tonight in Houston Texas. Former secretary of state in the bush administration, 
and also White House chief of staff under Ronald Reagan. He has a 
long and impressive resume. NBC's Gwen Ifill is on Capitol Hill. Gwen, 
any late official decision what's going to happen to the impeachment 
debate? Secretary Cohen is supposed to come here within the thundershower 
brief members on the house chamber floor. Right now, even as we speak, 
republican members are behind closed doors trying to died what to 
did he. The choices now are between reconvening on Saturday and taking 
up the same impeachment articles and coming back Monday and doing 
it. They have been unhappy all day about the timing of this. They 
have expressed questions about whether the question decided to launch 
the attack as a way of avoiding the impeach impeachment inquiry. Trent 
Lott went as far as to say he didn't support this and thought the 
timing was all wrong. Other republican leaders and democratic leaders 
ranging from Jesse Helms to senator Tom Daschle support the president's 
action. They think the timing is right. There's even been another 
letter sent to the president which senator Lott signed which says 
they support the action but think it should be about getting Saddam 
Hussein out of power. The whole question backs whether anything that 
happened today will change what the full house is supposed to do. 
As you know they were supposed to start, Tom, tomorrow morning at 
10:00, debate for 24 hours and start voting on Friday. We both made 
reference to the letter Trent Lott signed. Does that mean he's abandoned 
his earlier position that he cannot support this military action with 
Jesse Helms, who is saying does he think it's important to support 
it? Did Trent Lott speak prematurely? I don't think so because he's 
saying one and the same thing. He's saying he didn't support this, 
but he says he doesn't support it because he doesn't think it will 
take Saddam out. It will be good to see as more and more people come 
out and say they support the president whether Trent Lott has gotten 
ahead of his own party. Thanks very much, Gwen Ifill. It is a chaotic 
situation. None of us can remember the confluence of these kinds of 
events in which you have a major military action ordered by the president 
of the United States, on the eve of being put, in effect, in the dock 
of the United States house of representative and subjected to articles 
of impeachment just 15 hours later. We'll be continuing our NBC news 
special edition of "NBC nightly news" coverage of all of this right 
after this. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>