<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981216.0527 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
It became startlingly clear Wednesday how much the long months of 
evasion and legalisms, how much his enemies' unceasing denunciations 
of him as a liar, have cost Bill Clinton and the nation. Gripped by 
crisis on two fronts, in Congress and the Middle East, the president 
came face to face with the stinging reality that his credibility is 
crumbling, especially but not exclusively among Republicans on Capitol 
Hill. Some sober, experienced leaders no longer take him at his word. 
It is a situation he must remedy, and quickly, but it is not clear 
he can do so. On a day of truly explosive drama in this politically 
punch-drunk capital, two of the long-running conflicts of these final 
years of the old millennium collided with a bang: the Western allies' 
struggle to contain and disarm resilient President Saddam Hussein 
of Iraq, and Clinton's struggle to govern effectively in the face 
of the assaults of his political foes. Sen. Trent Lott, R-Miss., the 
majority leader, went so far as to publicly question Clinton's motives 
in ordering attacks on Iraq _ a violation of Washington's long-standing 
political code. You don't criticize the president, that code says, 
when U.S. forces stand in harm's way. Norman Schwarzkopf, the retired 
general who commanded U.S. troops in the Gulf War, joined prominent 
Democrats in firing back. He said on NBC, ``By golly, troops are committed, 
and we can't have people second-guessing the way they did in Vietnam.'' 
Some Republicans were a bit more cautious. The incoming House speaker, 
Rep. Bob Livingston of Louisiana, said he would leave questions of 
presidential motive and timing to the American people. But he pointedly 
said several times that he supported ``the troops,'' without saying 
he supported the president. This was the climax, in a way, of years 
of deterioration in this city's political civility. The habit of refusing 
to give one's adversaries the benefit of the doubt, of viewing them 
as enemies rather than opponents, increasingly ingrained in the congressional 
culture, has now seized a beachhead in foreign-policy debate. As the 
hours passed, on the eve of the scheduled start of the House's first 
impeachment debate in 130 years, one previously uncommitted Republican 
after another announced plans to vote against the president. With 
Clinton's strategy of courting the moderates in ruin, gloom enveloped 
the White House, and a top Clinton strategist said, ``It's time to 
think about the Senate and the trial.'' A trial would follow a House 
vote to impeach the president. Rep. John Porter, R-Ill., who had announced 
plans to vote against impeachment, switched sides, and he was joined 
on the anti-Clinton list by Rep. Jim Leach, R-Iowa. Exaggerating only 
slightly, a White House aide said, ``If we can't get Leach, we can't 
get anybody.'' But even as he was speaking, missiles were being readied 
for launch against Baghdad. When they struck, and when Clinton made 
a broadcast justifying his decision to order ``a strong, sustained 
series of air strikes'' against Iraq, the Washington political establishment 
might have been expected to rally behind him. Some spoke out in support, 
but there was harsh criticism as well, tinged with the suspicion that 
this was just a ploy to buy time on Capitol Hill. It was not so much 
the words but the men who spoke them that rattled the president's 
inner circle. Rep. Tom DeLay, R-Texas, who has been the prime mover 
behind impeachment, declared on a television show last Sunday that 
he did not believe anything Clinton said. A few heads snapped back. 
But DeLay is one of the most partisan and most ideological of the 
House Republicans, a bit of an outsider, so allowances were made. 
But Lott and Rep. Gerald Solomon, R-N.Y., the House Rules Committee 
chairman, are major establishment figures. When they expressed doubts 
about the president's policy itself and about its timing, in full 
knowledge that the decision to attack had been made, the Washington 
political community was astonished. Then, not long after the first 
missile strikes, Lawrence Eagleburger, a career foreign service officer 
and former secretary of state, said on CNN that he understood why 
attacks had to be made eventually but thought the timing ``smells 
to high heaven.'' Lott all but said he did not believe the administration 
officials who briefed him. Despite their assurances that impeachment 
had nothing to do with the decision to attack, he declared in a statement, 
``Both the timing and the policy are subject to question.'' Solomon 
said, ``Never underestimate a desperate president.'' It was not clear 
how long the attacks on Iraq would continue. Both Defense Secretary 
William Cohen and National Security Adviser Sandy Berger declined 
to answer the question Wednesday night, and Clinton himself said only 
that it would have been a mistake to begin the bombing campaign during 
the Islamic holy month, Ramadan, which begins this weekend. He did 
not say it could not continue during Ramadan. If the bombing lasts 
for only three or four days, Clinton will be accused of making an 
empty gesture; during the Gulf War, weeks of attacks were required 
to make limited gains. If it lasts indefinitely, Clinton will be accused 
of trying to delay the impeachment vote as long as he can. Buying 
time might be the president's best hope, if only a very slim one. 
Pro-impeachment sentiment has reached a peak this week, but it could 
conceivably dissipate if the roll-call is significantly postponed. 
Clinton is not the first president since the end of World War II to 
have his foreign policy motives questioned. Ronald Reagan was accused 
by a few members of Congress and a few editorial writers of staging 
the invasion of Grenada to mute criticism of his failure to protect 
marines who were killed in Lebanon. But not since Harry Truman and 
the Korean War has a president been subjected to quite the same level 
of questioning of motive that Clinton was subjected to Wednesday. 
The fact that Lott released his statement moments before the attack 
increased the sense that he was undercutting the president. Some Republicans 
did, in fact, rally to the administration. Rep. Jim Kolbe of Arizona 
was in the midst of a press conference in Tucson lambasting Clinton 
for ``impeachable offenses'' when handed a note about the air raids, 
and he changed course immediately, voicing support for the attack. 
But many others, while not willing to speak as bluntly or as publicly 
as Solomon and Lott, gave voice privately to deep suspicions. Clinton 
tried his best to allay them, quoting American military planners as 
saying that waiting would give Saddam time to conceal and protect 
elements of his suspected nuclear and chemical arsenals. But he did 
not address a report in Wednesday's Washington Post that suggested 
that the administration had orchestrated the timing and content of 
the report by Richard Butler, the chief United Nations inspector, 
that preceded the attacks. Once again, British Prime Minister Tony 
Blair proved himself a friend in need. By agreeing to join in the 
attacks, and by defending his decision in an eloquent statement carried 
on international television, Blair gave Clinton political cover against 
his partisan critics. That was especially welcome in view of the opposition 
voiced by China, Russia and France. The president did all he could 
to make Wednesday night's television appearance look like business 
as usual _ a calm, serious report about a threat to the national interest, 
with only a quick, glancing reference to his own troubles. But he 
delivered it in a setting he has recently avoided, the Oval Office, 
near which many of his fateful meetings with Monica S. Lewinsky took 
place. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>