<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981216.0549 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Gov. George E. Pataki and legislative leaders in Albany moved closer 
Wednesday to a compromise on an ambitious plan to establish scores 
of charter schools across the state with limited government and union 
regulation, officials close to the negotiations said Wednesday night. 
The tentative arrangement _ if it goes to the Legislature and is approved 
_ would make New York the 33rd state with legislation permitting some 
form of charter schools, taxpayer-financed public schools run by parents, 
teachers and community groups. The idea of establishing charter schools 
has been a favorite of Pataki's but has faced opposition from local 
school boards, which see the schools as a threat to their authority, 
and from the teachers' unions. The powerful United Federation of Teachers, 
in particular, has been fearful that the charter schools would not 
be unionized. Some of those concerns appear to have been addressed 
by negotiators Wednesday, who were talking about retaining the union 
in larger charter schools and granting some salary and pension enhancements 
to teachers, officials close to the negotiations said. Those negotiations 
are part of talks between the governor and legislative leaders over 
several unresolved matters, including a pay increase for elected state 
officials, an overhaul of the way budgets are approved and legislation 
that could help farmers obtain higher prices for milk. Aides to Pataki 
and Sheldon Silver, the Assembly Speaker, denied that negotiators 
had reached even a tentative agreement and refused to discuss the 
talks. These kinds of deals, with their many components, have in the 
past fallen apart over minor disagreements. If one side balks at a 
section in the charter school proposal, for example, that could hold 
up voting on the entire package. But in a sign that both sides were 
moving closer to an agreement, lawmakers were called back to Albany 
for meetings on Thursday, and Pataki told reporters, ``There's gray 
smoke _ actually it's gray tilting toward white.'' Officials close 
to the negotiations said that as part of the emerging compromise, 
the governor had agreed to give the teachers improvements in their 
pensions, as well as salary supplements that he had vetoed before 
in an effort to pressure the union to accept an agreement on charter 
schools. Officials would not immediately disclose the cost of those 
enhancements. The union was also able to retain control of charter 
schools with more than 250 students, officials said. The plan, which 
has been in secret negotiations for days, would cut out Mayor Rudolph 
W. Giuliani and the City University of New York; in the governor's 
version of the bill the university had been among the agencies authorized 
to grant charters to new schools, officials said. It also appeared 
to bar the New York City Schools Chancellor, Rudy Crew, who had strongly 
attacked the legislation in the last days of negotiations, from starting 
any charter schools. Pressure to close a deal quickly has been increased 
by the Monday deadline for Pataki to sign or veto a 38 percent pay 
raise for legislators. Pataki has implied that he would veto the raise, 
the first in 10 years, if he did not get some of his agenda in return. 
The State Senate passed a charter bill on Dec. 2, as part of a bigger 
package of legislation, but the Assembly refused to go along. ``There 
is no tentative deal; there isn't a deal,'' said Zenia Mucha, a spokeswoman 
for Pataki. ``I'm not going to tell you details of anything that has 
been discussed.'' Patricia Lynch, spokeswoman for Silver, said the 
legislators had been recalled to Albany because ``we're optimistic, 
and given the holiday period it's the last possible opportunity to 
put something together before the holiday period.'' The emerging compromise, 
officials said, would allow an unlimited number of existing public 
schools to convert to charter schools, and 100, maybe fewer, charter 
schools to start from scratch. Typically, charter schools are given 
a five-year operating charter and independence from local school districts 
in exchange for meeting certain standards. Pataki had advocated giving 
oversight of charter schools to a newly created Commission on Charter 
Schools, with a majority of members appointed by the governor, drawing 
strong protests from school officials who asserted that oversight 
should remain within the public education system. It appeared Wednesday 
that the State Board of Regents, which now regulates both public and 
private schools, would get some if not all of the oversight power. 
Local school districts, officials said, would be allowed to issue 
charters for converting public schools, and those schools would remain 
in the union and would have to meet all state testing requirements 
and standards. Schools started from scratch, however, would be granted 
their charters by the State Board of Regents or the State University 
of New York, officials said. It appeared that CUNY, local school boards, 
the Chancellor of the New York City school system and Giuliani _ who 
had all been included in the governor's plan _ had been cut out. Schools 
with more than 250 students would have automatic union representation, 
officials said, while those with fewer than 250 students would have 
to vote for collective bargaining. A major sticking point, officials 
said, continued to be where the funds for charter schools would come 
from. Local school boards have bitterly opposed the governor's proposal 
that they should be required to finance charter schools. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>