<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981216.0340 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
The good news for a visitor to Disneyland these days boils down to 
this: Tomorrow doesn't work all that well. And that dysfunction turns 
out to be the source of a lot of fun. Tomorrowland was one of the 
more important components of Disneyland when it opened in Anaheim, 
Calif., 43 years ago. Walt Disney thought of himself as a social visionary, 
and for him Disneyland was only partly for fun. He deliberately included 
Tomorrowland to educate as well as to entertain, to let the crowds 
know why the future was going to be grand. It was a sort of mini-world's 
fair with pavilions (underwritten by corporations) displaying the 
technologies that, it was firmly believed, would make the future effortless 
and bright. Tomorrowland, Disney optimistically intoned at the park's 
dedication in 1955, offered ``a vista into a world of wondrous ideas, 
signifying man's achievements.'' Things did not work quite as planned. 
The atomic age, which Disney had praised as filled with promise, turned 
out to be filled with dread. Technology, as we all know, has created 
plenty of problems even while solving others. And Tomorrowland's vision 
went a bit awry. Its nearly all-plastic House of the Future, along 
with other oddities like the Bathroom of Tomorrow and the Aluminum 
Hall of Fame, closed after a few years. The area, which takes up roughly 
17 of Disneyland's 85 acres, was updated piecemeal over the years, 
but by the late 1980s it had become one of the less popular of the 
eight themed areas of Disneyland and was deemed to need an overhaul. 
After several years of planning (and a sort of trial refurbishment 
of the Tomorrowland exhibition at Disney World in Florida in 1995), 
the new Tomorrowland here opened in May. One of its more ambitious 
attractions, Innoventions, just opened in November. Tomorrowland (which 
is on the east side of Disneyland) is a mixed bag that stands out 
from some of the more straightforward areas of the park, like Adventureland 
and Fantasyland, and it has some real bright spots. Among the more 
engaging attractions are those that have a sense of humor about technology 
running amok, including the ``Honey, I Shrunk the Audience'' 3-D movie 
and the Star Tours simulation ride. In other words, the rewarding 
parts of ``tomorrow'' are the parts that are all too human and flawed. 
By contrast, Innoventions, built where the old Carousel of Progress 
had been, has an earnestness that is off-putting, and in fact the 
technology on display is hardly visionary. ``Honey, I Shrunk the Audience,'' 
which is new, is set up as the occasion when the movie's fictitious 
Prof. Wayne Szalinski is to receive an award from the Imagination 
Institute. His invention, of course, malfunctions during the ceremony, 
shrinking the audience to the size of a shoebox, and great adventures 
ensue. In Star Tours, a refurbished version of a longtime attraction 
based on the ``Star Wars'' films, an inexperienced robot pilot takes 
the audience careening around the universe in a spaceship, into and 
out of trouble, with a great sense of levity. Not least, and on a 
more practical note, these are relatively lengthy experiences, roughly 
20 minutes, so the occasionally long waits are rewarded with a sustained 
entertainment. That is a rarity at Disneyland, where a family can 
easily spend twice as long in lines as in the attractions. These Tomorrowland 
attractions are also air-conditioned, something anyone who has visited 
Disneyland with small children in the summer can appreciate. Innoventions 
is from the old school, though. It, too, is air-conditioned, and a 
family can spend a fair amount of time exploring its many offerings. 
Like some of the old attractions, Innoventions is underwritten by 
corporations _ including Compaq computers, General Motors, Honeywell 
home technologies and the Kaiser Permanente health maintenance organization. 
It doubles as an advertising platform, allowing them to show off their 
whiz-bang future technologies _ near future, that is, so the items 
seem familiar. Some portions are engaging, but it mostly consists 
of computer monitors on which children can play various games, not 
the sort of thing most are likely to have in mind for a trip to Disneyland. 
Walt Disney Co. is a corporate leviathan, with revenues of more than 
$20 billion a year. But the Disneyland experience has not changed 
enormously over the years. Construction has begun in the former front 
parking lot on what will be a $1.4 billion expansion, which will include 
a Downtown Disney restaurant, shopping and entertainment area and 
a new theme park to be called Disney's California Adventure. But for 
now the park remains a somewhat nostalgic form of entertainment. Visitors 
enter onto Main Street, U.S.A., a sanitized vision of 19th- century 
America but with 1990s prices. There are lots of shops selling Disney 
merchandise and the sort of overly sweet or fatty foods most doctors 
have been discouraging parents from giving their children for years. 
But it is a nice entree for children, with lots of stimulation, from 
horse-drawn trams to old-fashioned buses rumbling slowly down the 
street. This all makes a curious introduction to Tomorrowland. At 
the end of the nostalgia of Main Street is a sunny circle, the Central 
Plaza, with a bronze statue of Walt and Mickey in the middle. Look 
left and you see the fortlike entrance to Frontierland, a version 
of the Old West. Look right and you see the future, sort of. The new 
entrance to Tomorrowland underscores the highly ambiguous attitude 
toward the future that Disneyland now embraces. If there is such a 
thing as an old-fashioned future, this is it. It could have been designed 
by Jules Verne. The gateway is formed as though huge, bronze-hued 
crystals had pushed up from the earth, opening to a ride called the 
Astro Orbiter. This is a 90-second spin around a central axis on a 
huge contraption designed to look like something Leonardo da Vinci 
invented. It is decidedly retro, by design. Straight ahead you go 
from the Renaissance to Buck Rogers. Disneyland has brought back the 
Moonliner, a 1950s, comic book version of a rocketship. In this new 
incarnation, it dispenses Coke. To the right is the Star Tours attraction, 
which is nearly always crowded. A visitor enters what looks like the 
waiting lounge at an airport, eventually snakes around to where some 
familiar characters from the movies, R2D2 and C3PO, are working on 
repairing a star fighter. It is a vivid revelation for a child who 
knows the ``Star Wars'' movies but has never actually visited a star 
port before. The simulation ride's robot pilot bumps into everything 
in the takeoff, nearly crashes repeatedly and finds himself under 
attack before escaping unharmed. A good time is had and 20 to 30 minutes 
have passed. The ``Honey, I Shrunk the Audience'' attraction similarly 
uses technology to create a realistic experience. Visitors wear 3-D 
goggles and, after being shrunk, confront a herd of giant white mice, 
are jarred by giant tennis shoes and sprinkled with a hail of breaking 
glass, a stunning effect in the 23-minute 3-D film. Oh, and watch 
out when the giant dog barks. Retained from the old Tomorrowland is 
the Space Mountain roller coaster. The Saint-Saens music that accompanies 
the swirls and twirls is performed by Dick Dale, famous for his guitar-slinging 
surf music. Space Mountain is also usually crowded. Another throwback 
is the old Autopia attraction, a fancy name for a ride in which little 
children can drive small, gas-powered cars around a small course. 
This hails back to a time when driving seemed futuristic rather than 
a nuisance. An old stalwart that has recently been closed is the Submarine 
Voyage, an underwater adventure that is being replaced. One newcomer 
is the Rocket Rods ride, which replaces the old people-mover. The 
Rocket Rods cars zoom around overhead on the old, elevated people-mover 
platforms. Disneyland has tried to give the attraction a futuristic 
feel by describing it as a transit system for tomorrow, and by having 
visitors first watch films on the history of transportation. But the 
real entertainment is the ride, which lasts only three minutes. To 
give Tomorrowland a focus, Disneyland has conjured up the Observatron. 
This is what looks to be a cluster of transmission dishes pointing 
into space. Every 15 minutes it comes to life, putting on a show with 
music and swirling arms, pretending to transmit a message into space. 
Watching this odd contraption rev up, one wonders what kind of message 
it might be sending. One of the odder pretensions of the new Tomorrowland 
is that the future is basically comforting and unthreatening, in sharp 
opposition to the sort of images one usually sees in the movies. To 
underscore this message, the area has been landscaped almost entirely 
with edible plants. There are orange and persimmon trees and everything 
from carrots to corn and lettuce. Though the local ducks often sneak 
over for a nibble on the plants, the public is supposed to keep hands 
off. Not to worry. The new restaurant in Tomorrowland is called Redd 
Rockett's Pizza Port. It is standard Disneyland fare, in this case 
lots of pizza and pasta, but this vision of ``tomorrow'' is drawn 
straight from the 1950s. It seems mankind, even in the future, will 
find some things too good to leave behind. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>