<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981216.0469 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
The Clinton administration's eagerness to strike immediately after 
this latest challenge by Saddam Hussein to the U.N. weapons inspectors 
marked a sharp break with past U.S. practice, some senior administration 
officials said Wednesday, and while Secretary of State Madeleine Albright 
talked to some 16 foreign ministers of the Security Council and European 
and Arab allies, she did more informing than consulting. Her most 
heated conversation was with Russian Foreign Minister Igor Ivanov 
and only took place after the air strikes began, officials said. The 
Russians have criticized the quick attack on Iraq all day, and Albright 
rejected Ivanov's contention that the main faults lie with U.N. inspectors 
and their chairman, Richard Butler, and not Saddam. Instead, she urged 
Ivanov to look beyond Iraq to more important common interests Washington 
and Moscow share, including Russia's own economic survival. France 
was also annoyed with Washington for getting Butler to pull out his 
inspectors from Iraq without discussion with the Security Council, 
for whom UNSCOM works. But Foreign Minister Hubert Vedrine told the 
Americans that while France would not oppose the strikes, given Baghdad's 
record, it would not publicly endorse them. The United States won 
public support from its reliable allies Japan and Canada while China 
joined Russia in angrily denouncing the U.S. strike. And U.S. officials 
at the Pentagon and State Department were in close touch all day with 
top Saudi officials, given the Saudi willingness to let U.S. and British 
planes refuel from Saudi bases. But Albright did not speak with U.N. 
Secretary-General Kofi Annan, officials said. He issued a personal 
statement in New York on Wednesday, calling this ``a sad day'' for 
the United Nations, the world, and ``me personally,'' because of his 
failure to avert the use of force despite great efforts. His sadness 
was justified, U.S. officials said, because Wednesday's strikes also 
marked the end of a nearly eight-year effort to police and disarm 
Iraq through the United Nations itself, rather than through powerful 
Security Council members. The inspection regime of UNSCOM is largely 
dead, U.S. officials say. Those inspectors are unlikely to be able 
to return to Iraq and work freely, senior officials say. Instead, 
Washington will use other forms of traditional containment, including 
continued economic sanctions, threats, support for opposition forces 
and the intermittent use of force to try to restrain Saddam. But few 
officials believe that air power alone can eliminate the threat posed 
by Iraq or its nuclear, biological and chemical programs. At the heart 
of the criticism Wednesday was America's timing and lack of new consultation, 
and the fear that Clinton would be perceived abroad, especially by 
Arab countries, for acting in his own benefit to avoid rapid impeachment. 
But analysts, including some Western diplomats from NATO countries, 
pointed to evidence that U.S. officials were working closely with 
Butler, the UNSCOM chairman, and appear to have forced the pace. U.S. 
and allied officials said that Butler had coordinated some of the 
terms of his report with U.S. officials in confidential conversations 
on Monday. UNSCOM officials say they often consult with Security Council 
members but are responsible for their own conclusions and judgments. 
Senior U.S. officials argued that the surprise factor and the imminence 
of Ramadan, the Muslim holy month that begins Saturday night _ not 
the impeachment vote _ was forcing the schedule, but analysts were 
not convinced, and did not think the world would be. ``When other 
confrontations with Iraq have dragged out for days and weeks while 
the administration geared up for a possible response, checked off 
all the diplomatic boxes and then usually did not act, how is it possible 
that the bombing had to happen today?'' asked Robert Kagan of the 
Carnegie Endowment. ``A reasonable person is logically forced to view 
this with a degree of cynicism.'' Of course, Kagan acknowledged, Clinton 
had authorized similar air strikes a month ago, then called them off 
when Saddam appeared to capitulate and promise full compliance with 
the United Nations. And U.S. officials emphasized at the time that 
they expected Saddam to renege on his promises, because he always 
intended to keep a core of biological and chemical weapons, and they 
would be able to use force later with less international criticism. 
And analysts said they had considerable concerns, both about how effective 
the bombing campaign will be to rid Iraq of the weapons of mass destruction 
Unscom inspectors were prevented from uncovering, and about how the 
bombing may or may not fit into the larger strategy of ridding the 
world of Saddam. Even presuming that Clinton and his foreign-policy 
team had no political reasons to bomb Wednesday, said William Quandt, 
a former National Security Council official under Presidents Nixon 
and Carter, ``my qualms are about what happens the day after the bombing 
stops.'' ``Saddam's a disaster, but will this get rid of him?'' Quandt 
asked. ``We know what we want but we're not prepared to pay the price 
to do it. Bombing is the compromise choice that makes us feel better, 
that we're somehow punishing Iraq, though not necessarily Saddam, 
and we won't take any significant risks of casualties ourselves.'' 
Still, one senior official said, using force now is also an important 
signal to the world that Clinton will act when he needs to, despite 
his domestic difficulties. Wednesday evening, Clinton defended the 
joint American-British strikes, which he described as ``strong and 
sustained,'' and intended to repress and degrade Iraq's ability to 
produce weapons of mass destruction and use them against its neighbors. 
And American officials said more explicitly that the attacks were 
also designed ``to shake the regime'' by also targeting Saddam's structure 
of power, including the Revolutionary Guard, his communications facilities, 
his palaces and strongholds. But the officials also conceded that 
it is unlikely that the Unscom inspectors will be able to return to 
Iraq and work freely, and that in effect, the United States and Britain, 
acting on behalf of the U.N. Security Council, had moved to a more 
traditional containment policy. Rather than relying on Iraq, monitored 
by Unscom, to disarm itself, Washington will now try to degrade Iraq's 
capacities, rather than eliminate them, and to deter Saddam from daring 
to use the terror weapons he may have. That policy includes an intention 
to strike later, again without warning, if Iraq attempts to reconstitute 
its weapons of mass destruction. It includes warnings to Saddam that 
he will be obliterated if he uses such weapons, and attempts to keep 
harsh economic sanctions on Saddam's regime, to limit its income. 
It also will include, Clinton said, more U.S. support for the badly 
divided Iraqi opposition. That support was pressed on the administration 
by the Congress this year in the $97-million Iraqi Liberation Act. 
But senior U.S. officials say that efforts to replace Saddam have 
failed badly in the past, and must be viewed as a long-term possibility. 
Officials joke that the money will provide the Iraqi opposition, whose 
leaders live in London, with used American armored personnel carriers 
in which to ride through Mayfair. The State Department announced that 
it is ordering the departure of dependents and some other personnel 
from diplomatic posts in Tel Aviv, Jerusalem and Kuwait because of 
military action against Iraq. The order is an upgrade of earlier warnings. 
A general travel advisory to Americans to use caution and review their 
security practices was also updated from November to mention the new 
military strikes. But officials said there was no specific threat 
that prompted the warning. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>