<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981216.0460 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Minnesota Mining and Manufacturing, one of the nation's industrial 
and manufacturing giants, warned Wednesday that slumping global sales 
and a slowdown at home would probably cut fourth-quarter earnings 
10 percent from the comparable year-earlier quarter. The announcement 
by 3M, which makes Post-it notes, Scotch tapes and consumer health 
products, which sent the company's shares down $2.375 each, to $71.375, 
is just the latest jolt to hit some of the nation's largest corporations. 
Since late November, share prices have been sliding after a sharp 
run-up in October, and that sell-off has been intensified by unnerving 
news from Washington and the onset of the season when U.S. companies 
traditionally warn Wall Street that they may not meet expectations 
in their next quarterly report. The 3M announcement, which encouraged 
Wall Street to lower its already bleak expectations, lengthens the 
list of ailing companies that constitute the widely followed Dow Jones 
industrial average. Of the 30 companies in that stock average, at 
least eight have issued earnings warnings this month, and several 
others have announced reorganization plans or huge layoffs. The list, 
of course, is a Who's Who in corporate America: Boeing; Coca-Cola; 
Merck; Sears, Roebuck; Union Carbide, and Caterpillar. Boeing will 
cut 20,000 jobs in the next year; Citigroup _ another Dow component 
_ also issued bad news on Tuesday, saying it would cut 10,400 jobs, 
or about 6 percent of its work force. The stock of a ninth company, 
Procter &AMP; Gamble, fell sharply last week after it said growth 
in the number of products sold would not meet expectations in the 
quarter. Those announcements have caused the Dow to fall 5 percent 
from its all-time high over the last few weeks and, for a broader 
group of investors, the parade of warnings has heightened concerns 
that the nation's best and brightest companies continue to suffer 
from the global economic turmoil that has swept Asia, Russia and Latin 
America and even threatened to topple a seven-year-long bull market 
in the United States. ``We're going through the same thing we've gone 
through in the last few quarters: management is saying things aren't 
as good as they used to be,'' said Marshall Acuff, the chief market 
strategist at Salomon Smith Barney. ``There are increasing pressures 
on profit margins for more and more companies; and that pressure is 
intensifying.'' The 3M warning _ which comes a day after Caterpillar 
advised of earnings trouble _ is the third time the company has issued 
a warning in the last five quarters and signals what could be the 
company's first profit-growth retreat in seven years. It also comes 
on the same day that shares of Dow Chemical and other chemical companies 
plunged after Eastman Chemical, one of the largest producers of plastic 
bottles, forecast sharply lower earnings because of falling demand 
and prices in Asia and elsewhere. Although 3M, which is based in St. 
Paul, will see earnings growth this year, sales growth is slowing 
around the globe and the company is continuing with a plan announced 
earlier this year to cut 4,500 jobs, about 2,000 by the end of this 
year. About 50 percent of 3M's business comes from overseas, and in 
Latin America and Asia, excluding Japan, sales are down sharply. In 
Japan and Europe, sales growth continues, but moderately. But currency 
translation is hitting the company hard, a spokesman said, and will 
reduce per-share earnings about 7 percent in the fourth quarter. Because 
global manufacturing is slumping, along with commodity prices, demand 
for 3M products, including even highway reflector signs in the United 
States, are slumping. But 3M's predicament is overshadowing much of 
the manufacturing sector in America. A glut of steel is hurting the 
steel industry and slackening demand for construction and farm equipment 
is hurting companies like Deere and Caterpillar. Wall Street analysts 
say that although many large companies are facing pricing pressure 
or the inability to raise prices in a competitive environment, the 
hardest hit companies appear to be in the manufacturing sector, which 
may be why the Dow average, which is more heavily weighted with industrial 
companies, is lagging behind other indexes that are more technology 
heavy. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>