<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981216.0111 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
When David Farber stepped down from the public stage of the witness 
stand in the Microsoft antitrust trial last Wednesday after two days 
of testimony, he found his own private audience eagerly awaiting his 
return. And he did not disappoint them. Logging on hours after returning 
from Washington to his home in Landenburg, Pa., the 64-year-old University 
of Pennsylvania telecommunications professor dispatched an e-mail 
message. ``To all those who I have ignored,'' the subject line read. 
The text of the message went on to say, ``I have never felt so drained.'' 
In Farber's case, ``To all'' refers to a sprawling network of 25,000 
Internet users who have maneuvered themselves onto his formidable 
mailing list over the last decade. His list _ which he calls IP, for 
``interesting people'' _has a devoted following among the digerati, 
as well as less technological types. And it gives him unrivaled, if 
unofficial, influence as a voice of the Internet. That status helps 
explain why the Justice Department chose Farber as an expert witness 
for a trial in which a central question is whether Microsoft tried 
to monopolize the market in Internet browser software. As master of 
the IP list, Farber typically exercises his opinion almost solely 
through a selection process in which he forwards three or four items 
culled from hundreds of information sources that he deems most worthy 
of attention each day. At most, he may add a one-line precis, as he 
did with a simple ``Bye bye liberty'' atop a mailing last month citing 
an Army Times article about the government's expanded antiterrorism 
surveillance. But in last week's post-courtroom e-mail message, he 
allowed himself more room for introspection. ``I am endlessly astonished 
that all too often the trials seem not to be interested in extracting 
the truth,'' Farber wrote, after a difficult day of cross-examination 
by Microsoft's lawyer, Steven Holley. ``Oh well.'' Appearing at a 
trial that has been dominated by software company executives, Farber 
was the first technologist to testify without an obvious ax to grind 
or damning e-mail record to refute. His testimony focused on defining 
the technical terms that are at the core of the dispute: whether Microsoft 
illegally used its monopoly in the personal computer operating system 
market to give an unfair advantage to the company's browser software, 
Internet Explorer. Farber argued that software was ``infinitely malleable'' 
and that Microsoft had designed its Windows 98 operating system so 
that consumers could not remove Explorer. Microsoft dismissed Farber's 
testimony as ``nothing more than an opinion piece on how he thinks 
Microsoft could have or should have designed Windows.'' But it was 
an opinion that had a definite appeal among a large segment of Internet 
users. ``The Internet reaction was like, `Ah-hah, there's our guy,''' 
said Esther Dyson, editor of Release 1.0, an influential industry 
newsletter, and chief of an international governing agency for assigning 
Internet addresses. ``The trial has centered on the Internet, but 
it's all been about the corporations of the Internet. It was nice 
to finally have the users and creators represented in the courtroom, 
as well.'' Even some of those rooting for Microsoft found cause to 
applaud Farber's appearance, including Scott Bradner, a senior technical 
consultant at Harvard University. Bradner was in Orlando, Fla., last 
week at an annual meeting of the Internet Engineering Task Force, 
an industry association. He said the 2,000 technology enthusiasts 
at the conference seemed of mixed opinion about the Microsoft trial. 
But he said he and many others were glad that Farber, a longtime member 
of the group, had taken the stand. ``There are more and more examples 
of where technical reality has to be reconciled with the law,'' Bradner 
said. ``It's important for objective reporters of technology to be 
able to explain it to judges and juries in a way they can understand.'' 
Farber is a bald, grandfatherly figure whose tendency to round his 
Rs into Ws finds him affectionately compared to Elmer Fudd. But it 
is a demeanor belying a distinguished resume. He grew up in Jersey 
City, N.J., holds a master's degree in mathematics from the Stevens 
Institute of Technology, and helped invent the first electronic telephone 
switch in the early '60s as an engineer at Bell Laboratories. It was 
there that he also concocted the computer language Snobol and met 
his wife, GG, before moving to Southern California and helping to 
organize the Internet. He has been at the University of Pennsylvania 
since 1989. In addition to teaching a course there on computer ethics 
and society this term, Farber has been a technical consultant for 
Intel Corp. and the Internet service provider Earthlink, among others. 
He serves on the Presidential Advisory Committee on High Performance 
Computing and Communications, and sits on the board of the nonprofit 
Electronic Frontier Foundation. But he said in an interview last week 
that ``the IP list has made me the most famous.'' The list began about 
11 years ago, when Farber's friend Eric Bloch started a demanding 
job at the National Science Foundation and complained that he no longer 
had time to read news, on the Internet or anywhere else. Farber began 
forwarding items to Bloch and then to others. Soon, the list became 
to the technology elite what an invitation to Irving (Swifty) Lazar's 
Oscar party once was to Hollywood's glitterati _ the industry's place 
to be. And by now, the IP list is widely considered the single most 
influential source of relevant and up-to-date news about all dimensions 
of the technological world. When Jon Postel, an Internet founder and 
a former PhD student of Farber's, died unexpectedly last month, for 
instance, IPers learned about it before anyone else. Word came through 
a posting by Farber that was followed by a eulogy from Vint Cerf, 
a longtime associate who is now senior vice president at MCI Worldcom 
and chairman of the Internet Society, a professional group. In recent 
years, Farber said he had enlarged and diversified the list, including 
homemakers and students who had requested to be added to a group of 
recipients that also includes Intel's chairman, Andrew Grove, and 
many leading technology journalists. The Internet has many mailing 
lists _ 90,095 by one count _ but Farber's may reflect more than any 
other the power of distributed-information networks. As he adds subscribers 
to the list, each becomes an additional source of information. And 
Farber performs the function of a trusted filter. ``He has become 
a social node in a network of people,'' said David Bennahum, a subscriber 
to the list and author of a new book, ``Extralife,'' about growing 
up with computers. ``He helped form the Internet socially by connecting 
all these important people together.'' Even human network nodes have 
to rest sometimes, though. Late last week, Farber posted what may 
be one of his final messages of the year to the IP list: ``After Sunday 
IP will be off the air and so will I for 10 days as I go off to a 
place in Hawaii where there are no phones, no radios, no TVs etc. 
and certainly no EMAIL,'' he wrote. ``Have a good Hanukkah and a Merry 
Christmas etc.'' NYT-12-13-98 1833EST 
</TEXT>
</DOC>