<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981216.0112 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
In the Microsoft trial, witness after witness for the government has 
described the big software company's industry-standard Windows operating 
system as the essential utility of modern computing. To succeed in 
the marketplace, they explain, a new software product must have access 
to Microsoft Corp.'s technology if the product is to run smoothly 
on top of the Windows operating system. Even a rival like Netscape 
Communications Corp., the Internet browser pioneer, must ask for Microsoft's 
cooperation so that it can compete against Microsoft _ a situation 
created by Microsoft's broad reach across so many software and Internet 
commerce markets, from spreadsheets to online travel services. The 
Justice Department has depicted Microsoft as unfairly using the technical 
leverage and market power that stems from its 90 percent share of 
the operating-system market to stifle competition. ``The case is fundamentally 
about access,'' said William Kovacic, an antitrust expert at the George 
Washington University Law School. ``Microsoft is accused, figuratively, 
of saying again and again that you can't set foot on our bridge unless 
you agree to the following conditions. If not, the company is left 
dangling with one foot off the bridge or told to learn to swim.'' 
Yet while the case raises the issue of access to technology, it also 
shows that doing anything to force Microsoft to provide access to 
its technology will be tricky, on both legal and practical grounds. 
During the trial, Justice Department lawyers have declared Microsoft 
to be a monopoly at every opportunity. But they have never once called 
it an ``essential facility'' _ a legal theory that the courts have 
been reluctant to apply beyond regulated monopolies like railroads, 
electric utilities and telephone networks. The doctrine dates to 1912, 
when the Supreme Court ruled against a group of railroads, led by 
a turn-of-the-century robber baron, Jay Gould, that denied competitors 
access to a bridge on the Mississippi River. But the government will 
almost certainly have to deal with the issue of technology access 
if it wins the Microsoft case and asks the court to order remedial 
action. Antitrust experts observing the trial say that at least at 
the U.S. District Court level, the government seems likely to win 
_ based on Judge Thomas Penfield Jackson's actions, from giving the 
Justice Department plenty of leeway to broaden its case with last-minute 
evidence to remarking that Bill Gates, the Microsoft chairman, ``has 
not been particularly responsive'' in his videotaped deposition. In 
a related case last year, Jackson ruled against Microsoft, though 
he was overruled by an appeals court last June. The Justice Department 
will not discuss possible remedies until the case is over. Still, 
the government is stepping up its efforts to try to devise an effective 
remedial plan. Joel Klein, the assistant attorney general who heads 
the Justice Department's antitrust division, has asked Timothy Bresnahan, 
an economics professor at Stanford University, to study the options 
for remedies, according to a person close to the Justice Department. 
Bresnahan, known for his rigorous statistical studies of industry 
structure and markets, is co-director of the Stanford Computer Industry 
Project, a research program whose corporate sponsors include Microsoft. 
He will be one of several experts advising Klein on remedies. Daniel 
Rubinfeld, the chief economist of the antitrust division, plans to 
leave the Justice Department at the end of this year, but he will 
remain a consultant on the Microsoft case. Yet the role of the economic 
and legal experts counseling the Justice Department is mainly to present 
a set of options to Klein. And although the White House does not get 
involved in the Justice Department's investigations or decisions to 
file suits, it could weigh in on the remedies issue. An effort by 
the Justice Department, for example, to try to break up Microsoft 
or force the company to open up access to its operating-system technology 
could well be a major economic policy decision. Whether the government 
seeks sweeping or more limited remedies will depend on how great the 
finding of liability is, if any, against Microsoft. In the trial, 
the subject of access to Microsoft's technology is typically raised 
in terms of a seemingly arcane three-letter acronym _ API, for application 
program interface. APIs are the software hooks that any program, from 
spreadsheets to games to Internet browsers, must use to run smoothly 
on top of the operating system, which controls the basic operations 
of a computer. Nearly every government witness has discussed APIs 
and has tried to offer Jackson a nontechnical translation. ``You can 
think of these interfaces as connectors, as a socket in a wall, like 
the ones you put a plug in for electricity,'' Dr. James Gosling, a 
vice president of Sun Microsystems Inc., explained to the judge last 
week. The issue of access to Microsoft's APIs is at the root of the 
government's case. Because Microsoft knows where every one of those 
plugs is _ and how each one works _ competitors complain that it has 
an enormous advantage over other developers in designing software 
that will run seamlessly on Windows. It was to gain access to Microsoft's 
APIs that Netscape says it met with Microsoft on June 21, 1995. Two 
days after that meeting, responding to a government inquiry, Netscape's 
outside counsel, Gary Reback, wrote to the Justice Department. At 
the June meeting, he stated, ``Microsoft indicated it would not provide 
this information to Netscape unless Microsoft gets an equity interest 
in Netscape, a seat on Netscape's board of directors, and otherwise 
controls Netscape's ability to compete against Microsoft.'' Microsoft 
denied the allegation, saying that Netscape and the government had 
distorted a fairly routine meeting in the software business, where 
companies often cooperate in some areas and compete in others. ``There 
is no proof in the record that Microsoft denied Netscape anything,'' 
said Charles Rule, a former senior Justice Department official who 
is an adviser to Microsoft. ``The government simply doesn't have a 
denial-of-access case.'' Tackling the issue of open access to Microsoft's 
technology is crucial to loosening the company's choke hold on the 
industry, said Ken Wasch, president of the Software Publishers Association, 
a trade group. ``Any remedy that doesn't in some way deal with access 
to APIs won't have much of an impact,'' he said. But those software 
interfaces are Microsoft's intellectual property, and having the government 
police the distribution of them to other companies runs the risk of 
becoming a regulatory nightmare. A few months ago, a senior Justice 
Department official said emphatically, ``I don't want to get into 
the business of having to be the arbiter of whether Microsoft has 
released every new set of Windows APIs on a timely basis.'' There 
could, however, be ways to limit the government's oversight role. 
Justice Department officials did take note of the announcement last 
week by Sun to open up the development of Java, its Internet programming 
language. It announced that the accounting firm Pricewaterhouse Coopers 
would audit the specification and would guarantee fair, impartial 
distribution of Java APIs. ``A behavioral remedy that requires some 
monitoring of access to technology does take you down a regulatory 
path, but it could be workable,'' said Carl Shapiro, an economist 
at the University of California at Berkeley who is a former Justice 
Department official. NYT-12-13-98 1851EST 
</TEXT>
</DOC>