<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981216.0524 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
The main suspects in the disappearance of an Upper East Side millionaire 
were charged Wednesday with murder and a wide range of other felonies 
in an 84-count indictment that details what prosecutors said was a 
highly sophisticated scheme to steal the missing woman's ornate East 
65th Street mansion. Investigators presumed that the missing woman, 
Irene Silverman, 82, who was last seen on July 5, was dead, but they 
have not found her body. The suspects, Sante Kimes and her son, Kenneth, 
have been charged with murder in an indictment that outlines a complex 
scheme involving disguises, false identities, tapped telephones, forged 
deeds, false addresses and burglaries. At no point does the indictment 
indicate how the Kimeses are believed to have killed Mrs. Silverman, 
nor does it include findings of fingerprints, blood samples or other 
forensic evidence that would link them to Mrs. Silverman's disappearance. 
Along with second-degree murder, Mrs. Kimes, 64, and her son, 24, 
are charged with conspiracy, robbery, attempted robbery, burglary, 
grand larceny, attempted grand larceny, weapons possession, forgery, 
possession of forged instruments, possession of stolen property and 
eavesdropping. If convicted of all charges, they would face 131 1/3 
years to life in prison. Prosecutors may have a difficult task before 
them in proving murder. While murder convictions have been won without 
the bodies of the victims being found, the prosecutors have usually 
found a witness who saw the victim abducted or someone who saw a suspect 
disposing of a body. In the case detailed in Wednesday's indictment, 
law enforcement officials appear to have no such evidence. But Manhattan 
District Attorney Robert Morgenthau said he was confident that a murder 
conviction could be won. The indictment states that the Kimeses kept 
detailed records of their scheme, including whom they phoned under 
different aliases, that were recovered when they were arrested in 
New York for passing a bad check to buy a car in Utah on July 5. They 
have been held in custody since then while investigators have tried 
to build a murder case against them. ``The mere fact that you don't 
have a body doesn't give somebody a walk,'' Morgenthau said. ``All 
the facts show that a murder was committed.'' Mel Sachs, the Kimeses' 
lawyer, called the evidence weak and predicted an acquittal. ``They 
do not have proof to show that the Kimeses intended to cause the death 
of Irene Silverman, caused the death of Irene Silverman, or that Irene 
Silverman is deceased,'' he said. ``There isn't any way that they 
connect the Kimeses to those three essential elements.'' Police Commissioner 
Howard Safir called the criminal scheme one of the most sophisticated 
ever seen in New York City. ``This is as complex and widespread a 
case as the NYPD has ever been involved in,'' he said. ``These two 
are very competent and very cold criminals.'' Even if the Kimeses, 
who have been suspected of carrying out a nationwide string of frauds, 
are acquitted of murder, prosecutors said the evidence against them 
on the lesser crimes was strong and convictions were considered likely. 
The Kimeses, according to the indictment, also tried to trick Mrs. 
Silverman's relatives, her former accountant, her employees and her 
employees' relatives into divulging information about her that would 
have helped them forge a deed turning her mansion over to a company 
they controlled. While the indictment did not name who was cooperating 
with law enforcement officials, it appeared from descriptions in the 
indictment that two people associated with the Kimeses _ Jose Alvarez, 
a Florida man they hired to work for them, and Stan Patterson, an 
informer who turned them over to the police _ had testified against 
the Kimeses before the grand jury. Mrs. Kimes, according to the indictment, 
set the scheme into motion in April by calling Mrs. Silverman's mansion 
and, identifying herself as Eva Guerrero, saying she was searching 
for a room for her boss. After her husband died, Mrs. Silverman had 
turned her mansion into a high-price boardinghouse. Over the next 
two months, the Kimeses mounted an exhaustive search for information 
about Mrs. Silverman's home, the indictment said. On June 14, Kimes, 
using a false name, moved into the mansion but instructed employees 
that no one was to know that Mrs. Kimes and another man, apparently 
Alvarez, were living in his apartment, it said, adding that from the 
day of their arrival, the Kimeses ordered Alvarez to eavesdrop on 
conversations and monitor who entered and left the building. For a 
week, they tapped Mrs. Silverman's telephone calls, the indictment 
charged. Kimes, according to the indictment, concealed his face from 
a surveillance camera as he entered the building by sliding along 
a wall and hid Mrs. Kimes whenever she passed by the camera. In June, 
the Kimeses also made several unsuccessful attempts to obtain Mrs. 
Silverman's Social Security number, the indictment said. Those efforts 
also failed and the Kimeses eventually manufactured a false Social 
Security card. The two also prepared the numerous forms needed to 
transfer ownership of Mrs. Silverman's home to the Atlantis Group 
Ltd., a company they controlled, according to the indictment. On July 
2, three days before Mrs. Silverman's disappearance, Mrs. Kimes disguised 
herself as Mrs. Silverman, forged the widow's signature and tricked 
a notary public into notarizing the documents, the indictment said. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>