<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981216.0344 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
This was supposed to be a homage to catatonia. This was going to be 
a description of how one can do nothing so intensively in the southeastern 
Caribbean that vacations there work like juice concentrate; a week 
in the Grenadine Islands can have the recharging effect of, say, two 
weeks in Florida. I had expected a primitive poultice for burnout, 
one that I could recommend to all my brethren who feel pressed when 
they wake up, stressed as they eat, pushed to produce faster and more, 
faster and more. I thought the remedy was simply stopping. And it 
was, of course, in part. But what I learned on a week's excursion 
in territory considered some of the last of the pre-Hilton Caribbean 
is that the point is not sloth. It is, if you will, something like 
harmony. There was harmony on the island of Bequia (pronounced BEK-way) 
where descendants of Scots and Africans and Caribs mingle on an enclave 
of 5,000 so sheltered it only got cable TV in the last year. There 
was harmony in the way Simeon Nero, our Bequia-based skipper, calmly 
piloted our chartered yacht through waves and wind that seasoned sailors 
call vigorous and I would call big momma waves. There was harmony 
even in the warmth of the water, part of an overall environment that 
presents itself as supremely threat-free, happy to receive you, there 
for you. Now, I promise not to get any loopier, but just consider 
this: On our first night on the yacht, I lay back and looked up at 
the star-spangled sky. It was a rare treat, to be somewhere warm, 
with no bugs, with no distractions, able to soak in the constellations 
for hours. But along with joy I felt anxiety. I was so small. The 
universe was indifferent. I was going to die. There wasn't nearly 
enough time to do all I wanted to do. I wanted more control, more 
say, more life. By the end of the trip, I could look up at the universe 
and say: ``Uh-huh. I'm part of this show.'' Now, how did my equally 
frayed companion and I get from point A, anxiety, to point B, beatitude? 
It began badly. Our plane was delayed in New York, which meant we 
missed the only flight out of San Juan that day to St. Vincent, the 
capital of that little sprinkle of 32 map-specks called St. Vincent 
and the Grenadines, which is a bona fide country with a population 
of 107,000, even if it does sound like a top-40 Gregorian chant group. 
The moral is: Flying to more obscure parts of the Caribbean that require 
such infrequent connections means that you risk losing a day if your 
connection fails. But it is worth it. And there are other routes to 
Bequia, including one through Barbados rather than San Juan, which 
at least puts you farther into the Caribbean if you get stuck. The 
ferry from St. Vincent to Bequia was not an antiseptic tourist ferry; 
it was a Real Ferry, and the feet of the local man who insisted on 
taking our bags could not have been confined by shoes for year and 
years, if ever. It was nightfall, and the entire flank of Bequia, 
as we approached, was dark, as if the whole seven-mile-square island, 
the largest of the Grenadines, were uninhabited. We wondered if there 
had been a blackout _ the island only got electricity in 1968; maybe 
it was still patchy. But no, it was simply that the whole northwestern 
side of Bequia is nothing but scrubbily forested slopes. As we rounded 
the corner, we could see the little lights of Port Elizabeth on Admiralty 
Bay, the island's harbor. Here is what Sydney Clark, the venerable 
travel book author, wrote 30 years ago: ``The Grenadines are among 
the last lost worlds of the Caribbean and there is an ever-present 
danger of their getting less lost.'' Happily, wondrously, Bequia and 
the rest of the Grenadines are still a little lost. At Spring on Bequia, 
an inland hotel, a 200-year-old plantation and still a working farm, 
we got a Flintstonesque, fieldstone-and-wood room with a drop-dead 
view of hill and sky and sea for $200 a night. You could look around 
and see virtually nothing that you wouldn't have seen a century ago. 
The white curtains flapped aggressively into the room with the strong 
breeze; there was no air-conditioning but none was needed, and there 
was no phone or television, but that was just as well, no? Of the 
hotels on Bequia, only one out of the half-dozen we visited, the Plantation 
House, had such amenities. And later, when we visited other Grenadine 
islands, it was much the same; island resorts that charged $415 a 
couple per night, including board, were offering isolation and peace, 
not CNN and T-1 lines. But the lack of technology fostered the required 
slowing of pace. Nothing beeped. Nothing hummed. Nothing brought spurts 
of adrenaline. And the smallness of Bequia produced a similar comforting 
atavism: The logical thing to do was to poke around, to hunt and gather 
experiences, to set out and see where we ended up, which could be 
far enough to get tired, but not to get lost. (Little did we know 
that compared with what would come later, this was a very big island.) 
Along one winding dirt road, we came across a Hawksbill turtle sanctuary 
that is the quixotic project of a local Bequian, Orton King. In Port 
Elizabeth's harborside strip of hotels and stores _ especially appealing 
because it ran only along the beach, not along a road _ there was 
astonishing homemade ice cream at Maranne's Ice Cream, and lobster 
pizza. Two full days on Bequia would have been much better; but the 
next morning, it was already time to _ here comes a phrase I have 
never used before in my life _ be picked up by our yacht. There she 
was in Bequia's busy little harbor: The Pleiades, a graceful, race-winning 
43-footer _ ours, with crew, for four days. She was manned by Simeon, 
who has 30 years of sailing experience and a couple decades more of 
life experience, which he shares only if you ask (Ask _ you'll learn 
something); his wife, Zelma, who cooked a mean Caribbean country-style 
meal, including more kinds of tubers than I ever knew existed; and 
his 18-year-old son, Quincy, who was learning the ropes. Simeon teaches 
sailing and navigation upon request, but I was incapable of taking 
in information more complex than the names of the islands we visited. 
It was a tribute to fine design that the boat did not feel crowded 
even with a crew of three plus two guests _ though it did feel a little 
uncomfortably colonial for my companion and I to each have our own 
cabin, one fore and one aft, while the Nero family slept on converted 
couches in the kitchen. Now, probably every novice's yacht tale on 
the Grenadines' high seas has to begin with a little dip. A little 
dip and sway and dip. A little up and down and up and ... Uh-oh. As 
we steamed out of Bequia, we were chatting happily. As we hit the 
real waves, serious swells of five or six feet that would gladden 
the hearts of true recreational sailors, silence descended on us _ 
silence that, every skipper knows, means the guests are feeling green-gilled 
and wondering if they have made a horrible mistake. Some say it's 
better to stay on deck, but I favor undergoing misery in solitude, 
and descended to my berth. I'm happy to report that things never reached 
the point of an event. And after that first afternoon, the seasickness 
never reappeared, even though we ventured into higher seas. By nightfall, 
we had reached the Tobago Cays, site of an excellent snorkeling reef 
and a scattering of mainly uninhabited little islands. You might think 
that a place that it takes hours of flying and hours of sailing from 
any major population center to reach would be pretty empty. But no 
_ shockingly to my neophyte eyes, the shallow waters in the keys were 
a maritime parking lot of yachts, scores of them, so many that insistent 
local vendors seemed to make a nice living by ferrying out high-priced 
drinking water and perishables. Remoteness is all relative, of course, 
but I don't think I've ever seen so many people in so obscure a place. 
Here is the truly wonderful thing about chartering a yacht, though. 
The next morning, after a good snorkel through colorful brain coral 
and among flitting schools of rainbow-colored fish, we could say to 
Simeon, ``Let's go.'' And we did. For three more days, we island-hopped, 
and there was a deep, Viking-like pleasure in it: To approach an unknown 
chunk of land (with a guide who knew it perfectly); to scan and scope 
it; to swim or be rowed ashore and explore it; then, having conquered 
it, to get back on a boat and leave. On a one-square-block-sized island 
in the Tobago Cays, we simply climbed the only hill, looked around, 
Yertle the Turtle style, came down and left. On Union, the most developed 
island we visited, there was five minutes' worth of shopping at the 
T-shirt-postcard stores in the harborside town. Some beaches were 
utterly deserted; one or two had a dozen or so people on them _ which 
came to seem like a stadium crowd after a while. The little islands 
varied. The two with the most character were Mayreau, which had a 
drop-dead-charming open-doored little church, The Immaculate Conception 
Mayreau Catholic Church, at its highest point; and Union, whose character 
struck us as a little seedy, a little hostile, spooky. A walk on its 
main road took us to houses that seemed poor in an unhappy, un-Caribbean 
way, arguing voices audible from within, and in the harbor town, strung-out-looking 
vagrants haunted the front of an open-air tavern. The most striking 
islands, though, were those that were nothing but resorts; that is, 
so small that they contained a resort or two and that was it. Palm 
Island was like that, such a little dot of sand that it might not 
merit a spot on a map if not for the $400-a-night Palm Island Beach 
Club; and so was Canouan, with its plush Tamarind Beach Hotel and 
Yacht Club ($250 a night). We didn't stop at Petit St. Vincent, a 
private hideaway with 22 cottages. Didn't want to intrude. We did, 
however, anchor our last night off Young Island, a small private island 
near bustling St. Vincent. Its ads say it has 30 cottages on 35 acres, 
but it looked even smaller. Certainly, I can imagine sitting in a 
Manhattan office and thinking, ``All I want right now is to be on 
a desert island.'' And certainly, these were desert islands, replete 
with a best-of-both-worlds supply of full bars and showers and fresh 
grilled fish. But after stopping on a handful of them, I remained 
dubious about whether they could provide the peace and serenity I 
sought. Because the problem is, there you are, trapped on that desert 
island with a few score other vacationers, possibly obnoxious ones, 
and a few score staff members, possibly exploited ones, and maybe, 
on some nights, even a very loud steel band. And you have no easy 
way off. The No Exit claustrophobia made me imagine a special guidebook: 
The Sartrean Caribbean. No, the boat, for all that it was smaller 
than any island, seemed best. Though we anchored each night near some 
shore or other, and though its small space was shared, the overwhelming 
sensation was of a growing friendship between me and the sea, just 
it and me. The Caribbean Sea, like the starry cosmos, was big and 
dark. But as I came to accept by the end of the week, when a long 
night swim in the inky bath seemed not a bit daunting, they were friendly. 
Friendly. The sea, and the cosmos, both. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>