<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981216.0532 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Minutes after Doug Flutie last played against the Jets, he looked 
like a man who had walked through a car wash without a raincoat. He 
was drenched with sweat, even more than usual for a National Football 
League player following a very physical game. He was limping a bit, 
and blood was sprinkled on his uniform. Flutie looked, well, flustered, 
as if he could have used a big bowl of Flutie Flakes. The Jets' coach, 
Bill Parcells, and his defensive coordinator, Bill Belichick, had 
devised a brilliant scheme to stop one of the most athletic quarterbacks 
in the game. The Jets used four linebackers and four defensive backs 
to keep Flutie pinned in the pocket _ blitzing him relentlessly _ 
and flooded key areas of the field with Jets bodies. It worked. Flutie 
spent the afternoon scrambling from men in green. Receivers weren't 
open. The running game was stopped cold. He finished with 12 completions 
on 30 attempts for 154 yards passing, with two interceptions and no 
touchdown passes in a 34-12 loss on Nov. 8. Very un-Flutie-like. ``It's 
been five years since I got my tail kicked like this,'' Flutie said 
then. ``Their four linebackers and four defensive backs gave me trouble.'' 
The Jets are basically the only team to put a crimp in Flutie's comeback 
tour. Until that game, he had 10 touchdown passes and was the hottest 
property this side of videotape for an instant replay machine; but 
that day Buffalo managed just four field goals. Now comes the rematch 
at Rich Stadium on Saturday, and this is where football becomes fun. 
What will the Jets attempt this time to try to stifle Flutie? And 
what will Flutie and the Bills do in anticipation of what the Jets 
may try? Do not think that Flutie, the ultimate competitor, isn't 
looking to even the score. People around the Bills say that Flutie, 
of course, wants his team to win this weekend, but he was also irked 
at how the Jets were bragging about shutting him down. He has studied 
extra hard this week, not wanting to be caught off guard by anything 
the Jets dream up on a chalkboard. ``That's probably true,'' the Bills' 
owner, Ralph Wilson, said. ``That's Doug. After the Jets game, I went 
into the locker room, and Doug was dejected. But he turned to me and 
said, `Don't worry Ralph, I've never lost two games in a row.' '' 
Wilson, who knows football as well as anybody in the NFL, added: ``The 
Jets have a very, very good team. They defended Doug very well. Parcells 
and Belichick are very good. But I don't think Doug played his best 
game against them. I don't want to take anything away from the Jets, 
but I think there will be a different Doug Flutie this game.'' And 
that's the point. Before people begin anointing the Jets as the best 
team in the American Football Conference East and the biggest threat 
to the Denver Broncos in the playoffs, they have to go through an 
extremely motivated 5-foot-9-inch quarterback, a man unlikely to be 
fooled twice. After the Jets, Flutie went on to win four of his next 
five games. The only loss came against New England _ yes, that game 
_ in which officials erred on two critical calls and probably still 
see Wilson's angry face in their sleep. Since taking over for an injured 
Rob Johnson in the first quarter of the Bills' fifth game, he has 
helped them recover from an 0-3 start. Largely because of Flutie, 
who Wednesday was selected as the third quarterback for the Pro Bowl, 
Buffalo can become only the fifth team in league history to lose its 
first three games and make the playoffs. The Bills learned a valuable 
lesson in their loss to the Jets. They were made painfully aware that 
Flutie is vulnerable to certain defensive schemes. The Jets used linebacker 
James Farrior as a ``spy,'' that is to say Flutie had his own personal 
shadow all over the field. Since then, Buffalo has adapted. Bills 
Coach Wade Phillips said the team has spread out the offense, going 
to four wide receivers at times, and preventing the use of a spy or 
stacking parts of the field with four linebackers. ``We are a little 
bit different offense now,'' said Flutie, who is 11-0 in NFL home 
games. ``As a matter of fact, the week of the Jets game, we were expecting 
to open up the offense a little bit more and we were tinkering with 
it, but we hadn't practiced it enough.'' Of course, Belichick will 
adapt to what the Bills do now, then the Bills will adapt, then Belichick 
will counter. Games inside games. Strategy is important, but the game 
could ultimately come down to Flutie's athleticism and leadership 
skills. Expect Flutie to make more audibles at the line of scrimmage 
and create more on the fly than he did in the last Jets game. Also, 
look for the return of that great Flutie pizazz that seemed toned 
down when the game was at Giants Stadium. Flutie loves to high-five 
his teammates and pump his fists in the air. ``Part of what makes 
Doug great is his enthusiasm,'' Wilson said. ``Instead of walking 
off the field, he runs off the field. I've seen some of these quarterbacks 
and they kind of amble off the field, like they are walking down Fifth 
Avenue.'' No walking for Flutie _ he seems to always be running. On 
Saturday against the Jets, he doesn't want to run for his life. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>