<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981216.0423 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Bigger is better. That seems to be the view of Frank Zarb, chairman 
of the National Association of Securities Dealers, the nation's largest 
self-regulatory organization and parent of the Nasdaq stock market. 
As head of an organization that oversees some 5,600 member brokerage 
firms, Zarb's domain is already plenty big. But he wants to become 
the world's No. 1 market for stocks and has recently acquired the 
American Stock Exchange and the Philadelphia Stock Exchange, and is 
talking about Nasdaq alliances with the main stock markets in Germany 
and Hong Kong. There is just one problem. Back home at the very grass 
roots of his organization, Zarb is having trouble putting out a little 
brush fire. Many owners of the smaller brokerage firms that make up 
the lion's share of NASD members, from places like Redwood Falls, 
Minn., West Hartford, Conn., and Weston, W.Va., are angered by a lack 
of representation on NASD. And they are threatening to loosen the 
stranglehold that large firms like Merrill Lynch, Paine Webber and 
Goldman, Sachs have on NASD's rule-making board and its operations. 
For the first time in its 60-year history, the securities dealers 
association's election for seats on the board of governors is being 
contested. On one side are NASD's official slate, selected by its 
nominating committee. They include former President Ford; James Dimon, 
the former president of Travelers who resigned last month from Citigroup, 
and Arthur Rock, a top venture capitalist. Opposing these nominees 
are a slate of four unknowns, put up by associations of small brokerage 
firms. Every year, NASD holds elections to replace retiring members 
of its 35-seat board, which votes on new rules and other issues surrounding 
the operations of the stock market and member firms. This year's election, 
replacing 12 retiring members, will be decided on Dec. 21. But while 
other NASD elections have been nonevents, this time throngs of small 
brokerage firms _ those employing 100 or fewer employees but making 
up 91 percent of the member firms _ are up in arms. They say they 
have become increasingly disenfranchised, even discriminated against 
by an organization whose board is dominated by executives from large, 
household name brokerages. Believing they are over-regulated and under-represented, 
the small firms want more say in the oversight process. ``The NASD 
is an organization that is resistant to change,'' said Alan Davidson, 
president of the Independent Broker Dealer Association and Zeus Securities, 
a one-office securities firm in Jericho, N.Y., that specializes in 
bonds. Davidson is also the force behind the independent slate of 
candidates for the association's board. ``They have betrayed the bulk 
of their membership.'' This David vs. Goliath story might be of no 
concern to the investing public but for one thing. Small broker-dealers, 
the association's roots, perform several important functions. They 
create jobs across the country and help small companies that are shunned 
by big firms raise capital so they can grow and create jobs. Furthermore, 
many of these smaller brokers make markets in shares of obscure local 
companies, providing liquidity to investors who are trading these 
shares. ``It is in the public interest that smaller firms be given 
the chance to survive and prosper,'' said Lewis Lowenfels, a prominent 
securities lawyer in New York who represented the American Stock Exchange 
floor brokers in the exchange's merger with NASD earlier this year. 
``The NASD was built in large part on the entrepreneurship of smaller 
firms and must be particularly sensitive to the needs of these firms 
as it builds and expands its global empire.'' Exactly what Frank Zarb 
has been doing all year, says Michael Jones, chief administrative 
officer of NASD. ``To say Frank has been aggressively pursuing and 
implementing the inclusion of small firms would be an understatement,'' 
he said. Of course, Zarb and his colleagues have to serve many masters: 
large firms and small, investors trading in Nasdaq stocks, issuers 
whose shares trade on the various Nasdaq markets. But even more important, 
Zarb has had to work overtime to clean up NASD's image after it was 
censured by the Securities &AMP; Exchange Commission in 1996 for failure 
to regulate its market adequately. Increasing the regulatory structure 
was a natural response. Although NASD began as a self-regulatory organization 
for smaller firms, it has become increasingly oriented to the big 
firms. Since 1988, eight board chairmen have come from firms with 
more than 200 employees; twice during that time a Merrill Lynch executive 
has headed the board. That the NASD favors big firms was one of the 
problems cited two years ago by Arthur Levitt, chairman of the SEC 
when it published the results of its investigation into accusations 
about Nasdaq trading improprieties and other issues. In addition to 
Nasdaq market makers' unfair trading practices, Levitt said: ``The 
NASD allowed the interests of large market-making firms to have undue 
influence over the conduct of its affairs and the regulation of the 
market.'' Many small firms believe little has changed since Levitt 
delivered his thunderbolt. The NASD, however, says that much has been 
done to open the regulatory structure to participants from outside 
the securities industry and the crucial separation of the regulatory 
arm from the operation of the stock market. ``We've come a long way 
under Frank's direction to balancing our constituencies,'' said Jones. 
Evidence of this happened earlier this year when the board reserved 
one seat for a small broker dealer. The association also formed the 
Small Firm Advisory Board to address the concerns of those constituents. 
That panel is headed by Carl Sherr, who runs his own small firm in 
Worcester, Mass. But Sherr is no outsider. He was chairman of the 
NASD in 1984 and has frequently sat on arbitration panels assembled 
by the regulator. He is also chairman of one of the association's 
district committees. ``He is supposed to be our representative,'' 
Davidson said. ``But he's one of them, not one of us.'' Since 1993, 
members of the securities dealers association have not been permitted 
to vote on rule changes made by the board. The NASD argued that sending 
out rule changes to an enormous membership was becoming too costly 
and inefficient. But to small broker-dealers this was proof that their 
input was unwelcome. It meant that the merger with the American Stock 
Exchange, which was put to a vote of the Amex members, was not approved 
by a vote of NASD member firms. ``The NASD owns and operates a television 
studio, sponsors the Super Bowl, has plenty of money for a multimillion-dollar 
sign in Times Square, but it doesn't want to spend 32 cents to mail 
members their own rule changes,'' Davidson said. Smaller firms are 
also deeply concerned about increasingly stiff fees and fines for 
even the most minor infractions. Joseph Mays Jr., president of Securities 
Consulting Group in New York, advises small securities-firm clients 
and was a compliance examiner at NASD from 1982 to 1987. ``In the 
past, some rule violations would have not been considered finable,'' 
he said. ``Now, they're looking for ways to catch firms in minor rule 
violations so they can put a dollar sign on the examination. They're 
turning the membership into a profit center.'' For example, critics 
say that NASD's approach to overcoming the year 2000 computer bug 
has been heavyhanded. Many smaller firms clear their clients' mutual 
fund, stock or bond trades through larger firms, handle no customer 
money or securities and may not even have a computer. Understanding 
this, the SEC suggested exempting these broker dealers from Y2K compliance 
surveys. But NASD said no. Last summer it sent out a 19-page form 
for all firms to fill out on their preparedness. Many tiny firms were 
a little late filing their reports. In the past, that would have probably 
been overlooked.This time NASD has moved to censure the firms and 
impose fines on them of $2,500, or roughly half the amount many of 
them have in net capital. Dues and incidental fees imposed on members 
have also jumped in the past three years, far in excess of inflation.The 
minimum annual fee is $1,200, but with add-ons a small firm could 
be charged $3,000 while a much larger firm might wind up paying only 
$4,000. Jones says the regulator's costs have increased as the industry 
has grown. But the cost increases are onerous to small firms. ``We 
service a lot of jeans-and-sneakers kind of people,'' said Thomas 
Pringle, president of Mark Securities, a two-branch brokerage in West 
Hartford, Conn. ``To treat Mark Securities like it's Merrill Lynch 
or vice versa is not right.'' Even though the structure of NASD calls 
for one firm, one vote, many of the smaller firms complain that the 
bigger firms carry more weight with the market supervisors. Small 
firms, 91 percent of the membership, hold only 10 percent of the industry 
representation on the board. Even though the vast majority of brokerage 
firms are honest, small firms find themselves standing out more on 
NASD's regulatory radar screen because of its increasing focus on 
microcap fraud _ securities violations perpetrated on gullible investors 
in tiny stocks by bucket shop brokerages. ``The big companies don't 
do it because they have too much to lose,'' argued Alfred Berkeley 
III, Nasdaq's president, in an interview earlier this year with USA 
Today. ``Little teeny companies and investment banks may have the 
incentive to fool people. And I'd like to put nails deep in their 
bodies.'' But Chris Nelson of Minnesota Valley Securities said many 
smaller firms are being wrongly tarred by NASD's brush. ``Out here 
in a town of 6,000, all you have is your reputation,'' she said. ``You 
don't have an option not to run a clean operation.'' Representatives 
of smaller firms also point to scandals involving big firms, such 
as the sales practices at Prudential Securities that led to a billion 
dollar settlement with aggrieved investors and Merrill Lynch's involvement 
in the Orange County bankruptcy. Small firms are particularly worried 
about a proposal approved by the board in October that would allow 
NASD's regulatory arm to issue temporary cease and desist orders to 
``prevent continuing violations of specific NASD rules and the securities 
laws.'' This essentially means that regulators need no longer show 
cause to a federal judge to shut down a brokerage firm. ``The view 
of the organization is that we deal with each firm on its own merits,'' 
said Jones of NASD. But many owners of small firms who were interviewed 
for this story declined to speak for attribution. They believe that 
retribution from NASD would result from on-record criticisms. La Rae 
Bakerink, vice president of compliance at SK International Securities 
in La Jolla, Calif., says they have reason to be concerned. Just weeks 
after Ms. Bakerink's name appeared on the NASD ballot as an independent 
nominee, she received word that her firm was being audited by NASD, 
more than nine months ahead of schedule. ``Fortunately, I'm not concerned,'' 
she said. ``We do a really clean business. But I still feel it's intimidation 
tactics.'' 
</TEXT>
</DOC>