<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981216.0451 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
A former U.S. Attorney in West Virginia, who also served as the top 
enforcement officer of the Commodity Futures Trading Commission, and 
a second man who the authorities said made his career devising fraudulent 
investment schemes, have pleaded guilty to racketeering and conspiracy 
charges for their roles in a telemarketing plot that cheated would-be 
investors of more than $80 million, federal law-enforcement officials 
announced Wednesday. As part of their plea bargains, John Field III, 
the former U.S. Attorney, who now lives in North Carolina, and Marcus 
Dalton of Colts Neck, N.J., the man described as a professional con 
artist and telemarketing expert, helped the authorities conduct a 
sting operation in which federal agents created a fake mutual fund, 
purportedly dealing in foreign currencies, and used it to infiltrate 
operations known as boiler rooms that sell fraudulent investments 
to the public. A main goal of the operation was to search the boiler 
rooms that agreed to sell the fake mutual fund for information about 
other fraudulent investment schemes and the people who created them. 
Investigators said they expected the investigation to lead to dozens 
of arrests. Nine telemarketers and one boiler-room wholesaler agreed 
to sell the fake fund, which was called UNEX 2100, and their offices 
were raided on Tuesday, investigators said. In addition to Field and 
Dalton, six other defendants pleaded guilty in U.S. District Court 
in Newark to charges of conspiracy and mail, securities and wire fraud 
related to telemarketing schemes, including several that involved 
selling millions of dollars in worthless investments in wireless cable 
television licenses. The defendants acknowledged taking enormous sales 
commissions on the bad investments, and some acknowledged that they 
simply stole the investors' money. The guilty plea by Field, who was 
U.S. attorney for the Southern District of West Virginia from 1972 
to 1977 and the director of enforcement for the Commodity Futures 
Trading Commission from 1977 to 1980, represented a disgrace for a 
highly regarded prosecutor who won national attention and a reputation 
for integrity in 1975 when he obtained an indictment of Arch A. Moore 
Jr., the governor of West Virginia, on conspiracy and corruption charges. 
Field, 60, pleaded guilty to racketeering on Dec. 4 in U.S. District 
Court in Concord, N.H. The racketeering charge stemmed from his work 
as a lawyer for a boiler-room operator who had been arrested and convicted 
in New Hampshire. Field's guilty plea in New Hampshire was sealed 
until today while federal authorities completed the undercover operation. 
At the time he came to the attention of federal investigators in New 
Hampshire, Field had already been under scrutiny by law-enforcement 
officials investigating fraudulent investment deals elsewhere, including 
in New Jersey and Nevada. Federal prosecutors in New Hampshire and 
New Jersey joined together, and in early 1996 Field agreed to assist 
their investigation by working undercover and using his contacts. 
In addition to the racketeering charge, Field pleaded guilty Wednesday 
in Newark to one charge of conspiracy to commit securities, mail and 
wire fraud. The plea was accepted by Judge Katharine Hayden, who also 
accepted guilty pleas from the other suspects in the case. Field faces 
a maximum prison term of 20 years on the racketeering charge, a maximum 
of five years for the conspiracy charge and fines of $250,000 or more. 
Because of his cooperation, he is not expected to get the maximum. 
The U.S. attorney in Newark, Faith Hochberg, announced the guilty 
pleas and the undercover operation at a news conference Wednesday 
afternoon with Paul Gagnon, the U.S. in New Hampshire, and other officials. 
Ms. Hochberg called Field's admission of guilt ``the rock bottom of 
his slide from protector of the public to predator on the public.'' 
Dalton, 45, who was the subject of a September 1995 article in Forbes 
magazine that described him as a ruthless grifter and telemarketing 
genius who preyed on the elderly, pleaded guilty on Tuesday to conspiracy 
to commit racketeering. He faces a maximum sentence of 20 years in 
prison and fines of $250,000 or more. Prosecutors said Dalton concocted 
fraudulent investment products in commodities, wireless cable systems, 
specialized mobile radio systems, cellular telephone systems and children's 
television programming. Other suspects who pleaded guilty to fraud 
charges were Barry Lichtenthal, 54, of Colts Neck, N.J.; Mark Prager, 
41, of Solana Beach, Calif.; Robin Clark, 57, of Atlanta; Drew Bagarozy, 
38, of Wall Township, N.J.; Howard Wunderlich, 51, of Somerset, N.J., 
and Thomas Umar, 40, of Belle Mead, N.J. They each face maximum sentences 
of five years in prison and fines. In one of the more outlandish uses 
of the money stolen from investors, Lichtenthal, who used the alias 
Michael Taylor, acknowledged in a court hearing today that he took 
$265,000 that he collected from investors for a fraudulent venture 
called Northeast Telecom and used the money to buy toy trains. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>