<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981216.0396 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Israeli Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu all but conceded Wednesday 
night that he expected his government to be toppled on Monday, threatening 
to call for new elections so that he could avoid the humiliation of 
being evicted from office against his will. Standing strongly, even 
fiercely, by his side at a Likud Party observance of Hanukkah Foreign 
Minister Ariel Sharon stated their mutual opinion more forcefully 
and bluntly than the beleaguered prime minister. ``We decided on our 
own initiative to push elections earlier,'' said Sharon, in his most 
thundering warrior voice. ``We have no reason to be dragged into such 
a situation. Why should we be dragged as a result of someone else's 
bill?'' Earlier in the day the cabinet said it would not hand over 
more West Bank land to the Palestinians on Friday, defying the timetable 
set by the American-brokered peace plan. Netanyahu, indicating he 
would not move directly into an election period, said he would first 
try to get a majority of the parliament to stand behind his tough 
posture toward the Palestinians. Moments after President Clinton left 
the Middle East, the Israelis pushed aside the issue of peace and 
pounced on the subject that really preoccupied them: the fate of Netanyahu, 
whose struggle to remain in office hung over and distorted the peacemaking 
mission of the American president. Parliament, in a vote on Monday, 
is likely to declare no confidence in Netanyahu, a result that would 
trigger elections within 60 days. By beating parliament to the punch, 
the prime minister seizes a tactical advantage that could improve 
his chances with voters who might consider him tainted if he were 
forced to abandon his post. A drumbeat for calling early elections 
started building almost from the moment that Air Force One left Tel 
Aviv on Tuesday. By this afternoon, Labor Party leader Ehud Barak 
had called on Netanyahu to initiate them, pronouncing the right-wing 
coalition government dead. Netanyahu made his announcement after lighting 
Hanukkah candles at the top of the evening news Wednesday night, apparently 
in an effort to preempt news of the expected defection of Defense 
Minister Yitzhak Mordechai. Mordechai, a political moderate and strong 
supporter of the peace effort, sent out a portentous message Wednesday 
that he would state ``his position regarding the political situation'' 
on Thursday. On Wednesday night, Netanyahu laid out a series of conditions 
that he would impose on the Palestinians before any further Israeli 
troop withdrawal. He said that the Israelis would not just freeze 
action called for in the peace agreement but stop complying with the 
agreement if Israel's demands were not met. Among them was a demand 
that seems to go beyond the requirements of the peace plan, that the 
Palestinians renounce their intention to unilaterally declare a state. 
The Americans have said that this asks too much of the Palestinians, 
who, they said, are entitled to aspirations, and the demand is unlikely 
to be heeded. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>