<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981216.0244 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
It had been a routine Sunday at the Palace Station Hotel and Casino, 
a rambling Las Vegas institution more popular among the locals than 
among the millions of tourists who flock to the city's more extravagant 
hotel-and-casino resorts. But when a 67-year-old woman, a regular 
at the Palace, plunked the last three silver dollars of about 300 
she played that evening into a rather ordinary-looking slot machine, 
what followed was anything but routine. The woman struck the largest 
slot machine jackpot ever: $27,582,539.48. Whether or not she knew 
it, the gambler, who asked that her name not be used, also came face 
to face on that November evening with the highly sophisticated computer 
technology that drives the deceptively traditional-looking Megabucks 
slot machine she played. Slot machines built around chips and then 
networked make such hefty payoffs possible. And casino makers say 
that computers have quietly revolutionized the multibillion-dollar 
slot machine industry in much the same ways that computers in the 
last 20 years have revolutionized, for better or worse, how millions 
of Americans communicate, shop, learn, work and play. ``As computer 
technology has been enhanced, so have the games,'' said Ed Rogich, 
an executive director of International Game Technology, a major gambling 
machine maker based in Nevada. The slot machine, casino gambling's 
single most visible and profitable (and loud) workhorse, has, at the 
dawn of the 21st century, gone digital. Born as a 19th-century penny 
amusement, the typical slot machine today in Las Vegas, Atlantic City, 
the Mississippi Gulf Coast or anywhere in the world where they are 
found is very likely to be a computer. While many of them still stand 
upright in brightly colored cabinets and retain the familiar spinning 
reels bearing symbols like cherries, bars and bells, the display is 
illusion. Once, spring-driven reels randomly stopped by slotted mechanisms 
decided whether everything or anything came up roses or cherries _ 
now a chip decides. The one-armed bandit is not just suddenly ambidextrous; 
it is a multitasking, multiple-games-in-one gambling machine. The 
new technologies have changed the way people win and lose on slot 
machines and have led to the networking that produces huge jackpots, 
like the one won at the Palace Station. The most profound change may 
be the eerie commingling of video games, entertainment and gambling 
to keep people at the machines. There is plenty of incentive for importing 
computer innovation to the casino floor, said Jason N. Ader, senior 
managing director at Bear, Stearns &AMP; Co. in New York for equity 
research in its gaming, lodging and leisure division. In a report 
he wrote this year on casino gambling, Ader noted that slot machines 
in Nevada and Atlantic City alone accounted for 65 percent of the 
casinos' gambling revenues and took up 80 percent of the space dedicated 
to gambling last year, a major swing away from the days when the big 
money makers were tables with such low-tech games as roulette and 
poker. All the advances are part of the march of gambling machine 
technology from mechanical to electromechanical, then to computer 
circuit boards and high-speed microprocessors (some even bearing Pentium-class 
chips). At each step, the goal has been the same: setting up a machine 
that pays out enough to keep people using it but keeps enough to make 
money _ lots of money. In Nevada, where state gambling laws require 
slot machines to pay out a minimum of 75 percent of the money that 
they take in, competitive pressures have pushed casinos to set their 
slot machines to pay out an average of 95 percent, said Keith Copher, 
chief of enforcement for the Nevada Gaming Control Board, which approves 
and inspects the state's more than 204,000 slot machines. But don't 
weep for the casino owners, Copher said, noting that 5 percent of 
the state's slot machines' take in the last fiscal year amounted to 
more than $5 billion. Before the computer era, slot machines featured 
spinning reels, usually three, seen through a window. A player would 
insert a coin, pull the machine's handle to start the reels spinning 
and hope that when they stopped, the symbols painted on the reels 
would line up in a winning combination. If they did, the player received 
some or all of the coins that had been placed into the machine. The 
odds of winning were determined by the number of reels in the machine 
and the number of symbols on each reel, explained Verne F. Holmes 
Jr., an inventor of electronic slot machine devices and vice president 
of new product development at Station Casinos, which owns the Palace 
Station. Now all that is done with a computer chip, usually an Eprom 
(Erasable Programmable Read-Only Memory) chip, that is programmed 
to generate random numbers and then to translate those numbers into 
the results the slot machine actually shows plyers: two single bars 
and a bell, for example. Slot machine makers say the game's outcomes 
cannot be predetermined by a master computer tucked away somewhere, 
and gambling regulatory groups like Copher's are charged with making 
certain that such a thing never becomes possible. To help make sure 
that the chips, and, of course, the programming they contain, are 
not rewritten or manipulated, some of them are covered with an epoxy 
film and tamper-resistant tape (a duplicate chip with duplicate programming 
is kept by independent inspectors for periodic bit-by-bit comparisons). 
``It's all random,'' said Copher, of the Nevada Control Board. ``We 
check all of the slot machines.'' The networked jackpots, one of the 
most significant changes in slot machines, are based on machines built 
around computer chips. The Megabucks slot machines, for example, are 
wired on closed networks like private Internets (riverboat-based versions 
of the game can use wireless network connections) so they can communicate 
with other slot machines offering the same game. In Nevada, for instance, 
Megabucks is played statewide on a network of about 700 linked slot 
machines in 133 locations. Every time a player in Nevada drops a dollar 
into a Megabucks slot machine, about six cents of that dollar is added 
to a special running jackpot figure posted simultaneously at the casinos 
where slot machine players can see it. Much smaller jackpots are usually 
independent of the network and are paid directly out of the machine 
a gambler plays, Rogich said. When the computer chip inside a machine 
comes up with a big jackpot winner, the machine the player won on 
automatically locks, waiting for technicians to arrive to check its 
integrity. But gamblers on the other machines in the network continue 
to gamble for a new jackpot, which starts at $5 million, said Rogich, 
of International Game Technology. His company started the networked 
game 11 years ago. Even slot machines that do not have networked jackpots 
are linked to networks that keep track of operations at particular 
casinos, said Ken Geiger, assistant vice president for slot-machine 
operations at the Las Vegas Hilton. Geiger manages his thousands of 
clanging and flashing slot machines at the Hilton with a computer 
network that gives him up-to-the-minute information on the status 
of each machine, like how many coins have gone into a machine, how 
many have been paid out and when the machine was last opened for maintenance 
and refilling. This is increasingly useful in an age when casino managers 
worry that each new computer advance will be challenged by hackers 
hoping to turn it to their own ends. ``Every one of those slot machines 
reports to a mainframe upstairs,'' Geiger said. ``If somebody right 
now opens up a slot machine door and leaves it open, it will page 
the person who left it open and a manager and say someone left the 
door open. The technology has gone through the roof.'' Computer technology 
can also be used to keep track of gamblers. Many of even the most 
common slot machines are equipped with card readers to handle the 
cards, resembling credit cards, that are given free to players. Through 
the cards, players are rewarded with points toward various prizes, 
based on how much they gamble. The system is similar to an airline 
frequent-flier program. Players furnish personal information in signing 
up for tracking cards, so the system gives casinos a wealth of information 
on gamblers' habits and background, and that information is stored 
in a casino database. When a player inserts a card, for instance, 
the casino can learn by way of the slot machine network that it is 
the player's birthday and dispatch a message to a casino waitress 
to give the player a drink on the house. Computers have also turned 
the slot machine into an entertainment center designed to help keep 
the player at the machine. The machines often include video games 
and other flashy displays with CD-quality sound and high-end graphics 
and offer such amenities as optical coin and bill readers. An International 
Game Technology catalog says one of its new machines comes ``cable 
ready'' so casino operators can let players watch their favorite sporting 
events or soap operas on the slot machines while they are hoping to 
hit the big one. The slot machines ``seem more like video games to 
me,'' Lenny Bakken, 31, an occasional player from Rochester, Minn., 
said after dropping a few quarters in a flashing, clanging electronic 
contraption that merged elements of old slot machines with a spinning 
Jeopardy wheel. ``It sure keeps your attention more,'' he added. And 
that may be cause for increased caution on the part of gamblers. Niraj 
Verma, an associate professor of planning and management at the University 
of Southern California in Los Angeles who often writes about technology's 
influence on society, worries about applying so-called user-friendly 
technologies like those in computers and video games to devices like 
slot machines, which, judged by their rate of return, are inherently 
unfriendly. ``It lures us into a kind of sense of security,'' Verma 
said, ``a familiar territory of bells and whistles and gizmos and 
fun. Our guard is down, and all of this contributes to taking away 
from us our control of ourselves. That is, in my view, the bottom 
line.'' But casino executives like Geiger at the Las Vegas Hilton 
are delighted rather than worried. They are banking on the appeal 
of video-game-like slot machines as they cram their gaming floors 
with high-tech slot machines with names like Wild Cherry Pie, Wheel 
of Fortune and Reel 'Em In, which increasingly have more in common 
with Nintendo than with the old-fashioned casino. ``The standard of 
standing in front of a slot machine with a three-reel spinner and 
putting in your $20 and losing your $20 and saying, `Wow, that went 
quick,' is phasing out,''' said Geiger, who started in the casino 
business 20 years ago in Atlantic City. ``Now it's, What can I put 
in front of the customer where he can sit down and I can entertain 
him? If we can mold the next generation into enjoying themselves while 
they're gambling, it's a home run.'' 
</TEXT>
</DOC>