<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981216.0431 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Goldman, Sachs &AMP; Co. announced Wednesday that it would enter a 
partnership with the government of Guangdong Province in southern 
China to help rescue one of the region's biggest state-owned companies. 
Guangdong said it had hired Goldman as a financial adviser. It is 
the first instance of a foreign investment bank's working for a provincial 
government in China. Goldman also said it would buy a $20 million 
stake in Guangdong Enterprises Holdings, a state-owned investment 
conglomerate based in Hong Kong, once the restructuring is complete 
in six to eight months. The exact financing of a revamped Guangdong 
Enterprises is not yet clear. The deal comes at a critical if muddled 
time in China's slow-going financial reform. Frightened by Asia's 
economic crisis, leaders in Beijing have lost their enthusiasm for 
fast reform of their currency and stock markets. Still, China is proceeding 
with an overhaul of its troubled banks and investment companies, seeking 
to clear up mountains of bad debt before serious problems, like those 
seen elsewhere in Asia, develop. Guangdong Province, the most affluent 
and free-wheeling area in China, has been at the forefront of the 
nation's market reforms for nearly 20 years. However, along with a 
creative interpretation of socialist ideology has come lax supervision 
and an abundance of questionable business dealings with government 
money, especially in real estate speculation. Early this year, Beijing 
sent new political leaders to Guangdong to try to rectify the situation. 
A crackdown on the extensive smuggling operations in Guangdong has 
also aimed to restore economic order. In October, Beijing sent a clear 
message that it would get tougher with its investment companies when 
it closed down Guangdong International Trust &AMP; Investment Co., 
which was unable to repay $2 billion in domestic and foreign loans. 
The closing signaled a shift away from largely outdated trust company 
financing _ created in the days when Chinese banks offered limited 
financial services _ and toward a more modern financial system built 
around banks and capital markets. Wednesday's announcement appears 
to be another step in that direction. ``To restructure so comprehensively 
a company like this is a first for China,'' said Wang Qishan, Guangdong's 
executive vice governor. A well-connected and aggressive political 
operator, he is one of the leaders sent by Beijing to rein in errant 
financial practices. In Hong Kong trading Wednesday, red-chip Guangdong 
Investment Ltd. rose 4 cents to $1.65, or 21 cents (United States) 
after Goldman announced it would take an equity stake in its parent, 
Guangdong Enterprises Ltd. In the past, Chinese officials have been 
reluctant to hire Western financial advisers, in part because of the 
culture of secrecy that pervades government operations here. Investment 
bankers in Hong Kong noted that in 1995 when Wang was president of 
the People's Construction Bank, he engineered China's first joint-venture 
investment bank with Morgan Stanley. Wang also played a role in hiring 
Goldman to sell shares of China Telecom on the New York Stock Exchange 
last year, a deal that investment bankers said earned Goldman more 
than $80 million. Now, Goldman partners have agreed to put $20 million 
of their own money into a company that will require an extensive restructuring 
before it shows any return on investment. The company, which operates 
in real estate, manufacturing and trading, is deeply in debt and has 
been borrowing heavily in short-term markets to stave off its creditors. 
Goldman executives effectively admitted that the investment was based 
on political as well as commercial intentions. ``We're not doing this 
to get a specific, targeted return,'' Henry M. Paulson Jr., Goldman's 
co-chief executive, said at a news conference in Hong Kong. ``We're 
investing to signal our confidence in Guangdong.'' A major problem 
with state-owned holdings like Guangdong Enterprises is that they 
have been managed by political appointees who are typically more interested 
in personal gain and in greasing their political connections than 
in making the companies commercially viable. Although Chinese leaders 
are now trying to sell many small unprofitable state-owned companies, 
current policy is still to keep most large state-owned companies government-owned. 
A joint statement released Wednesday reflected the mix of political 
and commercial challenges facing Goldman. It said that the objective 
of the restructuring was to remake Guangdong Enterprises into a financially 
independent entity, as well as to demonstrate the Guangdong government's 
commitment to the restructuring of state-owned enterprises. In recent 
years, Goldman has been aggressively buying up assets in several Asian 
countries, including debt in South Korea and Thailand. A special unit 
devoted to buying large stakes in troubled companies, called Goldman 
Sachs Merchant Bank, has operated both for the bank and on behalf 
of clients. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>