<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981216.0325 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
NEW YORK _ ``Works on paper'' in the context of art can cover the 
whole gamut of human experience. Rembrandt and Rubens, Watteau and 
Goya, Ingres and Cezanne _ all made works on paper that can change 
us for ever. But ``works on paper'' can also mean nice little pictures 
that never puzzle or disconcert. The German painter Anselm Kiefer 
has never made images like that, and it is clear from his new exhibition 
at the Metropolitan Museum that he's not going to begin doing it now. 
``Anselm Kiefer: Works on Paper in the Metropolitan Museum of Art'' 
fills several large galleries and has 54 items, most done between 
1969 and 1993. This is not a loan show that will sit there for a few 
weeks and then slip out the back door. Everything in it belongs (or 
has been promised) to the Met. Faith and confidence in any one artist 
could hardly go further, and all the more so because Kiefer has always 
tapped into a vein of latent Europhobia when shown in this country. 
As he was born in March 1945 and has always treated the Nazis with 
irony, ridicule and contempt, he cannot be called (in one of today's 
favorite adjectives) ``Nazi-tainted.'' But quite often he goes back 
and back in his imagination to the distant past of Germany, to which 
so much in the way of myth and legend can be traced. What are these 
myths and these legends, he asks, and what have people made of them? 
In 1980, for instance, he constructed a model of a deep mountain cave 
in Thuringia. In that cave, the Emperor Frederick Barbarossa was believed 
to have been waiting since the 12th century for the moment at which 
he would emerge to restore the greatness of Germany. But when Kiefer 
deals with that legend in the present show, it is not the bearded 
Emperor who sits at the bottom of that cave. It is a palette that 
stood for ``the unknown painter'' who will one day redeem his country. 
Over and over again, in this show, the palette reappears as a force 
for good. Perhaps the most striking instance of this is the ``St. 
Eustace'' of 1974. One of the wonders of older German art is the engraving 
by Albrecht Durer in which the future St. Eustace suddenly comes upon 
a stag that has a crucifix between its horns. Using a Polaroid photograph 
of a reindeer that he had taken in Norway, Kiefer worked it up in 
his own way and substituted a golden palette for the crucifix. Rough 
and ready as it may be, by comparison with Durer, the image has an 
ungainly force that is all his own. But Kiefer is not only Euro-centered 
in the sources of his inspiration. In 1971, he made a relatively straightforward 
watercolor in which a man lies on the ground, naked, with a complicated 
branch of a tree sprouting from his abdomen. The curator of the show, 
Nan Rosenthal, tells us in her catalog that this image relates to 
15th- and 16th-century painted books from Mesoamerica, ``where it 
was believed that a family originated as if born from a tree.'' As 
Kiefer was first married in 1971, this notion may well have caught 
his fancy at that time. Many of the images in the new show were inspired 
by travels not in Germany but in Israel, in Yugoslavia or in northernmost 
Norway. These travels were not a matter of superior tourism. They 
allowed him to make unexpected leaps in time and place and thereby 
to renew the element of surprise in tales too often standardized. 
Ms. Rosenthal points out, for instance, that in painting ``The Miracle 
of the Serpents'' from the Book of Exodus, Kiefer managed to make 
a vital point in the story by including an Art Deco light fixture 
from the 30th Street train station in Philadelphia. Almost every image 
in the show uses three or more modes of expression. They might look 
cranky or perverse, but they don't, even when they include torn and 
pasted photographs and also draw upon gouache, acrylic, watercolor, 
shellac or ballpoint pen. If these elements do not ``harmonize'' in 
traditional ways, it is because they aren't meant to. There are no 
norms in Kiefer's methods of work. The works on view in the Met are 
installed in such a way that we simply can't hurry along. We have 
to stop and look at every one. It was a bold idea to give them the 
kind of space that is normally reserved for Old Master paintings, 
but the compulsory breather pays off. It takes time, for instance, 
to work it out that the image called ``Heinrich von Fallersleben: 
The Belt'' gives a completely new twist to the song that is all too 
familiar to us as ``Deutschland, Deutschland Uber Alles.'' The third 
verse of that song, now the German national anthem, is a plea for 
``unity, law and liberty,'' and Kiefer based his image on a photograph 
of the winding waterway that now provides a peaceful passage through 
Kiel Bay and on to Denmark and Sweden. At the end of the show, there 
is a startling change of scale. The historical rationale for this 
is provided by the gigantic ``Triumphal Arch'' commissioned by the 
Emperor Maximilian from Durer and others and lent by the National 
Gallery of Art in Washington for this show. Measuring 135 by 114 inches, 
it is hefty competition, both in scale and in quality. But in 1977-78 
Kiefer made a number of composite woodcuts. One of them measured 125 
by 151 inches, and the others were not much smaller. Huge, up-front 
and full-bodied, they are reprises, one after another, of Kiefer's 
major German obsessions. There is a concise dictionary of national 
biography in which great men, bad men and monsters in human shape 
all figure. There is Brunnhilde's horse, Grane, with the last scene 
of ``Gotterdammerung'' already well under way. And there is ``Untitled 
(the Rhine)'' in which Hitler's ``Soldiers' Hall'' (planned 1938-41, 
but never built) is parked, like a stately encumbrance, on the banks 
of the Rhine, quite some way from Berlin. Works likes these call for 
long looking and close thinking. It is very much to the credit of 
the 20th-century department of the Met that it has assembled what 
is apparently the largest single Kiefer collection to be found in 
any museum anywhere. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>