<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981216.0552 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Everywhere Bill Parcells has been in the National Football League, 
every team that Parcells has coached, David Meggett has been there. 
Been there with Parcells with the Giants. Been there with Parcells 
with the Patriots. And now Meggett is here with Parcells with the 
Jets. They are like the right shoe with the left one, or the other 
pants leg, or the other glove. They understand each other (and that's 
a mouthful). They often find they need each other. Meggett _ Parcells 
calls him ``David'' though many call him Dave _ was a big part of 
Parcells' success with the Giants. Parcells' second Super Bowl victory 
with the Giants was earned with Meggett returning kicks and punts 
and tripping defenses on third-down plays as a receiver from the backfield. 
Then Parcells went to New England, and soon after Meggett joined him 
with the Patriots. Parcells lobbied long and hard for Meggett with 
the New England brass and won it over. Soon, Meggett did, too, on 
the field and as a leader in the locker room. During the past off 
season, however, Meggett was recuperating from a foot injury and more. 
He has theft and assault charges pending in an alleged sexual misconduct 
incident last February in Toronto. The Patriots cut him. He had been 
attending classes at Towson State. Parcells called. He called Meggett 
after the Toronto incident, too. Meggett needed him then. He called 
Meggett recently. This time, Parcells needed him. Parcells needed 
Meggett because Parcells and the Jets are in the thick of the race 
for the first place in the American Football Conference East. The 
Jets are 10-4 and are already in the playoffs. They want more. Parcells 
wants more. With big regular-season games left at Buffalo on Saturday 
and then home the following week against New England, Parcells is 
marshaling his forces for the East title and for the best possible 
seeding in the playoffs. Injuries have hurt his kick-returning game 
and his depth at running back. This is no time for guesswork; go for 
what you know. And Parcells knows Meggett. He nurtured him as a young 
player. He rode him and ripped him and coaxed him and then watched 
Meggett respond. Not every player responds to Parcells' heavy hand 
and nauseating bark. His style can be deplorable to some, lovable 
for others. Meggett can take it and, more important for the player, 
it works. There was an incident once in New England when Meggett muffed 
a punt and returned to the sideline, and Parcells whacked him good. 
Right there on the sideline. And then in the same game Meggett scored 
a touchdown. When he returned to the sideline, Parcells hugged him. 
``I talked to him two days after the Toronto thing happened,'' Parcells 
said. ``He said, `This is a setup.' He has never lied to me. He's 
never been a discipline problem, never late for meetings. Some of 
these guys socially, it's tough to keep up. I know David to be a trustworthy, 
honest person. A lot of these guys are vulnerable.'' The loving, caring, 
understanding Bill Parcells? This is not a mile he would walk for 
merely any player. In word or in deed. This is where Parcells must 
love being the general manger and head coach of the Jets. Given any 
of his previous setups with the Giants or the Patriots, Parcells would 
have had to perform major selling to sign Meggett, not only because 
of the old injury but also because of the off-field baggage he brings. 
But now, this decision, obviously, is pretty much Parcells'. And it 
did not take him long to settle on Meggett once he saw him run and 
cut in a workout and do the things he used to do. In New England, 
Meggett was one of Parcells' lieutenants in the locker room. Meggett 
would offer advice to younger players. He would help those struggling 
to understand Parcells' unorthodox ways. He helped to keep the locker 
room focused on Parcells as much as on winning. He is a special player 
_ the National Football League career leader in punt returns (344) 
and in punt return yardage (3,688) _ and he is in a special situation. 
Fourteen Jets games down. Two Jets games to go in the regular season, 
and then a run toward the Super Bowl. Enter Meggett. A player who 
has not taken a hit on the field this season but has taken hits in 
his pride and character in nearly every way imaginable. Parcells is 
an irascible guy who builds loyalties that last with a handful of 
players and coaches. Bill Belichick, his defensive coordinator, has 
13 seasons with Parcells. Romeo Crennel, his defensive line coach, 
has 19 seasons with Parcells. Keith Byars followed him from the Patriots 
to the Jets. So did Curtis Martin. But Meggett is a rare player who 
has been everywhere Bill Parcells has been as a head coach. Almost 
three seasons ago, the Patriots came to Giants Stadium to play the 
Giants in the regular-season finale for both teams. The Patriots were 
en route to Super Bowl XXXI and their loss to Green Bay. It was Parcells' 
return to the New York fans, this time as the Patriots' coach. It 
was Meggett's return, this time as a Patriots kick returner. Meggett 
returned a punt for 60 yards for a touchdown in that game and the 
Patriots, down by 22-0, rebounded with vigor and won, 23-22. The look 
in the eyes of Parcells and Meggett on that day said plenty about 
their special relationship. I need you. You need me. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>