<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981216.0462 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
A coalition of environmentalists plans to sue the Forest Service on 
Thursday, demanding an end to logging in national forests on grounds 
that the federal timber program causes more economic harm than good. 
The environmental groups, led by Friends of the Earth and Forest Guardians, 
assert that the Forest Service routinely ignores laws and regulations 
that require it to calculate the economic costs of logging, such as 
damage to water resources or tourism, and to weigh them against the 
benefits, such as the value of the timber that is sold. In one sense, 
the lawsuit upends the typical dispute between business groups who 
say that environmental regulations cost more than they are worth, 
and environmentalists who usually argue that the benefits of strict 
environmental rules cannot be expressed in dollars. For years, the 
environmentalists have been fighting attempts in Congress to require 
cost-benefit tests. Now they are in court seeking exactly that. The 
lawsuit has been joined by recreation, hunting and fishing organizations, 
owners of small forest lots, tourism enterprises and others who say 
they have been harmed economically by the logging program. It is supported 
by some prominent natural resource economists who contend that is 
is possible to measure the worth of forests that are not logged _ 
and indeed that these values probably far exceed the worth of the 
timber they hold and the jobs that are created by logging. The suit 
is to be filed in federal district court for Vermont, in Burlington, 
said Brian Dunkiel, a staff lawyer for Friends of the Earth. It follows 
a year-long campaign in which the environmentalists filed administrative 
appeals with the Forest Service challenging hundreds of individual 
timber sales by the service, including in the Green Mountains National 
Forest in Vermont, on similar grounds, only to be rebuffed repeatedly. 
``The law requires the Forest Service to account for net economic 
and social values,'' Dunkiel said. ``It is almost as though the Congress 
had hired the Forest Service to serve as the public's accountant, 
to manage these assets. What has become clear is that the Forest Service 
has failed terribly.'' James Lyons, the undersecretary of agriculture 
for natural resources, said he had not seen the complaint and could 
not address its specifics. ``As an organization we are certainly moving 
in a direction that takes into account all the resources,'' Lyons 
said. ``We are seeking to improve, if not maximize, net public benefits. 
Our analysis is not focused solely on timber production. ``It's not 
what we take out of the woods, it's what we leave behind that really 
matters.'' The coalition's lawsuit relies on a new but increasingly 
influential theory among ecologists that it is possible to put a monetary 
price on the public benefits that flow from healthy ecosystems, such 
as providing habitat for commercial species, protecting drinking water 
reserves, providing recreation and helping control global warming. 
It comes at a time when the federal timber program, in which the Forest 
Service auctions off its trees to commercial companies, is under challenge 
on many fronts. The Clinton administration is considering sweeping 
new forest policies aimed at protecting the last pristine stands of 
trees in roadless areas, and anti-logging forces have proposed legislation 
in Congress that would restrict logging and road construction in tens 
of millions of acres in national forests. But some conservationists 
have complained that the administration's approach exempts major forests 
from protection, and the legislation has virtually no chance of being 
enacted because pro-logging lawmakers control committees in the House 
and Senate that have jurisdiction over forests. Instead, the plaintiffs 
in the suit are seeking to force the Forest Service to stop logging 
until it obeys what they say are the requirements of existing laws 
and rules. In documents prepared for the lawsuit, John Talberth, the 
executive director of Forest Guardians, presents the results of a 
broad review he conducted of the professional literature describing 
what he called generally accepted standards for measuring the values 
of forests and the costs of logging them. He also presents results 
of a survey of hundreds of timber sale documents obtained from the 
Forest Service, which he said demonstrated that the agency ``has failed 
to incorporate significant information about the socio-economic values 
of unlogged national forests into timber sale program decisions.'' 
</TEXT>
</DOC>