<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981216.0353 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
The CBS sitcom ``Everybody Loves Raymond'' now regularly beats Fox's 
``Ally McBeal'' in the Monday night Nielsens. Recently, an executive 
producer of ``Raymond,'' Philip Rosenthal, expressed his delight to 
Entertainment Weekly with a notable shortage of grace, semantic and 
otherwise. Asked how he accounted for the superior ratings, Rosenthal 
said, ``Everyone on our show has no problem eating.'' Sore winners 
are bad enough; boorish ones should guffaw to themselves in private. 
Rosenthal wasn't even being original; he's just the latest to jump 
on the Ally-bashing bandwagon, a vehicle that rolls with some regularity 
over the slender bones of the show's lawyer heroine and Calista Flockhart, 
the gifted young stage actress who plays her. The hysteria over Ms. 
Flockhart's putative anorexia reached such a pitch of meanness a couple 
of months ago that the actress took to eating large meals in public 
as self-defense. Ms. Flockhart is hardly the only young woman on television 
these days who looks like a line drawing. In the print ads for HBO's 
``Sex and the City,'' Sarah Jessica Parker's hips are no wider than 
the laptop she's typing on. According to my laptop, that's 11.5 inches, 
and she's sitting down. But nobody's rushing to stitch an ``A'' for 
anorexia on the skimpy little dresses Ms. Parker wears in the show. 
Nor, for that matter, has she been attacked for wearing them. ``Sex 
and the City,'' like the autobiographical sketches by Candace Bushnell 
that the show is based on, is a not-quite-tongue-in-cheek portrait 
of the educated young urban woman as a man-hungry gold digger. Nevertheless, 
when the editors of Time magazine felt moved last summer to ask the 
question ``Is Feminism Dead?'' they didn't make Ms. Parker or Ms. 
Bushnell the punch line of what must surely be the silliest cover 
of the year. Instead, their hilarious array of disembodied female 
heads floating in a funereal black sea proceeded from Susan B. Anthony 
through Betty Friedan and Gloria Steinem to _ who else? _ Ally McBeal. 
The death of feminism tends to be greatly exaggerated, but journalists 
have been writing its obituary since 1975, when Harpers magazine did 
its own cover article, ``Requiem for the Women's Movement,'' just 
in time to ride the antifeminist backlash while criticizing the movement 
for not being radical enough. Time does something similar, only the 
movement's problem now is that it's not serious enough. Ally is the 
antithesis of true feminism because (1) she gets upset when the supermarket 
doesn't have enough of her favorite snack, (2) her skirts are too 
short, and (3) she's a ditz who (4) thinks too much about her lousy 
love life. I'm a confirmed ``Ally McBeal'' fan who first took to the 
streets with knees knocking and feminist fist upraised not quite 30 
years ago, when my dress size was considerably smaller than it is 
now, and what dresses I owned seldom extended more than 12 inches 
down from the waist. I've never thought that her skirt length or eating 
habits were a threat to my political health. On the contrary, I identify. 
As for points (3) and (4), I come from a family of opinionated motormouths, 
but when I feel rattled or shy, heredity deserts me and my brain shifts 
into park. So when Ally gets that slightly wild deer-in-the-headlights 
look in her eye (it generally has to do with sex) and blurts something 
embarrassing, I identify with that too. It's a comfort to know that 
there's another woman out there, even an imaginary one, for whom the 
dance of desire begins with a foot in the mouth. None of that would 
matter if Ally were just an airhead, but she isn't. She wins her cases 
with ingenious, sometimes inspired arguments that have less to do 
with the law than with an attempt to discern some rules to live by 
in the blur of a rapidly changing world. At its uneven best, ``Ally 
McBeal'' is neither yuppie sitcom nor courtroom drama but an absurdist 
morality play that gives off sparks of screwball comedy. Its heroine 
is basically smart and thoughtful, with a prissy streak that's the 
downside of her penchant for worrying about what is right. If she's 
also confused and conflicted, that's because she exists in a state 
of uncomfortable dissent from the world around her. With her somewhat 
nutty integrity, Ally McBeal has always struck me as the weird little 
sister of Mary Richards, although she's not nearly so nice. Alone 
among her newsroom colleagues on ``The Mary Tyler Moore Show,'' Mary 
submissively called her boss Mr. Grant. When a judge tells Ally he 
will bar her from his courtroom unless she wears longer skirts, she 
calls him a pig. This is David E. Kelley, the show's creator, talking 
back to his critics, but it works within the terms of the character. 
It's not one of Ally's better moves, but to her own self she's certainly 
being true (not that she seems to have a choice). And like most eccentrics, 
she harbors a fugitive longing to be normal. How else to explain her 
attachment to her terminally bland ex-boyfriend? Handsome Billy and 
his pretty wife, Georgia, are the show's only true yupsters, a totally 
conventional couple who resent and make a perfect foil for Ally's 
stubborn singularity. They gripe at her for making waves, for getting 
out of line, for being larger than life, for, in other words, not 
knowing her place. She's that quintessential feminist emblem, the 
inconvenient woman. The Time magazine article lumped ``Ally McBeal'' 
together with ``Bridget Jones' Diary.'' But the heroine of Helen Fielding's 
comic British novel is consumed with the search for Mr. Right, while 
Ally spends much of her time turning eligible men away. (A little 
too much time, it seems to me; will she ever get to have sex again 
or was that cute nude model it?) ``Bridget Jones'' reads like something 
from a 50s time capsule. Candace Bushnell's money-grubbing hardbodies 
are more believable (so that's how Donald Trump keeps getting dates), 
but they don't represent much besides themselves. What rings both 
timely and true is Ally's mix of doubt, assertiveness and self-mocking 
humor, the last best expressed in her dissing contests with her roommate, 
Renee. If Ally is kin to Mary Richards, then Renee descends from Murphy 
Brown. Pugnacious and competitive, Renee copes with her vulnerability 
by putting on a tough front. Ally does it by putting on no front at 
all. Maybe that's why she creates such a disturbance both on and off 
the show. Her short skirts are a metaphor; she's all but walking naked 
through the world. My passion for ``Ally McBeal'' is not boundless. 
Most of the new episodes lack the emotional heft that gives the show 
its real payoff. Without that, the absurdism seems unfocused (the 
whole subplot involving a colleague's pet frog) or worse, unfunny. 
I've always thought the pristine unisex bathroom was one of the show's 
more resonant absurdities, another metaphor for that rude and ridiculous 
place where men and women eventually meet and things happen that nobody 
can control. But the missing frog pops out of the toilet where Ally 
is sitting so that she can go eek? Somebody leaves the toilet seat 
up so that she can fall in? If this is what Ally gets instead of a 
lover or even a fling, maybe Kelley should take his subconscious in 
for a tuneup, before he becomes the worst Ally-basher of all. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>