<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981216.0429 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
The attack on Iraq Wednesday sent ripples through world financial 
markets and was expected to weigh on American stocks when markets 
opened Thursday. But analysts, who noted that predicting market reactions 
is difficult, said they did not expect a major impact as long the 
attack succeeded rapidly. Assuming a quick resolution, markets should 
go back to trading on the basis of the other uncertainties worrying 
investors _ the impeachment vote looming over President Clinton, slowing 
corporate earnings and the deepening recession in much of the rest 
of the world. All of these events, analysts believe, could have a 
much bigger impact on stocks, bonds, the dollar, oil and other commodity 
prices than the Iraq attack. ``Markets, traders and investors really 
hate uncertainty,'' said David Blitzer, the chief economist at Standard 
&AMP; Poor's Corp. ``But,'' he added, referring to the bombing, ``they 
have been through it before and will look at what happened then.'' 
While the Dow Jones industrial average plunged 21 percent after the 
Iraqi invasion of Kuwait in August of 1990, it soared 18.5 percent 
in the two months after the war began in January and it appeared that 
the United States and its allies would win easily. ``I don't expect 
it to have a gargantuan impact,'' Blitzer said. ``It won't turn the 
tide.'' As in 1991, the Iraqi situation could turn positive quickly, 
which would prevent much reaction at all. That is why forecasting 
a market response is so difficult. Analysts also said that the big 
negative that threatened all markets in 1991 _ a surge in oil prices 
that took it quickly to $40 a barrel _ is extremely unlikely today. 
Futures contracts on both the Dow Jones industrial average and the 
Standard &AMP; Poor's index of 500 stocks, an indicator of how prices 
would likely behave in early trading Thursday, fell after news reports 
about the attack on Iraq, which came after the American markets had 
closed. During trading, when it was already clear that an attack was 
a possibility, stocks were little changed. The Dow Jones industrial 
average dropped 32.70 points to 8,790.60 while the S&AMP;P index of 
500 stocks slipped 0.89 points to 1,161.94. The Nasdaq index fell 
3.24 points to 2,009.36. In foreign stock markets early Thursday, 
the Nikkei index of 225 stocks was down about 1 percent but the move 
was small compared with recent trading. While the Iraq crisis was 
a dominant theme on Wall Street Wednesday, stocks also were affected 
by profit-warnings of large blue-chip companies. The latest was 3M, 
which said its fourth-quarter results would miss expectations. Its 
stock dropped 2 3/8 to 71 3/8. Hugh Johnson, chief investment officer 
at the First Albany Corp., said that the impeachment of the president 
could be far more damaging to stocks, especially if it ever seems 
that Clinton will actually leave office. ``The stock market expects 
the House to vote impeachment but that it will not get through the 
Senate,'' he said. Blitzer said just a long trial in the Senate, regardless 
of the outcome, could be a problem. ``I could see people getting distracted,'' 
he said. Bond market prices rose and yields, which move in the opposite 
direction, ended lower just as the official word of the Iraq attack 
came at 5 p.m. The price of the 30-year Treasury issue advanced 18/32 
to a price of 104 3/32 and its yield eased to 4.99 percent from 5.02 
on Tuesday. But one trader said that may just have been a knee-jerk 
reaction. In early trading in the bond futures market Wednesday night, 
there was very little reaction, with the price of the 30-year bond 
up just slightly. In anticipation of the possibility of a bombing, 
oil prices shot up sharply Wednesday after it was announced that U.N. 
inspectors were leaving Iraq because President Saddam Hussein of Iraq 
would not cooperate with inspections of the country's weapons programs. 
Since an attack on Iraq was avoided at the last minute in November, 
both the United States and Britain had threatened to attack without 
warning if the inspections program was undermined by Iraq. The near-month 
contract for oil on the New York Mercantile Exchange jumped 7.2 percent, 
or 83 cents, to $12.38 a barrel, the biggest single-day gain in three 
months. But Michael Rothman, the senior energy analyst at Merrill 
Lynch, said ``when this ends, it is very likely oil prices could be 
under renewed downward pressure.'' Even with Wednesday's rally, oil 
prices are not far above the 12-year lows they hit earlier this month. 
Rothman said the price of oil rose on the anticipation of the cutoff, 
if an attack began, of the 1.7 million to 1.8 million barrels of oil 
a day that Iraq is allowed to sell under a humanitarian exemption 
from the economic embargo in place since 1990. He estimated that supply 
could be disrupted for up to a month. But if sales resumed relatively 
quickly, he said, the temporary absence of Iraqi oil on the market 
would not make a significant dent in the glut that is depressing prices. 
Rothman said that he is not expecting the conflict to result in a 
disruption of oil production from any of Iraq's neighbors. The dollar 
also rallied Wednesday in Europe, as it often does when there is political 
or military uncertainty, rising to 1.6728 German marks from 1.6575 
marks Tuesday. But it was little changed against the Japanese yen, 
inching up to 116.53 yen from 116.35 yen Tuesday. But it is possible 
that the dollar could lose these gains quickly if it is clear that 
the attack on Iraq will be successful and will not lead to wider problems. 
In trading early in Tokyo Thursday, the dollar was lower against both 
the mark and the yen. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>