<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981216.0315 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
The Stanislavsky Nemirovich-Danchenko Ballet from Moscow came into 
its own on Tuesday night with its splendid signature piece, Vladimir 
Bourmeister's 1953 revisionist staging of ``Swan Lake.'' With a smartly 
rehearsed corps led by a soulful and glamorous Lilya Musavarova as 
Odette-Odile and Georgi Smilevsky as an all-too-human prince overwhelmed 
by fate, the company was visibly more at home here than in ``The Nutcracker,'' 
which opened its season last week at the Kennedy Center for the Performing 
Arts in Washington. This is not your conventional ``Swan Lake.'' As 
a vibrant theatrical spectacle, it is all fire and ice. Bourmeister's 
choreography for a fiercely dramatic ballroom act has a devilish red 
glow. The evil magician Rothbart turns the usual floor show into a 
stunning entertainment intended to confuse the prince. It isn't just 
Odette, the Swan Queen who is a maiden by night, who appears in a 
vision to reproach Prince Siegfried for his betrayal of their love. 
Even her malicious double, Odile, initially appears and disappears 
as a seductive mirage amid an array of menacing character dancers. 
It is a dazzling scene heightened by its contrast to the ice-blue 
images of the lakeside acts, in which Siegfried encounters the swan 
maidens. That Odette was, so to speak, once a full-time maiden is 
at the narrative core of this production. One of Bourmeister's prime 
innovations was to add a prologue and epilogue. Before Act I begins, 
Odette is a human, picking flowers for a bouquet. When she climbs 
onto a ledge on a huge rock, she is caught in the oversized wings 
of the owl-like Rothbart, who rises up as a shadowy shape above her. 
The epilogue reverses the action. Odette and Siegfried, through true 
love, break Rothbart's spell. They throw themselves into a simulated 
flood that Tchaikovsky had in mind in his original score for ``Swan 
Lake.'' Thanks to a blackout, the tutu-clad Swan Queen raised by Siegfried 
is transformed into the original princess, now in a pink dress, as 
the rock and presumably Rothbart crumble behind them. So many of Bourmeister's 
ideas have seeped into other Russian and Western productions of ``Swan 
Lake'' that it is difficult to imagine the initial impact of his rethinking 
of this 19th-century classic, now usually seen in the 1895 version 
choreographed by Lev Ivanov and Marius Petipa. For one thing, Bourmeister 
went back to Tchaikovsky's score for the first version of ``Swan Lake,'' 
choreographed by Julius Reisinger in 1877 for the Bolshoi Ballet. 
Bourmeister found in archival sources the supposedly lost music for 
Act III, the ballroom scene, that George Balanchine used in his 1960 
``Tchaikovsky Pas de Deux.'' The ``Black Swan'' pas de deux in Bourmeister's 
version is thus danced to the music for the adagio and male solo in 
the Balanchine showpiece. Odile's solo is danced to music often used 
in Russian productions, and the coda music was used by Frederick Ashton 
in a Royal Ballet production. Bourmeister restored the flood that 
the 1895 version discarded for a happy apotheosis. But the uplift 
of Soviet esthetic policy did not allow for Tchaikovsky's tragic ending, 
and Bourmeister reunited the hapless regal lovers in his epilogue. 
In Bourmeister's ``Swan Lake,'' which the company claims to have faithfully 
preserved, it is clear that he hoped to modernize a 19th-century classic 
by restoring its characters' psychological motivations. He rechoreographed 
the entire ballet, except for Act II, where he retained Ivanov's choreography 
for the swan maidens, as staged by Pyotr Gusev. Act I is reoriented 
dramatically to show the prince and his knights dancing with peasant 
girls in the waltz. The peasants are modest, with eyes cast down, 
and they hide when the Queen Mother enters with her retinue. The prince 
is clearly not interested in the brides that the Queen suggests he 
choose. The jester of Soviet productions is interwoven into the choreography. 
Vitaly Breusenko was first-rate in the intelligent bravura of this 
part. The usual pas de trois is danced by two couples with some input 
from the prince, who dances to the music usually heard in the ``Black 
Swan'' adagio. As a classical company, the Stanislavsky dancers may 
lose some purity of style at times. But the female corps was flawless 
in Act II, where Ms. Musavarova's unfolding and beautiful line carved 
the requisite shapes in space with consistent lyricism. Ivanov knew 
best. But Bourmeister's third act may actually improve on Petipa's 
character dances, all rechoreographed to vibrant effects with Kadria 
Amirova leading four men with twirling red capes. The new duet for 
the Black Swan had some awkward moments, although Smilevsky was exemplary 
in his acting and technique, and Ms. Musavarova offered some perfect 
fouettes. Vladimir Arefiyev designed the 1993 sets, including the 
imposing ballroom decor. Georgi Zhemchuzhin conducted, accenting the 
lyrical without bombast. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>