<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981216.0263 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
It was my search for beautiful hollies that led me to Swarthmore College, 
where I found hundreds of them marching down a hill, like some jolly 
medieval procession heading for the meadow. I followed along, looking 
for the best berries, the bluest leaf and the secrets of how they 
grow. Swarthmore was founded by Quakers in 1864, and the 400-acre 
campus includes 200 acres of native forest, a meandering stream called 
Crum Creek, and the magnificent trees and plant collections of the 
Scott Arboretum, founded in 1929 by Arthur Scott, class of 1895, and 
heir to the Scott Paper Co. If Scott felt a little guilty about all 
those trees that died for toilet paper, more industrialists should 
do such penance. Imagine spending four years studying your Shakespeare 
under a bur oak planted in 1876, or seeing your first Sophocles in 
an amphitheater terraced into a hilly woods with native poplars rising 
like a great cathedral overhead. ``They built the amphitheater around 
the trees, not the other way around,'' said Andrew Bunting, the curator 
of the Scott Arboretum, leading the way through the woods to the James 
Frorer Holly Collection. Frorer, class of 1915, was an avid holly 
collector, and in 1974, he offered the college $100,000 to adopt and 
move hundreds of mature hollies from his home in Wilmington, Del. 
``It took $64,000 just to move them, all balled and burlapped, on 
flatbed trailers,'' Bunting said as he surveyed the collection, which 
now includes about 1,000 shrubs and trees _ more than 300 kinds of 
hollies. ``Some had 10-foot rootballs.'' They were planted on the 
south-facing slope, interspersed with dogwoods, whose white blossoms 
set off the dark evergreens in spring. When you are intrigued by a 
plant, it's a good idea to visit an arboretum or public garden with 
a good collection to compare the color and shape of leaves and fruit, 
and the habits of the plants, which in the case of hollies can sprawl 
along the ground or grow to the regal height of 50 feet. Some of the 
old American and English hollies here are 50 feet tall and 20 feet 
across, and their lustrous evergreen leaves are set off to perfection 
against the hardwood forest at the top of the ridge, which protects 
them from the north wind. Picture those dark greens against golden 
hickories in the fall. Deciduous hollies, which are native to swamps, 
thrive in the flood plain at the bottom of the hill. These are the 
hollies that lose their leaves and parade their berries all winter 
on bare branches. ``We've had storms where the water is 6 feet deep, 
and these do quite well,'' Bunting said, standing in a grove of winterberry, 
or Ilex verticillata Winter Red, whose gray branches were loaded with 
bright red berries. Some varieties will grow as high as 12 feet, but 
for small spaces, there's a cute five-footer called Red Sprite. Deciduous 
hollies are quite stoloniferous, meaning they send out shoots from 
underground, and if you have the space (or can't kill them with an 
ax), let them expand into a natural grove. They hold on to their berries 
straight through the winter, and the birds don't eat them unless they 
get desperate. Sparkleberry is another good deciduous holly, reaching 
the height of a small tree, with branches loaded with fiery red berries. 
Tiasquam has bigger, orange-red berries growing more sparsely along 
the stems. And Winter Gold has big, bright yellow berries that look 
like sticks full of M&AMP;M's. The holly that really caught my eye 
was Ilex x koehneana San Jose, which has a tall, conical habit with 
a dark green spiny leaf similar to English holly, only much flatter 
and bigger, with berries densely clustered along the stem. San Jose 
is hardy to Zone 6, which includes New York City, but this big holly 
can't be crammed into a little bitty backyard. I also loved Ilex pedunculosa, 
or longstalk holly, with soft leaves (no spines!) and berries dangling 
like little earrings from inch-long stems. If hollies smoked cigarettes, 
this one would. It looks great, Bunting says, espaliered against a 
wall. English holly, Ilex aquifolium, has dark, glossy leaves, with 
spined, wavy edges and dark red berries. American holly, Ilex opaca, 
has a more opaque leaf and orange-red berries. It's also hardy to 
about minus 20 degrees, while English holly can take only about minus 
10 degrees. Most hollies are dioecious, which means that plants have 
either male or female flowers, and the female plants won't bear fruit 
unless you have a male plant somewhere in the vicinity. ``You don't 
need the same species, but you need to make sure they are blooming 
at the same time,'' Bunting said, so that bees can carry the male 
pollen to the female flowers. The male plant can, in typical fashion, 
pollinate many females, so you need only one, and it can be within 
a city block of its harem. Deciduous hollies have three different 
bloom times, so hybridizers have developed certain male pollinators 
that bloom at the same time as the female plants. Southern Gentleman, 
for instance, is supposed to pollinate Winter Red, and Rhett Butler 
was designed for _ let me guess _ Scarlett O'Hara. ``But Rhett will 
also pollinate Sparkleberry,'' Bunting said as we stared at a stand 
of bright red berries in the meadow. Sparkleberry's other mate is 
Apollo. Who says botanists never have any fun? The male plants can 
do fine in light shade, but if you want your hollies to fruit, put 
them in the sun and give them rich, well-draining, slightly acid soil 
(a pH of 6 to 6.5). Like most broad-leafed evergreens, hollies should 
be planted in the spring to let roots get established before hot weather 
makes the leaves transpire. If you plant in the fall, and then get 
a hot spell, the undeveloped roots won't be able to compensate for 
water lost through the leaves. The blue hollies (Ilex x meserveae), 
developed on Long Island by Kathleen Meserve, are cold-hardy to minus 
15 degrees. They have spiny, lustrous blue-green leaves and shiny 
red fruits. But don't count on a lovely habit or shape. The plants 
look as if they'd been tortured. Better just to make wreaths. Try 
Blue Princess, which grows to about 8 feet, if conditions are right, 
and Blue Prince, her mate. There are far too many hollies to describe 
here, but the Brooklyn Botanic Garden has a good $7.95 handbook on 
the family (718-622-4433, ext. 274), with propagation techniques, 
information on the Holly Society of America and source lists. Two 
mail-order nurseries with good holly varieties are Fairweather Gardens, 
in Greenwich, N.J. (609-451-6261), and Windrose Nursery, Pen Argyl, 
Pa. (610-588-1037). Both take cuttings from the Scott Arboretum, so 
if you see one at the college that you like, ask the nursery to propagate 
it. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>