<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981216.0471 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Faced with a significant drop in computer and software advertising, 
Ziff-Davis Inc., the publisher of high-technology magazines, is pursuing 
new sources of ad income from car, electronic commerce and other companies. 
According to Adscope, of Eugene, Ore., which tracks technology advertising 
in 400 computer, telecommunications, special interest and consumer 
publications, technology ad expenditures fell 4 percent in the third 
quarter compared with figures in the period a year earlier. Revenue 
dropped 10 percent for computer and telecommunications titles in particular. 
Adscope also said third-quarter technology advertising revenues were 
down 8.7 percent for Ziff-Davis and down 7 percent and 11.8 percent, 
respectively, for its competitors IDG and CMP Media Inc. For the first 
nine months of the year, compared with the period a year earlier, 
this spending was down 6.9 percent for Ziff-Davis, down 1 percent 
for CMP and up 5.2 percent for IDG, Adscope said. Claude Sheer, the 
former president of Ziff-Davis Publishing who was recently named the 
company's chief Internet strategist, attributed the decline in technology 
advertising to four factors: computer companies diverting advertising 
money to solving the Year 2000 problem; the downturn in the Asian 
economy, which has depressed computer sales in the region; consolidation 
within the computer industry, which has cut into ad budgets, and fewer 
introductions of new computer products, which has also diminished 
advertising. ``If any one of these happened by itself, it would have 
been a minor speed bump, but for all four to occur in one year, it's 
gotten to be a pretty big deal pretty quickly,'' he said. As a result 
of the decline, Ziff-Davis, which is 70 percent owned by Softbank, 
a Japanese distributor of software, shut down three of its 15 magazines, 
Internet Business, Equip and Windows Pro, in October and laid off 
10 percent of its work force of 3,500. In addition, it is revising 
its advertising strategy, going after categories that have not traditionally 
promoted their products or services in Ziff-Davis' titles. The largest 
of these categories is automotive advertisers, which the publisher 
has pursued for the last several years, stepping up its efforts during 
the summer. To reach this group, Ziff-Davis set up an ad sales office 
in Detroit in June. It also commissioned a study by ICR, a market 
research firm in Media, Pa., which it said found that 10 million of 
the 71 million U.S. consumers who went online in the third quarter 
researched a car or light-truck purchase. According to Ziff-Davis, 
the survey also found that online car researchers were twice as likely 
as the general population to read a computer publication. And it said 
the demographics of its readers, mostly college-educated males with 
high household incomes, closely matched the demographics of online 
auto shoppers. Ziff-Davis said automotive advertising in its four 
titles that carry car ads _ PC Magazine, PC Computing, Yahoo! Internet 
Life and Family PC _ rose to 98.5 pages in the first nine months of 
this year from 60 in the period a year earlier. New advertisers included 
Volkswagen, Isuzu and Nissan; Ford, General Motors and Suburu increased 
their buys. Electronic commerce companies are another category Ziff-Davis 
is eager to cultivate. Companies that have already bought space include 
Playboy.com, Cyberian Outpost and Catalogcity.com. E-Trade Group Inc., 
the online investment company based in Palo Alto, Calif., is about 
to sign an agreement with Ziff-Davis, worth more than $5 million, 
to promote its services through Ziff-Davis' magazines and on ZDTV 
and ZDTV.com, its cable television channel and the channel's Web site. 
Officials of both companies declined to specify the length of the 
agreement. In addition, Computershopper.com, the electronic commerce 
channel on ZDNet.com, Ziff-Davis' Web site, is participating in the 
electronic marketplace on E-Trade's Web site, Etrade.com. Jerry Gramaglia, 
E-Trade's senior vice president for marketing, said the wide range 
of programs involved in the agreement would allow E-Trade ``to hit 
the bull's-eye of our target,'' investors who are 35 and older, computer 
savvy and mostly male. ``We will be able to shift in and out of the 
programs to maximize efficiency,'' he said. Cindy Giller, senior vice 
president and group media director of Young &AMP; Rubicam in San Francisco, 
said that the circulation of Ziff-Davis' two most popular computer 
magazines _ PC Magazine and PC Computing _ and of IDG's PC World ``puts 
them in the broader category for consumer advertising capabilities.'' 
``The whole category is changing, broadening out,'' she said. ``People 
who use computers are not as niched as they used to be. That's why 
these magazines' circulations are growing, and that's why they're 
viewed as consumer titles, not computer niche trade publications.'' 
Ms. Giller also said that computer magazine readers who were eager 
to stay in the forefront of technology might have similar feelings 
about cars, which could make these publications attractive to advertisers. 
Sam Whitmore, a former editor in chief of PC Week and the publisher 
of an online newsletter that analyzes technology media, commended 
Ziff-Davis' efforts to promote all of its products in one package 
to E-Trade, something he said the competitors IDG or CMP could not 
offer. ``This is a very new direction for computer publishers,'' Whitmore 
said. ``Ziff-Davis is trying to get out from under being a trade publisher. 
If they stay a trade publisher, they'll wither.'' Meanwhile, Mike 
Perlis, who succeeded Sheer as president of Ziff-Davis Publishing 
in November, said the magazines would also pursue other nontechnology 
advertisers, including financial services companies and those in the 
fashion, credit card, liquor, consumer electronics and telecommunications 
industries that are beginning to market their products online. ``As 
companies start making selling on the Web a big piece of their strategy, 
reaching people with knowledge of this will be important,'' he said. 
``If they put together our raw demographics, and the fact that our 
readers are more likely to participate in the Web, they're buying 
a good one-two punch.'' 
</TEXT>
</DOC>