<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981216.0374 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
When the Red Line subway station on the corner of Beverly Boulevard 
and Vermont Avenue opens here next year, the first thing commuters 
will see is a giant outcropping of sandy-colored rock that straddles 
the entrance. Looming ominously over the escalators down to the trains, 
it looks like a leftover from the desert scenes in ``Raiders of the 
Lost Ark.'' ``I wanted to reveal the relationship of the subway to 
its geological environment,'' said George Stone, a sculptor commissioned 
by the Metropolitan Transportation Authority to enliven this station. 
``Architecture in general tends to hide the fact of its location, 
even the fact, in this case, that we are underground.'' What Stone 
calls his ``art rocks'' _ three more of the prefabricated boulders 
hang from the roof of the pristine, marble-floored station below _ 
are part of one of the most imaginative public art programs in the 
country. Though other cities, including New York, have major subway 
art initiatives, Los Angeles is distinct for insisting that artists 
be included at the planning stages. ``What is exciting about this 
program is the experimental way in which the art has been worked into 
the design process right from the beginning,'' said Elizabeth Smith, 
a curator at the Los Angeles Museum of Contemporary Art. ``A subway 
station used to be the province of the engineer and the architect. 
Now the artist has been allowed to to have a profound impact on the 
physical aspect of the space.'' This impact was first evident in the 
small section of the Red Line that opened in June 1990. The contribution 
from artists has been expanded in the design of the next eight stops, 
which will extend the $2.75-billion line from downtown to North Hollywood. 
Each station has been allocated $300,000 for art. Five of these stops 
are scheduled to open in May; the final three are to be ready a year 
later. A quintessentially suburban city with no history of underground 
mass transit, Los Angeles has been slow to warm to the idea of a subway. 
The project has been dogged by controversy from its beginning in 1986. 
In 1995, tunneling at the corner of Normandie Avenue and Hollywood 
Boulevard caused a sinkhole wide enough to gobble up cars. During 
later excavation, sections of the famous boulevard near the Chinese 
Theater sank by more than a foot. Then came opposition from home owners 
above the Cahuenga Pass. They staged loud protests, ultimately unsuccessful, 
against the plan to tunnel under the Hollywood Hills and into the 
San Fernando Valley. In November, the negative publicity helped insure 
passage of Proposition A, a countywide referendum, which prohibits 
use of MTA money for further ``below ground'' projects, including 
the extension of the Red Line into the predominantly Hispanic neighborhoods 
of East Los Angeles. Given the lukewarm public reaction, MTA officials 
hope their ambitious Metro Art Program will promote a more positive 
image, even if the subway has a doubtful future. ``Art is a means 
by which we can give the community a sense of ownership and pride 
in their subway,'' said Maya Emsden, director of the program. Program 
officials relied on neighborhood input, picking boards of community 
advisers to help design each station. Along with two outside art experts, 
these advisers chose the final plans. In the case of Stone, a talkative 
devotee of environmental and narrative uses of sculpture, the agency 
got more than it bargained for. Some officials feared that the artist's 
rocks at the Vermont-Beverly Station were too suggestive of earthquakes. 
``The board freaked,'' the 52-year-old artist recalled. ``I went round 
and got letters from psychologists, who reassured us that the rocks 
would not scare off potential riders.'' The Red Line station at Vermont 
Avenue and Santa Monica Boulevard bears the imprint of the minimalist 
artist Robert Millar. The 40-year-old Millar, who worked for 12 years 
as a lighting consultant on public works projects, suggested to the 
station's architect, Mehrdad Yazdani, that they create a space for 
street performers behind the large glass and steel wedge that towers 
over the entrance for the station. To illuminate this street-level 
plaza, which is next to Los Angeles City College, Millar collaborated 
with the designer, Teal Brogden, in drawing up giant, Coca-Cola red, 
cantilevered lights. Giant versions of movable bedside lamps, they 
give the station a powerful glow at night. Millar, a Californian in 
the tradition of Robert Irwin, James Turrell and Ron Cooper, will 
make his greatest impact on the long, gray concrete entrance tunnel. 
This month the artist, a thoughtful, blond-haired beach dweller, is 
planning to paint the tunnel walls with 10,000 questions, ranging 
from ``Does art seek meaning?'' and ``Does art avoid meaning?'' to 
``Does the public transportation system make moral decisions?'' and 
``How might tomorrow be different from today?'' The questions will 
be spelled out in Times Roman, a type font used by many newspapers; 
Millar said he wanted ``to refer back to a newspaper.'' ``Viewed from 
afar they serve to give a texture to the space,'' the artist said. 
Up close, he added, the riders can read each question. ``The majority 
aren't that important,'' Millar said. ``But they're part of the process 
that leads you to ask the more important questions.'' On the wide 
concrete beams that cross the entrance-tunnel roof, the artist has 
erected compositions of blue, white and red fluorescent tubing. Opposite 
them, Millar placed a series of minimalist paintings made from poly-carbonate. 
Clear in some places, opaque in others, they subtly absorb the multihued 
light from his fluorescent strips. Assigning different artists to 
eachsubway stop means no two stations will look alike. ``We wanted 
subway riders to know where they were by seeing the art,'' Ms. Emsden 
said. ``It's a modern version of traditional signage.'' May Sun, a 
soft-spoken, 44-year-old multimedia artist, is working on the stop 
at the economically depressed corner of Hollywood Boulevard and Western 
Avenue. She placed detailed reminders of what she called the corner's 
``neglected history'' into the station's tiled walls and floors. At 
the entrance, commuters will walk across a series of granite tiles, 
each of which bears the outline of a fossil: the molar of a mastodon, 
a camel tooth and the toe of a prehistoric horse. All were uncovered 
at the site during the long months of tunneling. Ms. Sun laid other 
tiles into the entrance, their surface patterns modeled on hobo signs 
_ familiar greetings left by one transient to another _ found in railway 
yards during the 1930s. Photographic murals of railroad workers in 
Los Angeles, including those building this new subway, line a mezzanine 
wall. Smaller snapshots of neighborhood landmarks like the Variety 
Discount Bargain Saver store across the street are placed in the tiled 
entrance walls. Inspired by the animals that once roamed the Hollywood 
Hills, Ms. Sun designed Matisse-like portraits of a cougar, a deer 
and a fish in red granite, which appear on tiles in the station's 
floor. ``I wanted to have a lot of different elements,'' said Ms. 
Sun, whose earlier work includes ``L.A./River/China/Town,'' an installation 
project. ``I thought the same people would be taking the subway on 
a daily basis and I wanted them to discover something new each time.'' 
Michael Davis designed the station at the corner of Sunset Boulevard 
and Vermont Avenue. On a visit to the site eight years ago, the 50-year-old 
artist turned his eyes north and saw the Griffith Park Observatory, 
a local landmark that brought back childhood memories; Davis grew 
up in the Crenshaw District and could see the observatory from his 
home. Wanting to use the stop, which is flanked by three hospitals, 
to lift the spirits of riders, he decided to incorporate his memories 
into his design. ``I have a whole thing about the 1950s,'' said Davis, 
wiry and engaging, with short, silver-blond hair. ``There was a real 
optimism about the future then. You could see it in their designs, 
even in the space stations they liked to draw.'' The artist decided 
that his station would be an homage to ``one of those imaginary spaceships.'' 
Davis' playful take on deep space is immediately apparent in the open, 
curving entry tunnel. The railings have different-sized orbs _ patterned 
after constellations _ set between bars. On the mezzanine level, riders 
will walk under a stainless-steel circular roof. Each of its silvery 
sheets has been punched with countless tiny holes. Lighted brightly 
from above, Davis' ceiling resembles a star-studded sky. Choosing 
a more literal connection to the hospitals above, Davis created his 
version of the nine planets, circular cast-terrazzo tiles set in the 
marble floors. On each he etched an abstract medical image. The smallest 
is a replica of a virus as seen through a microscope. The next largest 
is Davis' rendering of the X and Y chromosomes. ``Astronomy is looking 
for the same things as medicine _ the origins of life,'' Davis said. 
``This was the best way of combining them.'' The artist Magu, formerly 
known as Gilbert Lujan and a founding member of a group of Chicano 
artists known as Los 4our, took a much less abstract approach to his 
commission at Hollywood and Vine. The station is an homage to the 
movie industry. On the street-level plaza, pedestrian shelters are 
topped by replicas of the Brown Derby, a white stretch limousine and 
the roof of Mann's, formerly Grauman's, Chinese Theater. A yellow-tiled 
pathway _ the artist's version of the Yellow Brick Road _ leads down 
the steps and through the winding mezzanine, where it ends facing 
two giant, old-fashioned projectors donated by Paramount. The station's 
roof is lined with now-obsolete 35-millimeter film reels, painted 
blue. Magu has set 242 hand-painted tiles into the station's walls. 
Some are tributes to Hollywood's past; others, like the tiles depicting 
the elaborately made-over low-rider cars that cruise the boulevard 
at night, reflect the more recent history of this famous street. Still, 
the MTA is not taking any chances that its art will go unseen. For 
those Angelenos who remain wary of mass transit, yet still want to 
view these Red Line stations, the agency is sponsoring art tours. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>