<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981216.0180 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
It's open season on Deer Hunter. Since its debut last holiday season, 
more than a million copies of the lo-fi Bambi-hunting simulation have 
been shipped, and bandwagoneers have spawned countless imitations. 
Walk into a computer store or a Wal-Mart, which commissioned Deer 
Hunter in the first place, and you'll see a wall of rifle-and-shotgun 
expeditions to every hunting ground on earth, to say nothing of the 
fishing titles. GT Interactive Software, which publishes Deer Hunter 
under its Wizardworks label, has made a cottage industry out of the 
genre, releasing a herd of follow-up titles into the retail wilderness: 
Deer Hunter Extended Season (the add-on pack), Rocky Mountain Trophy 
Hunter, Bird Hunter, Bow Hunter, Deer Hunter II 3D and Browning Elk 
Hunter. Partridge in a Pear Tree Hunter is presumably in the works 
for holiday '99. But in the meantime, we can look forward to Alaskan 
Expedition, which adds grizzly bears and caribou to the menu, and 
Grand Slam Turkey Hunt, which is endorsed by the National Wild Turkey 
Federation. (There are 2.5 million wild-turkey hunters in the United 
States, and their software needs will not be denied.) For people who 
like shooting things on screen but don't necessarily consider themselves 
the ``hunting type,'' there is Carnivores for PC (www.wizworks.com), 
which takes Deer Hunter back to the Jurassic age so players can trudge 
through steamy prehistoric jungles in search of tyrannosaurs, triceratops 
and velociraptors. In addition to the standard shotgun, crossbow and 
sniper rifle, you get tranquilizer darts. But basically, it's the 
same game. Hunker down, wait for the critters to appear, then shoot 
them. It's obviously a formula that works. Even hard-core console 
developers have ventured into the woods with titles like TNN Outdoors 
Pro Hunter (www.tnnhunter.com), which harnesses the Unreal engine 
(the software that powered this year's breakthrough first-person shooter) 
to produce an experience that combines real-world wildlife with the 
modus operandi of Quake (i.e., shoot anything that moves). Instead 
of going after a single prey species, as in most hunting titles, TNN 
Outdoors Pro Hunter lets you pick off anything that crosses your path, 
from white-tailed deer and elk to wild turkeys, doves, rabbits and 
quail. If you are really determined and an excellent shot, you can 
fire at squirrels. And you can do it with a .357 Magnum. It's a starkly 
absurd comment on the National Rifle Association's party line. Or 
a good laugh, depending on your politics. But more than anything, 
the confluence of Deer Hunter and Doom illustrates that most computer 
games are hunting games. You may be gunning for terrorists or space 
aliens (be vewy vewy qwiet, I'm hunting extwa-tewwestwials) but you're 
still stalking and shooting. Hunting games are everywhere, and people 
don't seem to have a problem with them _ as long as they're figurative. 
It's only the literal hunting games that push our buttons because 
real-world recreational hunting is freighted with associations about 
culture, politics and social class. Deer Hunter's mind-boggling commercial 
success shows us something about how the demographics of computing 
have changed since PC's dipped below the $1,000 mark, now that people 
are buying software for $19.99 at Wal-Mart. Computer software, once 
a medium of the elite, is becoming a medium for the masses. And that 
creates a certain amount of tension for the former. And where there 
is tension, there is humor. Witness Deer Avenger, a parody of Deer 
Hunter by Brian McCann, a staff writer on ``Late Night With Conan 
O'Brien,'' published by Simon &AMP; Schuster Interactive. You play 
the title character, Bambo, a camouflage-clad buck out for blood. 
Your arsenal includes a slingshot loaded with deer dung, an M-16, 
a bazooka and a stream of snide one-liners. Your quarry is big-bellied 
rednecks, goofy Minnesotans. Oh, yeah, and over-equipped yuppies _ 
moronic cartoons irresistibly drawn to hunter calls like, ``Help! 
I'm naked and I have a pizza!'' Like Deer Hunter, the game offers 
you a choice of locations: Connecticut (``picturesque, peaceful Colonial 
New England. A breathtaking backdrop for vengeance''); Minnesota in 
winter (``10,000 frozen lakes and a lot of dumb hunters'') and West 
Virginia (``come for the hunting, stay for the wacky dancing, banjo-playing, 
inbred freaks''). Deer Avenger makes fun of the software, cracking 
jokes at Deer Hunter's low-resolution graphics and interminable pace. 
``So,'' the deer snorts, ``this is what you bought a Pentium for. 
Can you believe how great these graphics are? This action alone is 
worth the price of the game.'' But mostly, it just pokes fun at hunters. 
Instead of deer droppings and tree scratchings, they leave beer cans, 
toilet paper and freshly wrinkled pornographic magazines. When you 
spot them, you hear, ``Well, well, well, if it isn't that guy from 
`Deliverance,''' or an audio clip of dueling banjos. And when they 
die, they say things like, ``I'm coming to meet you, Beulah!'' Some 
laughs are more comfortable than others. It's easy to laugh at yuppie 
sportsmen with their cellular phones and sport utility vehicles and 
Ralph Lauren hunting outfits because when you're making fun of people 
at the top of the socioeconomic totem pole, humor is a leveling device. 
And if you happen to be one of those people, it's self-deprecating 
charm because you can afford to take a shot at yourself. But if you're 
making fun of the beer-swilling, tobacco-chewing, incestuous rednecks, 
it's a less comfortable laugh because you're spitting down. (Unless 
you happen to be a redneck, in which case it's recreational self-loathing, 
which can also be quite funny.) Deer Avenger takes a lot of cheap 
shots at what the software industry euphemistically calls the ``Deer 
Hunter demographic.'' But it's good to see products like this coming 
out of the New York media establishment because parody, not imitation, 
is the sincerest form of flattery. It validates Deer Hunter's success 
in a way that the copycats cannot. As the killer buck likes to say, 
``Bonjour, Bubba.'' 
</TEXT>
</DOC>