<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981216.0254 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Like literature and art, architecture has a way of transporting a 
modern observer back to the past, allowing you to see not only what 
the creators were seeing, but also, in many cases, what they were 
thinking as well. Tours of historic buildings are popular _ the Tower 
of London, an ancient, infamous fortress dating back 1,000 years, 
is a top draw for visitors to England. There are dozens of sites devoted 
to history and architecture on the Web, but one of the most detailed 
and involving is Great Buildings (www.greatbuildings.com), the online 
counterpart to the Great Buildings Collection CD-ROM (published by 
Van Nostrand Reinhold). The disk, a 650-megabyte repository of photos, 
video clips, 3-D models and historical text devoted to more than 750 
important architectural structures, has been available for Macintosh 
computers since 1994. A Windows version is under development. The 
Great Buildings Web site offers quite a bit to see and can prove quite 
useful if you don't feel like fighting hordes of tourists (or getting 
out of your pajamas) to catch a glimpse of the Taj Mahal. The site 
might also prove useful as a research tool for children, especially 
when little Benjamin suddenly remembers that his report on the Parthenon 
is due the next day. The site is well organized, and you can search 
for specific buildings by name, architect, country of location and 
architectural style (neolithic to neovernacular). Each link to a particular 
building reveals a page with basic information and pictures, biographical 
information about the architect and commentary on why the building 
is notable. Depending on the building, some pages offer more detailed 
observations about the structure, like dimensions and historical trivia. 
(``In the late sixth century, the Parthenon was converted to a Christian 
church.'') Each building's page contains a list of sources for further 
reading, as well as a link to the online bookseller Amazon.com if 
you want to go all the way. One of the great things about Great Buildings 
is that you can also download free 3-D models of more than 65 of the 
buildings listed on the site. A link to free software for viewing 
3-D models is also provided. Design Workshop Lite for both Windows 
and Macintosh, by Artifice (www.artifice.com), is a stripped-down 
version of the popular Design Workshop Classic and Design Workshop 
Pro software used by architects, graphic designers and 3-D design 
professionals. The free Lite version download is between 4 and 6 megabytes, 
which could be time-consuming if you have a slow modem, but the program 
can also be ordered on CD-ROM from the site for $20. Once you have 
the software, the site provides clear instructions on how to download 
and view the 3-D models. The 3-D files are fairly quick downloads 
themselves, averaging about 250 kilobytes, and when you uncompress 
them on your hard drive, they expand to about 1 megabyte each. Models 
of Chartres Cathedral in France, King's College Chapel in Cambridge, 
England, and the Piazza di Spagna in Rome can be found on the list, 
along with many others. Modern structures like the Azuma House in 
Osaka, Japan, and the Vietnam War Memorial in Washington are also 
rendered as 3-D models. Notable New York sites include the Empire 
State Building, the Brooklyn Bridge and the Chrysler Building. The 
building models are beautifully rendered in simple, textured 3-D images, 
and you can use your mouse to explore the buildings from all angles, 
even from inside. A Wireframe option lets you electronically remove 
the building's surface material for a peek at the infrastructure. 
Design Workshop Lite provides a surprising number of features. Users 
can adjust lighting and elevation and easily choose different views 
of the building. Once within the model, you can move about as if you 
were walking through the building, watching walls and doors go by 
as you stroll along with your mouse. The model for the Globe Theater, 
Shakespeare's stage in 17th-century London, is particularly well done, 
allowing you to move through the aisles to the stage floor itself. 
The original theater had no official restrooms for its 3,000 patrons 
and burned down in 1613 when a prop cannon blew up during a performance 
of ``Henry VIII.'' This 3-D model might just be the next best thing 
to being there _ and it is much safer than a visit to the original 
would have been. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>