<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981216.0510 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
An appeals court in Rome freed a Kurdish rebel leader from house arrest 
Wednesday, further inflaming a bitter diplomatic dispute between Italy 
and Turkey. The court determined that Italy had no grounds for detaining 
Abdullah Ocalan, leader of the Kurdistan Workers Party, which has 
been fighting for self-determination in southeast Turkey. But Italy's 
prime minister, Massimo D'Alema, quickly said Ocalan would nevertheless 
be kept under police surveillance. After the ruling, Turkish officials, 
already furious with Italy for refusing to extradite Ocalan to Turkey, 
expressed outrage and renewed threats of economic retaliation against 
Italy. ``It will damage Turkish-Italian relations and international 
law,'' Defense Minister Ismet Sezgin told Turkish television reporters. 
Italy has refused to extradite Ocalan, who is wanted in Turkey on 
terrorism charges, because of a law that bans the extradition of prisoners 
to countries with a death penalty. Ocalan was arrested by the Italian 
police in Rome on Nov. 12 while trying to enter Italy from Moscow 
on a false passport. Shortly after his arrest, he requested political 
asylum in Italy. Italy, which quickly found Ocalan's presence burdensome, 
has so far been unable to persuade other European countries to take 
him off its hands. Germany, which issued a warrant for Ocalan's arrest 
in 1990 on homicide charges, declined to ask for his extradition, 
fearing repercussions from Turkey and from Turks living in Germany. 
Chancellor Gerhard Schroder said an international court should try 
him, but did not volunteer Germany as a venue. Italy has also suggested 
that an international trial might be a suitable way of bringing Ocalan 
to justice, but was hoping that the court could convene elsewhere 
in Europe. Wednesday, both D'Alema and Foreign Minister Lamberto Dini 
said Italy would either have to make Ocalan available for trial or 
expel him. Neither one mentioned a third option: granting him political 
asylum. Early on, D'Alema, a former Communist, refused to rule out 
political asylum, a choice favored by some leftists in his coalition. 
But pressure from Turkey and the United States, which also regards 
Ocalan as a terrorist, has made political asylum less palatable. Human 
rights groups have also accused Ocalan of killing civilians. That 
pressure led Italy and other countries to consider the option of a 
trial in an international court. But Turkey is vehemently opposed, 
worried that Ocalan would try to use such a trial as a forum for airing 
the grievances of the Kurdish separatist movement. D'Alema said Wednesday, 
``Since Turkey does not intend to back a trial for Ocalan outside 
its territory, this situation represents a very serious obstacle to 
the search for any solution.'' Lawyers representing Ocalan said that 
though he was free to leave Rome, he had decided to stay in the apartment 
where he had been held under house arrest and await a decision on 
political asylum. A commission of the Interior Ministry is expected 
to decide on asylum by the end of the month or early January. D'Alema 
suggested Wednesday that a decision might come sooner. ``At this point, 
it may be necessary to accelerate certain decisions,'' he said. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>