<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981216.0342 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Aetna Inc.'s proposed purchase of the health care business of Prudential 
Insurance Co. of America has touched off concern among doctors and 
consumers, but Aetna's size and market power could ultimately benefit 
patients. The acquisition would create the nation's largest health 
insurer, serving one in every 10 Americans and writing contracts with 
about half of the nation's physicians. Doctors fear the behemoth will 
harden Aetna's already aggressive assault on tests and procedures 
it deems excessive, and some consumer advocates worry that an enlarged 
Aetna will bully patients. Rival insurance companies recoil at the 
prospect of competing against a company with the market power to negotiate 
steep discounts with hospitals. But the critics overlook a powerful 
reason in favor of the takeover. If insurance companies spent most 
of the last decade belligerently cutting costs, they will probably 
spend the next decade evaluating the quality of patient care. Here, 
large plans will have a decisive advantage. Tight oversight of patient 
care requires hugely expensive computer systems that only large insurance 
companies can afford. Aetna is creating such systems. So too is New 
York state's largest insurer, Empire Blue Cross and Blue Shield. In 
a rapidly evolving business, size becomes the patient's friend. Richard 
Huber, president of Aetna, said as much when he announced the deal 
for Prudential Health Care. He predicted that ``the wave of company-led 
cost-cutting is nearly complete. The next big push will be quality.'' 
The large size of Huber's company does not guarantee success. But 
without large size, it might well fail. Aetna's new heft will give 
it only 10 percent of the national market and up to 30 percent of 
some regional markets. Those are not formidable numbers. Besides, 
there are ample remedies if the antitrust authorities find local pockets 
of excessive concentration. Size will also help insurance firms create 
computerized data systems that track diagnoses, treatments and prescriptions. 
The idea is to flag errant care before it does harm. The huge development 
costs for these computer systems can only be absorbed if the insurer 
can spread the expense over many patients. Aetna has been developing 
clinical information systems for almost a decade. Every time one of 
its 16 million customers files a claim for a procedure, test or drug, 
the transaction enters Aetna's computer files. Aetna distributes reports 
to each of its physicians once or twice a year, telling them how their 
treatment of several prominent medical problems compares with that 
of their peers. The physicians learn, for example, how many of their 
diabetes patients, compared with diabetics nationwide, received an 
annual eye exam. Aetna reports how many of the doctors' patients filled 
their drug prescriptions and how many of their asthma patients suffered 
attacks severe enough to send them to a hospital emergency room. The 
company contends that doctors are responding to its reports by slowly 
bringing their treatment practices in line with recommendations by 
the major medical societies. Empire has created a sophisticated oversight 
system that so far covers about 100,000 enrollees, including employees 
of Merrill Lynch &AMP; Co. and Circuit City Stores Inc. The important 
feature of Empire's system, says its president, Michael Stocker, is 
instant feedback. Each day, Empire runs data on each of the 100,000 
enrollees through its computer to search for ``triggers'' _ events, 
like admission to a hospital or prescription for a new drug _ that 
justify subjecting the patient's medical record to careful scrutiny. 
Empire says it pulls about 60 files a day for close examination. It 
then turns the files over to a company that examines the patient's 
labs tests, prescriptions and medical procedures for evidence of mistaken 
diagnoses or inappropriate treatment. The records are referred to 
academic specialists for independent review. If the review turns up 
a problem, Empire's doctors call the patient's physicians to suggest 
corrections. Empire says it makes one or two such calls a day. Jamie 
Court, a prominent consumer advocate in California, supports the use 
of computer systems ``when their purpose is to root out errors rather 
than to deny care for the purpose of cutting costs.'' Empire points 
to cases where errant care was corrected before it did harm. In the 
case of a patient admitted to a hospital for knee surgery, it was 
found that he had been taking an unnecessarily dangerous drug to combat 
colitis. Another patient was found to be taking a blood thinner she 
did not need but not taking anticholesterol drugs she did need. And, 
her records indicated, she had not been properly examined for peptic 
ulcer disease. A third patient was found to be taking duplicate drugs 
both to lower her cholesterol and to lower her blood pressure. Empire's 
system provides daily checks, rather than the quarterly and annual 
reports of many other clinical-data systems. Health maintenance organizations 
argue that, by putting a single physician _ called a gatekeeper _ 
in charge of a patient's care, they eliminate inconsistent therapies. 
Otherwise patients are prone to visit multiple doctors who know little, 
if anything, about one another. The intriguing feature of clinical-data 
systems is that they harness computers to perform some of the error 
checking that gatekeepers perform. There remains the important task 
of persuading patients and physicians to adopt wise counsel, a difficult 
problem that may turn out to be managed care's true advantage. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>