<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981216.0237 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
The Rev. Chip Lee, an Episcopal priest from Oakland, Md., assures 
his parishioners that he can be reached by telephone 24 hours a day, 
7 days a week, even though he juggles two rural congregations (three 
in the summer) and puts more than 500 miles on his Buick each week. 
Lee used to rely on a tangle of voice-mail systems, pagers and cellular 
phones to watch over his flock. But since August, he has combined 
everything into one electronic mailbox accessible through a toll-free 
number. All his calls are answered by an angelic female voice that 
quickly finds him wherever he roams. The voice goes by the name Portico, 
and ``she'' is one of a handful of computer-generated administrative 
assistants that use speech recognition to manage telephone, e-mail 
and fax communications for busy people. ``Having a virtual assistant 
has completely changed my life,'' Lee said with a kind of reverence 
that nearly suggested divine intervention. Lee, who pays Portico about 
$90 a month for 750 minutes, is one of the growing number of employers 
of virtual assistants. In principle, the idea is wonderful _ this 
assistant never turns on you when you fail to give a raise, never 
escapes on three-hour bathroom breaks or calls in faking the flu to 
take a day off. And unlike an answering machine, the virtual assistants 
like Portico, Wildfire and Webley _ the three that operate nationally 
_ have responsive voices that turn these services into humanlike appliances, 
complete with personality. But there are tradeoffs. The largest is 
that the current limits of speech recognition technology make interaction 
with virtual assistants frustrating, especially for the person who's 
calling and often also for the person who is being called. Although 
these personalities are a huge leap beyond voice mail, they speak 
and understand only preset phrases, and they can be maddeningly literal 
and impenetrable. Further complicating the picture, say two professors 
who helped create Portico's persona, is that on a fundamental psychological 
level, humans do not distinguish between communicating with a live 
person and with an electronic creation. People respond to the personalities 
of computers, televisions and other media by the same rules they use 
for social interactions with real people. This may suggest that the 
mistakes of the current less-than-perfect virtual assistants are worse 
than those of underperforming real assistants. Webley (which has the 
voice of a British butler), Portico and Wildfire are the first generation 
of virtual assistants. At first glance, they are remarkably similar. 
Just by talking into the phone, users can make calls, hear voice mail 
and e-mail, and use stored address books to return calls. These virtual 
assistants also manage incoming calls through call screening and call 
routing, and they send faxes to your current location. They even recognize 
frequent callers and respond according to your wishes. (Take a message 
from Mom. Put Charles Schwab through.) Although Wildfire Communications 
invented the idea of a telephone-based personal assistant in 1992, 
Wildfire's product hasn't actually spread like, well, you know. Its 
first version was an expensive system sold to businesses to replace 
their internal voice mail beginning in 1994. Then Webley (owned by 
Vail Systems) began a competing service in January, and Portico, from 
General Magic, started in July. (Not all of these are available in 
all cities.) Despite their imperfections, all three are gaining subscribers, 
particularly among those comfortable with technology. All have major 
financial supporters and will certainly continue to improve. AT&AMP;T 
Wireless, Intel and Microsoft invested in Wildfire, and Microsoft 
is helping to finance Portico. But to lure many more people to seek 
salvation in electronic voices, virtual assistants must evolve beyond 
their user-unfriendly responses. Roger Black, a prominent art designer 
of publications and a media consultant who has used Wildfire for three 
years, has 11 offices around the world and three homes. He has made 
Wildfire his only phone number, but he acknowledges that relying on 
the voice interface can be exasperating, especially when the service 
requires you to keep repeating yourself or if the telephone connection 
is bad. But he said he liked Wildfire's sense of humor about her own 
shortcomings. ``One time I screamed an unprintable injunction and 
she said, `I'm sorry, I cannot perform that function,' Black said. 
``Wildfire also sighs when you call it in the middle of the night, 
and if you tell it you are depressed, it responds: `Great. Now I'm 
a therapist.' '' Just as with real people's personalities, maddening 
quirks and inconsistencies in the automated assistants' responses 
can make the difference between thinking of them as loyal companions 
or as irritating pests. For a machine to portray a reliable and likable 
human being requires the most natural interaction possible, say Clifford 
Nass and Byron Reeves, Stanford University communications professors 
who helped build the persona behind Portico. It is perfectly normal, 
the professors say, to argue with your computer when it does not do 
what you want it to do. Because we tend to treat machines like people, 
machine blunders set us off just as human ones do. Nass and Reeves 
also helped devise the personalities of Microsoft's Bob and the help 
characters called Office Assistants in Microsoft Office 98. Computer 
engineers once believed that only sophisticated artificial intelligence 
software could accurately simulate a person. (Remember, the computer 
Hal was ultimately smarter than the astronauts in ``2001.'') In contrast, 
psychologists have asserted that humans identify personality in seconds 
by responding to the smallest, most trivial clues. Nass and Reeves 
figured that if the psychologists were right, even the simplest text 
or poorly recorded computer voice would give a machine instant personality. 
To prove it, they began a series of standard experiments in human 
interaction in which one person was replaced by an electronic box. 
What they found were the identical psychological results of human-to-human 
studies, even though people denied reacting to the machine in a social 
way. ``Although we may logically know we are interacting with a machine, 
our reactions are fundamentally the same as when we interact with 
a human,'' Nass said. Black said some of his male clients were charmed 
by Wildfire's friendly and rather seductive voice. ``One person once 
told me that they responded to Wildfire's statement `I'll see if I 
can find him' with, `Take your time, sweetheart.' '' As advisers to 
General Magic on the creation of Portico, Nass and Reeves conducted 
an audition of more than 100 actors to match the right voice to the 
psychological profile invented for Portico. Then they found Hollywood 
script writers to best link Portico's language to its persona. Despite 
all this, speaking to Portico, Webley and Wildfire quickly shows these 
assistants to be more virtual than real. Even Nass says talking to 
Portico is like talking to a foreigner in English. While callers may 
not like talking to computers masquerading as people, some users _ 
including Paul Saffo, a technology business consultant and loyal user 
of Wildfire _ take the responses by their callers to Wildfire as a 
gauge of the callers' characters. ``Anyone who complains registers 
as a jerk that I probably don't want to talk to,'' Saffo said, adding 
that he was delighted with the service. Dr. Avrum Bluming, an oncologist 
and a clinical professor of medicine at the University of Southern 
California, signed up for Wildfire six months ago to answer the dozens 
of calls he receives daily from patients on his car phone. ``I hate 
wasting time,'' said Bluming, adding: ``Looking down at the phone 
while driving raised certain health and safety issues. Now I just 
tell Wildfire to dial.'' He also uses Wildfire's toll-free number 
to make long distance calls from the hospital, something that once 
meant a long wait for a connection from the hospital's operator. But 
since his Wildfire service cannot send a page, Bluming has not yet 
abandoned his beeper and his answering service for urgent incoming 
calls. Many committed users, like Oliver Muoto, a software marketing 
executive, agree that the services need significant improvements before 
they catch on with most consumers. ``For anyone impatient with technology, 
virtual assistants are really still pretty inconvenient to use,'' 
said Muoto, who just switched to Portico from Wildfire after a year 
because Portico lets him use the Web to check his voice mail and reads 
him his e-mail over the phone. But don't ask Muoto about all the times 
he has screamed into the phone, trying to make himself understood 
by a virtual assistant on a bad phone line. Or take the fact that 
a colleague recently sent him an e-mail message instead of calling 
because, she wrote, ``I just had an argument with your telephone secretary.'' 
Ask him instead about how his virtual assistant found him via his 
cellular phone in time to finalize the details on the contract for 
venture capital financing of his start-up company. He said the services 
needed to become simpler to learn and better at adapting to natural 
conversation and at recognizing and managing a user's priorities. 
``But,'' he added, ``for sales and marketing people like me who feel 
the pain of being out of touch, we're willing to live with a less-than-ideal 
solution that works 90 percent of the time.'' 
</TEXT>
</DOC>