<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981216.0361 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Big and powerful are adjectives that spring to mind when listening 
to the Eroica Trio, but a more pithy description might be intelligent. 
The group's second recording, ``Dvorak: Piano Trio Dumky'' (EMI 7243 
5 56673 2), represents thoughtful music making of a high caliber. 
Eroica's musicians _ Erika Nickrenz, pianist; Adela Pena, violinist, 
and Sara Sant'Ambrogio, cellist _ have the muscle to be purely dramatic 
and emotional, but here, they stand out for subtler reasons: all three 
players are soloists who have a lot to say, and every note, no matter 
how light, has some significance. Indeed, no voice ever fades into 
the background; rather, the instruments not featured in a particular 
passage assume the active stance of intelligent listeners, making 
comments on the main statement or, in some cases, quietly but compellingly 
pursuing their own trains of thought. In the last measures of Dvorak's 
``Dumky'' Trio, for example, as the cello nears the end of an expository 
thread, the violin ponders a major third with quiet insistence so 
that when the piano breaks in with an emphatic concluding theme, the 
listener wants to urge them to slow down, so there is time for the 
different ideas to sink in. The program, too, is intelligently selected. 
This is a Slavic disk; the Dvorak is followed by Shostakovich's Second 
Trio and an arrangement of Rachmaninoff's ``Vocalise.'' These works 
have in common a kind of tortured Romanticism and rootedness to a 
folk idiom. All three have passages evoking the elegiac mood of a 
solitary singer in the course of a melancholy ballad; often, the music 
seems to hover on the brink of actual speech, particularly in Eroica's 
performance. Both Dvorak and Shostakovich juxtapose these moments 
abruptly with the driven, sometimes manic rhythms of folk dance. An 
example of the Eroica's intelligence is the way the players use special 
effects (especially in the Shostakovich) to expand their instruments' 
vocabulary, rather than merely as decoration. Stifled plucked notes, 
or a bow struck on the body of the instrument, are as articulate as 
if produced by a percussionist. In one fast passage in the second 
movement of the Shostakovich, the three instruments merge in a series 
of tugged, slurred chords that help create an intensity so visceral 
it is hard to sit still. The Prokofiev-like fourth movement opens 
with the plucked strings taking on an assumed, comically hollow voice, 
like a cartoon character; in their next statement of the theme, they 
whiz like a kazoo. Given the kind of charge these players generate 
with one another, it is no surprise that intensity and drama can get 
a bit out of hand. In this fourth movement, they rise prematurely 
to the climax, reaching a pitch of emotion that is impossible to sustain 
without slipping into the realm of the overwrought. There is no denying 
the honest motivation behind such emotional outbursts; but it makes 
it a little hard to hear exactly what the music is saying. The tantrum, 
however, very appropriately colors the end of the Shostakovich with 
the exhaustion that follows tears, until the strings wearily whisper 
a few last remnants of the theme before fading out altogether in the 
piano's last light chords, falling like drops of water. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>