<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981216.0477 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
U.N. weapons inspectors have concluded that Iraq could be hiding two 
to five times more deadly germ agents than it had admitted to making, 
as well as warheads to deliver them, United Nations officials said 
Wednesday. In interviews, the inspectors said Iraq's systematic refusal 
to cooperate in recent weeks had deepened their suspicions, which 
stem from evidence they have gathered since the end of the 1991 Gulf 
War. The inspectors disclosed that Iraq had failed to turn over a 
key log book of purchases by its germ program, which would account, 
among other things, for the amount of media, or special food for germs, 
it had purchased. Iraq also refused to open buildings for routine 
inspections and only belatedly made available the Iraqi experts who 
could help resolve key discrepancies about Baghdad's production of 
germ weapons. In his speech Wednesday night, President Clinton said 
he had ordered the attack on Iraq to help contain Saddam Hussein and 
his weapons of mass destruction. Clinton listed some of the obstacles 
and harassment inspectors faced. But the inspectors said the problems 
went far beyond the president's statements. The scope of Iraq's germ 
program remains cloaked in mystery, the experts agreed, with every 
indication that Baghdad had backtracked during this latest round of 
inspection on even its previous minimal cooperation. ``Clearly,'' 
said one official who returned returned from Baghdad, ``they weren't 
going to cooperate and were going out of their way to cause problems.'' 
Iraq has already confessed to making enough deadly microbes to kill 
all the people on earth several times over. After the Gulf War, Baghdad 
admitted to having loaded botulinum toxin (which causes muscular paralysis 
resulting in death) into 16 warheads, anthrax (which causes high fever 
and is usually fatal within two weeks) into five warheads, and aflotoxin 
(which causes liver cancer) into four warheads. It also acknowledged 
having filled 157 bombs with the same deadly agents, and having conducted 
research on tricothecene micotoxins (which cause nausea, vomiting 
and diarrhea), wheat cover smut (which ruins food grains, hemorrhagic 
conjunctivitis (which causes extreme pain and temporary blindness) 
and rotavirus (which causes acute diarrhea that can lead to death), 
and camel pox (a camel version of small pox). But the inspectors now 
believe that Iraq could well have gone even further, based on discrepancies 
between what Iraq has declared having imported, consumed, and destroyed. 
Inspectors said that the biological teams were denied at least three 
key documents, at least one of which was key to reconciling Iraq's 
reporting record. According to two inspectors, the U.N. team asked 
the Iraqis on the morning of the first day of meetings for a ``log 
book'' that described purchases and imports for the germ program, 
which several of them had seen in 1995 but had failed to grasp its 
significance. Among the log book's entries were imported shipments 
of media, or the special foods used for growing germs. At the first 
meeting, the Iraqis promised to produce the critical log book. But 
each day, they offered another excuse, and each day, the inspectors 
kept pressing for the document. In the inspectors' view, the book 
was critical to estimating the amount of germ agents that Baghdad 
could have produced and turned into weapons. At first, the Iraqi team 
said they couldn't find the book, two inspectors said. Then the Iraqis 
said that the book should be retrievable, but that if they found it, 
they would need the approval of Tarik Aziz, Iraq's deputy prime minister, 
to release it to the team. By the last day of the meetings, the Iraqis 
indicated that they were still looking for the vanished book. ``We 
got the runaround,'' another inspector said. ``This was less cooperation 
than we had seen six months ago.'' In other cases, the Iraqis refused 
to provide documents they acknowledged existed. One was a list of 
imported food to grow germs from the customs department, which was 
also requested on the meetings' first day. The Iraqis said they couldn't 
find them, an inspector said. Another missing document was an inventory 
of germ food that had been stored at Al Hakam, Iraq's major germ production 
center. An inspector said that if Baghdad had used the imported germ 
food to grow deadly agents, especially anthrax in either liquid or 
dry form, the microbes could still be used in weapons. On Dec. 4, 
Diane Seaman, an American inspector, tried to a lead a large, experienced 
biological team into a site inspectors considered routine. While she 
was permitted to go the building, the Iraqis refused to open the doors 
of the office she sought to enter, telling her that she would have 
to ``break down'' any locked doors if she wished to inspect them. 
``It was a holy day,'' one inspector conceded. ``But there can be 
no exempt days or the inspection system wouldn't work.'' The Iraqis 
also delayed making available key officials from the biological program 
whom the inspectors sought to interview. ``We had asked for six,'' 
one inspector said. ``But they only produced three of the people we 
wanted at our early meetings.'' By the last meeting, when their usefulness 
was marginal, Iraq finally produced the full contingent of experts. 
But the Iraqis have told inspectors that two top scientists in the 
germ program whom the United Nations wanted to question are out of 
the country. One of them was said to be in Britain, an allegation 
London has flatly denied. The inspectors said that Iraq was well aware 
of the stakes in this latest round of test inspections and monitoring. 
At the end of the biological meetings, Gabriele Kraatz-Wadsack, the 
leader of the biological teams, sat down with the Iraqis and gave 
them a detailed account of the remaining discrepancies and failures 
to provide key information and documents. The Iraqis did not challenge 
her account, one inspector recalled, adding: ``They only got into 
a debate about insignificant things.'' 
</TEXT>
</DOC>