<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981216.0551 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
A Rochester man convicted of committing a murder during a kidnapping 
was sentenced to death Wednesday. It was second death sentence handed 
down by a jury since capital punishment was reinstated in New York 
in 1995. The jury in State Supreme Court in Rochester sentenced the 
man, Angel Mateo, 29, after rejecting defense arguments that his life 
should be spared because of mitigating factors, including the physical 
abuse he suffered as a child. Mateo, who faces another death penalty 
trial next year in the killings of three people in an unrelated case, 
showed no emotion when the sentence was announced. His lawyer said 
he would appeal. The sentence came six months after a Brooklyn jury 
sentenced a former jail guard, Darrel Harris, to die for killing three 
people in a robbery at an illegal social club. The death sentence 
in that case was the first since the governor and the Legislature 
reinstated capital punishment in New York nearly 12 years after the 
state's highest court declared the state's previous death penalty 
law unconstitutional. Harris and Mateo face execution by lethal injection, 
as prescribed under the death penalty statute. The last person executed 
in the state, Eddie Lee Mays, was put to death in the electric chair 
in 1963 for killing a woman while robbing a bar. The Mateo case was 
the first death penalty trial in Rochester since 1952. In recent weeks, 
it became the focus of intense public debate there, with opponents 
of the death penalty staging daily protests outside the courthouse. 
Mateo was convicted on Dec. 3 of first-degree murder in the killing 
of Juan Rodriguez-Matos. Mateo has also been charged with capital 
murder in the slayings of three people on a street in Rochester in 
1995. He faces a trial in March for those killings. The jury sentenced 
Mateo to death Wednesday after an eight-day sentencing trial in which 
his lawyer called Mateo's mother, an aunt and cousins to the stand 
to ask the jury to spare his life. His relatives testified that his 
rampage had been fueled by a lifetime of traumas, including childhood 
beatings, his father's suicide in 1971 and the murders of his sister 
in 1993 and half-sister in 1991. The killing of Rodriguez-Matos was 
part of a violent rampage that Mateo embarked on in November 1996, 
prosecutors said. He had been on a frenzied search for his estranged 
girlfriend, who was hiding at a shelter for battered women, they said. 
Mateo held two families hostage and slit a man's throat in an effort 
to get them to help him find his girlfriend. The man whose throat 
was slashed, Willie McWilliams, survived and testified against Mateo. 
In between those attacks, Mateo kidnapped Rodriguez-Matos on the street. 
When Rodriguez-Matos, who was mentally ill, could offer little help 
on the woman's whereabouts, Mateo shot him in the head and suffocated 
him with a plastic bag, prosecutors said. The Monroe County District 
Attorney, Howard R. Relin, praised the jury's decision Wednesday. 
``The law says that certain people warrant the death penalty,'' he 
said in a telephone interview after the verdict. `` Mateo is certainly 
one of those people. The callousness and viciousness of the murder 
is what separates him from other defendants.'' 
</TEXT>
</DOC>