<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981216.0252 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
The last time I traveled to Mexico, I was armed with only a little 
English-to-Spanish phrase book to guide me through the streets of 
Merida. On a street corner, my husband announced that we had to find 
the city zoo because he had suddenly remembered from a previous visit 
that the exhibition of hairless dogs ``had a haunting quality.'' Thumbing 
through the book in search of words to ask for directions, the best 
I could find was a translation for ``Can you direct me to a dentist? 
My teeth are bleeding.'' We eventually found the hairless dogs, and 
for the record, they were haunting. Keep in mind that this happy adventure 
occurred in 1987, before we had children. In those days we had hours 
and hours to amble down unfamiliar streets, eating tacos we bought 
from a vendor and speculating about the curious circumstances that 
led the author of our Spanish phrase book to worry about spontaneous 
mouth hemorrhages. But these days, wandering around Mexico without 
knowing the language doesn't seem so funny. With plans to travel at 
the end of the month to the Baja Peninsula with my three children, 
my husband and my parents (none of whom speak Spanish), I realized 
last week that I needed to brush up on the skills I have largely ignored 
since college. Not that I expect anyone's teeth to bleed; I just want 
to be able to ask about our suitcases if they get lost. With 11 years 
of Spanish classes lurking somewhere in my brain, I supposed that 
a quick refresher in vocabulary and verb tenses would do the trick. 
In search of instant gratification (as always), I ended up on the 
Internet, where a number of sites offered free instruction. My first 
stop was at Language Connect (www.languageconnect.com), to take a 
simple and easily digestible daily vocabulary lesson. Click on the 
language you want to learn, and the site serves up four words, along 
with sentences to put each in context. For instance, I learned that 
the Spanish phrase for ``runway'' was ``pista de aterrizaje,'' and 
read the sentence, ``There was a lot of snow on the runway,'' a potentially 
useful excuse for lost luggage. But the bite-size taste of Spanish 
wasn't enough, so I went searching for a full-fledged online course. 
I found a free one at www.learnplus.com, a new site still under construction. 
I had high hopes for the beginner's Spanish class after exchanging 
e-mail with the instructor, Monica Marra. ``We think that learning 
on line can be one of the best ways to learn because the Internet 
is `the' interactive media,'' Ms. Marra wrote. She explained that 
I would be able to communicate directly with her after I created a 
personal home page on the site. She would post answers to my e-mail 
questions and corrected versions of my quizzes on my home page. I 
started the first section of the course, which covered valuable topics 
for people traveling with small children, like how to say, ``Where 
is the hotel bar?'' Next to each item in a grammar or vocabulary lesson 
sat a little icon; I could click as many times as I wanted to hear 
the words spoken aloud. While that was no different from the sort 
of feature available with self-instruction foreign language software, 
it was a useful reinforcement of the text-based lesson. Unfortunately, 
I was never able to use the interactive aspect of the site, the home 
page feature. The first problem: the site refused to recognize the 
password I chose. As a result, all the answers I had typed to a 30-minute 
quiz were lost. Later, after Ms. Marra explained via e-mail that my 
password contained a ``special character which can then interfere 
with the processing of data,'' I chose another, special-character-free 
password and took the quiz again. A few hours later, Ms. Marra informed 
me that she had posted quiz corrections on my personal home page. 
But this time, I was unable to gain access to my home page at all. 
Deciding that I might be better off dealing with a well-established 
purveyor of foreign language instruction, I went to www.berlitz.com, 
where I found common phrases in 15 languages, travel and culture tips 
for 30 countries but no online language courses. That perplexed me; 
after all, Berlitz has been in the business for more than a century 
and pioneered the use of self-instruction tools in the pre-phonograph 
days, with language lessons recorded on wax cylinders. I phoned Bernabe 
Feria, Berlitz's director of curriculum development, to ask why the 
company was lagging when it came to the Internet. ``The reason,'' 
he said, ``is that while the Internet is fine for somebody like you, 
who is reviewing or trying to pick up a handful of scattered languages, 
it still is not a useful enough medium for teaching a language. The 
day is coming. But for now, the Internet relies mainly on text-based 
teaching, which is not interactive enough.'' The most reliable way 
for novices to learn a foreign language, confirmed Edward Scebold, 
executive director of the American Council on the Teaching of Foreign 
Languages, is to study with another person, face to face. ``You can't 
recreate the spontaneity of that kind of teaching on the Internet,'' 
Scebold said. ``Think of the give-and-take of an immersion classroom, 
where everyone speaks the language all the time.'' Of course, any 
time you go on line, you enroll in an immersion course. But the subject 
is always the same: How Technology Works _ Or Doesn't. Passwords get 
rejected. Quiz answers get lost. You get distracted from Spanish verb 
tenses by a more immediate lesson about computer crashes. As a last 
resort, I queried an English-to-Spanish dictionary at www.dictionaries.travlang.com. 
The search engine responded immediately with the translations for 
``dentist'' and ``bleeding,'' but when I asked for ``teeth,'' its 
answer was ``no matching entries found.'' Will I be out of luck on 
the Baja Peninsula? Not if I need to report a dentist bleeding on 
a snowy runway outside the hotel bar. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>