<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981216.0537 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Furious and fractured, House Republicans on Wednesday night postponed 
the impeachment vote against President Clinton for perhaps a few days 
because of the bombing campaign against Iraq, even as the odds against 
the President began to look insurmountable. As the lame duck 105th 
Congress returned to the Capitol for evening party caucuses on impeachment, 
with one Republican after another announcing his support, the House 
was left reeling at the almost surreal clash of crises. The first 
wave of bombs fell in Baghdad just minutes before the Republicans 
began their closed-door strategy session on impeachment. After more 
than three hours of raucous, angry and passionate debate, the Republicans, 
despite expressing deep suspicions of Clinton's motive for ordering 
the bombing, finally heeded the call from their incoming speaker, 
Robert Livingston of Louisiana, that the impeachment debate, which 
had been scheduled for Thursday, be postponed. Livingston said, ``We're 
going to defer action tomorrow.'' Not even bringing himself to mention 
the word impeachment, he said, ``We are reserving our right to move 
forward with the other action.'' He instructed members to stay in 
Washington on standby, for debate to resume ``possibly Friday, possibly 
Saturday, but within the near future.'' He said, ``The issue is important 
and will come up in the next few days.'' Joe Lockhart, the presidential 
spokesman, said that the White House would have no comment on the 
House decision to postpone the impeachment vote. ``That is a matter 
for the Congress to decide,'' Lockhart said. As the day wore on, at 
least nine more Republicans declared they would vote to impeach Clinton, 
many of them the moderates whom Clinton most desperately needed to 
bring to his side. Their defection left any White House strategy to 
protect the president in shambles. Democrats said that even though 
it was still mathematically possible, they could no longer see how 
the president could avoid impeachment _ the indictment by the House 
that would be followed by trial in the Senate _ unless military action 
somehow shifted the mood of the House. ``Unless this action has an 
unexpected effect, he's done,'' said a Democrat close to the effort 
to spare Clinton impeachment. But several Republicans said that the 
bombing strikes had only hardened the resolve in their party to impeach. 
``If anything, suspicions around the timing of the action in Iraq 
has solidified support against the president,'' said Rep. Spencer 
Bachus, R-Ala. The Democrats, who are almost united against impeachment, 
rallied behind the president. Some even called for impeachment to 
be put off into the next Congress, when the Democrats will have five 
more seats and Clinton might have more of a chance of avoiding being 
only the second president impeached by the House. ``I don't understand 
why this can't go over to the next Congress,'' said Rep. Henry Waxman, 
D-Calif. Rep. Dick Gephardt, the House minority leader, said, ``There 
was a unanimous feeling in our caucus that it should not come up as 
long as our troops are in harm's way.'' Among Republicans, from Sen. 
Trent Lott to Rep. Dick Armey, suspicions ran angry and deep that 
Clinton had timed the military action as a tactic to save his presidency. 
Rep. Roscoe Bartlett of Maryland said of the Republican caucus, ``some 
people were incredulous'' about the motivation for the bombing. ``Emotion 
ran all the way from disgust to anger.'' Armey, the House majority 
leader, said the fact that Republicans had doubts about the legitimacy 
of the military action showed that Clinton was losing his ability 
to lead. ``If the president refuses to resign for the sake of the 
nation, I believe he should be impeached and face Senate trial.'' 
Both political parties went straight from their respective meetings 
to the House floor for a briefing by the president's entire national 
security team. The departing House speaker, Newt Gingrich, worked 
with Cabinet officials to organize that session while Livingston helped 
conduct the Republican caucus on impeachment. At the White House, 
Joe Lockhart, the press secretary, dismissed any suggestion that Clinton 
was using his powers as commander in chief to avoid becoming the first 
president to be impeached since Andrew Johnson 130 years ago. ``The 
president of the United States makes national security decisions based 
on the best interest of the United States,'' he said. Throughout the 
extraordinary day, Republicans tried to assure the nation of the stability 
of foreign policy even as one after another they announced their decisions 
to vote for the president's impeachment. ``I am comforted by the fact 
that the president is in contact with the bipartisan leadership,'' 
said Rep. Sherwood Boehlert, R-N.Y.,, as he announced that he had 
decided to vote for impeachment. ``This has been by far the most difficult, 
even tormenting decision I have had to make in my 16 years in Congress,'' 
Boehlert said speaking softly before television cameras. ``I simply 
have not found the means to rationalize away the fact that our president 
lied under oath, that he has tried repeatedly to game the judicial 
system.'' Other Republicans spoke in similar uncompromising terms. 
``I get the impression that the president considers himself above 
the law,'' said Rep. John Porter, R-Ill., who had once said he would 
oppose impeachment, but now said he would support it on the House 
floor. Finally, Rep. Rick Lazio of New York on Wednesday night contrasted 
the president's statements on Monica Lewinsky with the sacrifice American 
soldiers make in battle, saying, ``It should not be difficult now 
to tell the truth or vote according to the dictates of conscience 
even if it means the end of one's career.'' The others who came out 
against Clinton made up a roster of Republicans he had hoped to sway, 
including Reps. Brian Bilbray of California, Jim Leach of Iowa and 
Bob Ney of Ohio. Before the impeachment debate became interwoven with 
the Iraq actions, the battle lines seemed to be forming for how the 
two parties were going to fight on after the House vote on impeachment. 
The White House did get one message of support on Wednesday from Republicans. 
Rep. Jay Kim of California, who pleaded guilty to accepting illegal 
donations in 1997, said he was leaning toward opposing impeachment. 
A Senate trial ``is going to be an international embarrassment,'' 
Kim told the Inland Valley Daily Bulletin in California. Vice President 
Al Gore, who canceled a trip to New Hampshire to stay in Washington, 
began sounding what is expected to be the White House theme in the 
weeks ahead _ that Republicans were embarked on a partisan, divisive 
course. ``I believe on Capitol Hill there is still time for Democrats 
and Republicans to come together and embrace a bipartisan compromise 
to seek a resolution that is both quick and fair and try to turn away 
from the bitter partisanship that we have seen so far,'' he said. 
Rep. Michael Pappas, R-N.J., one of the lame-duck members of Congress, 
who put his support behind impeachment on Wednesday by contrast renewed 
the call for Clinton to resign. ``His actions were the cause that 
brought us to this point,'' he said. ``He can resign and keep us from 
having to move forward to go to the time and expense and diversion 
this would cause the Congress or the Senate.'' 
</TEXT>
</DOC>