<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981216.0427 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
The New York Times said in an editorial on Thursday, Dec. 17: After 
hearing for months about Bill Clinton's ability to compartmentalize 
issues, the country and the world now have to match that difficult 
trick. By attacking Iraq as House members gathered in the capital 
to consider his impeachment, Clinton could not avoid the impression 
that he is blurring the boundaries that must separate America's foreign 
conduct from its domestic political turbulence. But that accusation 
would in large part be unfair. The confrontation with Iraq has played 
out on its own timetable and happened to reach a decisive point on 
the eve of the House impeachment debate. No one but Clinton knows 
all the factors that went into his decision to order air strikes, 
and historians may long speculate whether the threat of impeachment 
propelled him to exercise his powers as commander in chief. Trent 
Lott, the Senate majority leader, and a handful of other Republicans 
immediately questioned Clinton's motives, a startling departure from 
the unity that usually accompanies American military action. That 
is not the only political custom suspended in Washington this strange 
and eventful week. But viewed outside the prism of impeachment, the 
decision to launch cruise missiles against Iraq was fully justified. 
Just weeks after Saddam Hussein had yet again promised to give international 
inspectors unhindered access, Iraq barred them from sites suspected 
of housing chemical and biological arms. Richard Butler, the chief 
U.N. inspector, reported Tuesday that effective inspections were impossible. 
Given the prospect that Baghdad would rebuild its arsenal of toxic 
weapons while U.N. inspectors were handcuffed, Clinton and Prime Minister 
Tony Blair of Britain had no choice but to use military force to destroy 
portions of Iraq's arms industry. With the Islamic holy month of Ramadan 
beginning this weekend, military action had to start or be postponed 
until late January. Cruise missiles and the bombing runs that will 
follow cannot eliminate the threat, but they can severely reduce Iraq's 
ability to make new weapons or use its old ones. It is essential for 
American and British forces to limit civilian casualties. Washington 
and London must also be mindful of the uneven international support 
for the attack. There are limits on how long and how hard Iraq can 
be hit before foreign support diminishes. In the likely event that 
Iraq refuses to allow inspections to resume after this attack, the 
Security Council must develop new ways to restrain Baghdad. Clinton 
outlined a strategy of containment, promising to use force again if 
necessary and to maintain economic sanctions on Iraq. These measures 
may not be popular among all members of the Security Council, but 
less forceful policies will not work as long as Saddam remains in 
power. Clinton made only glancing reference to the gathering storm 
of impeachment in his address on Wednesday evening, but the convergence 
of events clearly left Republicans disgruntled and distrustful. The 
attack on Iraq may delay but will not end the debate over Clinton's 
fate or change any votes already committed to impeachment. Congress 
needs to resolve that constitutional crisis as soon as possible. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>