<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981216.0474 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
After meeting with his top military advisers in the Situation Room 
at the White House Wednesday, President Clinton made a rare appearance 
just after 8 a.m. at the daily meeting of his top aides, in the corner 
office of John Podesta, the chief of staff. Only three or four of 
the 30 staff members in the room knew that, within hours, American 
missiles would strike Iraq. But they all knew that the House would 
probably vote soon to impeach the tired-looking man in the doorway, 
and they stood to applaud him. Clinton thanked them for their hard 
work, according to people who were present, and he assured them that 
if they kept at it, the American people would support them. ``They'll 
figure it out,'' he said. ``They always get it right.`` For the last 
24 hours, from the time he left Israel until he addressed the nation 
Wednesday night, Clinton worked feverishly on two momentous matters 
that he insisted Wednesday night were wholly unrelated: the pending 
impeachment vote in the House of Representatives and the air assault 
on Iraq. Clinton made the initial decision to strike Iraq Tuesday 
night, as he flew back from a four-day trip to the Middle East. But 
first, he spent some time chatting with the members of the congressional 
delegation he had taken with him. They talked about the Middle East 
and about the international economy. But for the first time, Clinton 
spoke directly to one member of the delegation about the impeachment 
vote. White House aides said that Clinton spent about ten minutes 
talking one-on-one with John Fox, a Pennsylvania Republican who has 
said he is undecided about his vote. Clinton was clearly enjoying 
his talks with his fellow politicians, but his aides were anxious 
that he turn his attention to Iraq. They also wanted to make sure 
that he slept on the flight, since three days of high-stakes diplomacy 
had clearly exhausted him. After finishing with the congressmen, the 
president received a briefing on the report from Richard Butler, chairman 
of the United Nations group overseeing the disarmament of Iraq. Clinton 
quickly concluded, aides said, that Iraq was flouting the rules of 
the international weapons inspection program imposed after the end 
of the 1991 Persian Gulf war. Clinton, Secretary of State Madeleine 
Albright and Samuel Berger, the national security adviser _ all aboard 
the plane _ conducted a secure telephone conference call with Vice 
President Gore, Secretary of Defense William Cohen, George Tenet, 
the director of central intelligence, and General Henry Shelton, chairman 
of the joint chiefs and other officials in Washington. ``We went around 
the horn and asked everybody what their recommendation was,'' Berger 
said Wednesday night, ``and the recommendation was unanimous that 
the president should go forward.'' Clinton finally went to sleep, 
but only briefly, because he had to make some more telephone calls. 
He then wandered into a conference room on the airplane to watch his 
aides playing hearts, before returning to his cabin and sleeping for 
about five hours until the plane reached Andrews Air Force base. On 
reaching the White House about midnight, he sat down with Berger and 
Podesta. And from his private study in the White House residence, 
he telephoned Rep. Dick Gephardt, the House minority leader, and Sen. 
Tom Daschle, the Senate minority leader, to tell them about the decision. 
Cohen, a former Republican senator from Maine, called Republican leaders 
on Tuesday night with the same news. The decision was confirmed Wednesday 
morning at the Situation Room meeting, which began at about 7:15. 
The unanimity of the decision was confirmed again, according to Berger. 
But after stopping by the staff meeting, Clinton was not done with 
the question of impeachment. He spent about 50 minutes in the Oval 
Office early Wednesday afternoon with Rep. Amo Houghton, a New York 
Republican who opposes impeachment. Gregory Craig, the special White 
House counsel, also attended the meeting. Clinton then set to work 
on the 15-minute speech that he delivered from the Oval Office Wednesday 
night. He made several telephone calls to foreign leaders as well, 
though White House officials refused to identify them. The White House 
was in for a couple of shocks Wednesday afternoon before the assault 
began. After the president told Sen. Trent Lott, the majority leader, 
of his planned strike, White House advisers were astonished to hear 
Lott criticize it publicly as a political move. ``The rules we've 
always had is that politics stop at the shore,'' said one senior White 
House official, speaking on condition of anonymity. ``Somebody changed 
the rules and it wasn't us.'' But Clinton advisers said that they 
expected Lott's comments to backfire. As Clinton, prepared to give 
his speech Wednesday night, his aides were alarmed by one final detail: 
The tie he was wearing. They insisted that he trade it for the bright 
blue one worn Wednesday by Paul Begala, his counselor. Then Clinton 
took a sip of water, and began. It was only at the very end of his 
remarks that he brought the two tracks of his day together. ``Saddam 
Hussein and the other enemies of peace may have thought that the serious 
debate currently before the House of Representatives would distract 
Americans or weaken our resolve to face him down,'' he said. But, 
he said, Wednesday proved that ``when we must act in America's vital 
interests, we will do so.'' 
</TEXT>
</DOC>