<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981216.0233 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Still stumped for a holiday gift idea for your favorite technophile? 
Still alarmed that a well-meaning relative is going to get you a gift 
that does not plug into a wall or run on batteries? Here are a few 
ideas. All prices are approximate. Most of these items are available 
in computer stores. If you have an Internet connection, shopping is 
easier on line and can be done round the clock, and a few of the major 
online computer and software vendors will accept orders until midnight 
Dec. 23 for delivery on the 24th. Truly last-minute shoppers can buy 
electronic gift certificates on line and have them delivered to the 
recipient by e-mail on Christmas Day. But do not bother asking Santa 
for a G3 Macintosh desktop computer; Apple says it has sold its entire 
holiday inventory. It promises that a new generation of faster G3 
machines will be available in January, along with details about a 
couple of new portable Macs for consumers. One new site worth visiting 
on line: www.buy.com and its specialty areas, like buycomp.com for 
computers and buysoft.com for software. Time after time, comparison 
shopping via the Web led me to this place, which opened last month 
and appears to have the most consistently low prices. Caveat E-emptor: 
like many Web vendors, Buy.com requires the customer to pay all shipping 
fees, even when returning defective merchandise. Under $10 These are 
hardly high-tech products, but they are always useful in high-tech 
environments: a miniature flashlight, perfect for peering inside the 
nooks and crannies of a computer, for tucking into a traveler's computer 
bag for those dark moments when one has to manipulate a phone jack 
behind the hotel bedstead and for reading menus in dimly lighted restaurants, 
and a can of compressed air for blowing dust bunnies, lint and crumbs 
from the delicate innards of electronic devices. Dust can build up 
and cause overheating, which causes electronic parts to fail. UNDER 
$25 Floppy disks are so boring. Imation now makes them in neon colors. 
A box of 30 is $20. UNDER $50 The most popular software in all the 
land is the Windows 98 upgrade, but the elves in Microsoft's workshop 
forgot to make it fun. That's why I highly recommend Gizmos 98 (about 
$50) from Play Inc., a collection of nearly two dozen inspired Windows 
98 accessories and utilities that offers more amusement per click 
than any other disk around. Gizmos includes a variety of visually 
gorgeous card games, puzzles, clocks, screen savers and desktop screens, 
and handy utilities like a file shredder, an encryption tool, an audio 
CD player and a presentation program that lets the user organize digital 
pictures and make slide shows. A big trend next year will be burning 
your own CDs, both for making custom audio CDs and for backing up 
and storing data on CD disks. Doing so requires a device called a 
CD-R or CD-RW drive. But how do you keep from confusing one shiny 
disk with another? A company called Neato makes a CD label maker, 
consisting of software and hardware, that lets CD burners be as creative 
with their disk labels as they are with the custom CDs they make. 
The kit, with labels, is about $45. Palm Pilot users, a group that 
seems to include everyone in Silicon Valley plus a million others, 
will appreciate a Cross Duo, a stylish $35 pen that writes on paper 
but also acts as a nonwriting stylus for the Pilot. UNDER $100 The 
portable audio CD player is still cool, depending on what your definition 
of ``is'' is. Yes, the future of recorded music is most likely to 
be on the Internet, but for now, the audio CD still rules. Pioneer 
Electronics has a new line of portable audio CD players called Loopmasters 
(list price $99 to $119) that do not blaze any new trails technically 
but come in an array of colors, from clear plastic to psychedelic, 
all with transparent lids and remote controls on the headphones. Given 
the choice between oxygen and music, my teen-ager would crank up the 
volume until he turned blue, all the better to match the Royal Metal 
hue of his Loopmaster. UNDER $250 The Lego Mindstorm Robotics Invention 
System ($200) is one of those presents that parents give their children 
and then hope the kids will share. It consists of more than 700 Lego 
bricks and pieces, plus a small programmable computer, some software 
(Windows only) that helps children learn to program, some sensors, 
an infrared transmitter and a couple of motors to bring the constructions 
to life. It comes with a book for constructing some simple robots, 
but the real joy comes from letting loose your imagination and creativity. 
It is a wonderful introduction to robotics and programming. In the 
Internet age, the speed of the computer's processor chip is often 
less important than the speed of the Web connection. Most computer 
owners are still connecting to the Web at speeds of 28.8 kilobits 
per second or slower, so it is no wonder they think ``www'' stands 
for World Wide Wait. The faster the modem, the more enjoyable it is 
to browse the Net. Today, the fastest dial-up modems are the so-called 
v.90, 56K models, and one of my favorites is the 3Com U.S. Robotics 
56K V90 External Fax Modem (about $125 at Buycomp.com). External modems 
do not require the user to open the computer case, so they are the 
better choice for beginners. The National Geographic Society has released 
its entire 109-year collection of articles, photographs and advertisements 
as a set on either 4 DVD disks ($171.95 at Buysoft.com) or 31 CD-ROM 
disks ($174.95 for the Collector's Edition at Buysoft.com. This may 
be the ideal way to persuade pack-rat spouses to finally get rid of 
years (and tons) of accumulated yellow magazines. For iMac owners, 
Kingston Technologies (www.kingston.com) has a special this month 
on a 64-megabyte RAM upgrade for $139.99. Today's desktop computers 
have the same creative power as yesterday's $50,000 video-editing 
workstations. Still, many would-be video directors keep their old 
home videos on tape instead of in the computer. Dazzle Multimedia 
has a great $249 peripheral called the Dazzle Digital Video Creator, 
which lets users capture videos from camcorders, video cassettes or 
other sources and create moving images for display on Web sites, televisions 
or computer screens. UNDER $500 Just for fun, a pair of the new Motorola 
Talkabout 280 SLK two-way radios. Motorola has shrunk the new versions 
of these walkie-talkies so that even small children can hold them 
easily and has added some chrome-finished plastic to jazz them up. 
Even at $159.95 each (it takes two or more to communicate, obviously) 
they are cheaper than outfitting a child with a cell phone. The range 
is two miles, sufficient for keeping in touch on hikes, on the way 
to and from school or at the mall. The Palm III organizer from the 
3Com Corp. is the latest available version of the popular handheld 
PC companion device. The price ranges widely right now, from $250 
to about $350. The company recently announced a new model, called 
the Palm VII and set to cost a little under $800 when it becomes available 
next year. It is a fancier, wireless communications system with a 
built-in modem and other features. The price gap between the Palm 
III and the forthcoming Palm VII, not to mention the gap in product 
numbers, suggests that Palm has some other products in the pipeline. 
A cautious consumer might want to wait until early next year to see 
what 3Com has in mind. UNDER $1,000 Digital cameras are getting better 
all the time, and while they are not yet a major threat to conventional 
film cameras, they are clearly heading in that direction. We have 
tried a bunch of them, and the most solid choice so far is the Kodak 
DC-260 with 3X optical and 2X digital zoom lens ($713.95 from Buycomp.com). 
It can capture images up to 1.6 megapixels, enough for printing an 
impressive 5-by-7 photo. Its clunky styling will not win any awards, 
but it is better to take marvelous pictures than to look marvelous. 
Flat-panel computer monitors are near the top of many wish lists this 
year, but some models dipped below $1,000 only recently. My top choice 
is the pricey Apple Studio Display, which works just as well with 
Windows machines as with Macintoshes, but it costs about $1,300. For 
about $900, consider the NEC Multisync LCD400 flat-panel display, 
a 14-inch model that will be welcomed by anyone who is short on desk 
space. But remember, flat-panel prices are coming down steadily, and 
better bargains are very likely after the holidays. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>