<DOC>
<DOCNO> PRI19981216.2000.1819 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
For THE WORLD, this is Pamela McCall in the BBC newsroom in London. 
U.S. and British forces have launched attacks against Iraq, striking 
at what President Clinton calls its nuclear, chemical, and biological 
weapon programs. Washington and London said the decision is in response 
to Iraq's obstruction of United Nations weapons inspectors. Within 
the hour of the first attack, President Clinton spoke to the nation. 
The inspectors are saying that even if they could stay in Iraq, their 
work would be a sham. Saddam's deception has defeated their effectiveness. 
Instead of the inspectors disarming Saddam, Saddam has disarmed the 
inspectors. This situation presents a clear and present danger to 
the stability of the Persian Gulf and the safety of people everywhere. 
The international community gave Saddam one last chance to resume 
cooperation with the weapons inspectors. Saddam has failed to seize 
the chance. And so we had to act, and act now. U.S. Defense Secretary 
William Cohen has just announced that more air and ground forces are 
being sent to the Gulf. He said Iraq should not misunderstand our 
determination. British forces are also taking part in the strike against 
Iraq. British Prime Minister Tony Blair. Following the Butler report, 
after more than a year of obstruction and a catalog of broken promises, 
which I've outlined to you, we have no option but to act. Our objectives 
in this military action are clear, to degrade his capability to build 
and use weapons of mass destruction. British Prime Minister Tony Blair. 
He added every care is being taken to avoid civilian casualties. When 
it all began, air raid sirens sounded in the Iraqi capital, Baghdad, 
and anti-aircraft guns lit up the sky. Several series of violent explosions 
were heard over the night sky. From Baghdad, the BBC's Jeremy Cook 
reports. After all the talk, the action has begun. The first explosions 
echoed around Baghdad at 12:49 A.M. local time. The air raid sirens, 
which had sounded earlier, did not warn of the attack when it finally 
came. There was no sound of aircraft flying overhead, suggesting that 
these opening servos may have been Cruise missiles. The target of 
the attack is likely to be anti-aircraft defenses. Once they are neutralized, 
the bombing missions here may enter a new phase and turn against sites 
suspected of producing or hiding chemical and biological weapons. 
The anti-aircraft artillery has opened up and is lighting up the sky 
over the Iraqi capital. The explosions came after Saddam Hussein moved 
to put Iraq on a war footing. He told the revolutionary command council 
to organize the country into four defensive zones. Jeremy Cook reporting 
from Baghdad. In Israel, the Defense Minister has called an emergency 
meeting to assess the situation in Iraq. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>