<DOC>
<DOCNO> PRI19981216.2000.2014 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
President Clinton has launched what a White House spokesman calls 
a substantial military strike against Iraq. The president made the 
decision to strike after reviewing the report of the U.N. weapons 
inspection chief, Richard Butler, who charged that Iraqis were not 
cooperating with his arms monitors. Mr. Clinton is scheduled to address 
the nation within the hour. Lori Milroy is the publisher of "Iraq 
News." She has been following the events today. Lori Milroy, what 
is the purpose of these strikes? What can the administration achieve 
by bombing? " Well, the last time they explained what they wanted 
to do, which was last - the last crisis in November - to degrade Saddam's 
capabilities to produce unconventional weapons. The problem with that 
is he will probably lose the weapons monitors and inspections as a 
result of that, and Saddam can rebuild. And how likely do you think 
that is to happen? Certainly, those areas we'd presume to be some 
of the targets of the military attacks today. Well, it's a replay 
of what happened during the Gulf War in miniature. Everything that 
was destroyed during the Gulf War, almost, has been rebuilt, and that's 
what will happen again, and that's why these air strikes cannot achieve 
a coherent objective. Is there any kind of achievement to be made 
through strikes such as theses? Yes. The administration will make 
the overthrow of Saddam its goal, as the president suggested when 
he called off the strikes in November - then, yes, that is a coherent 
objective. And he certainly has survived previous air strikes. Is 
there any reason to believe that the outcome could be different this 
time? An air strike alone is not going to get rid of Saddam. What 
do you think will? The policy that Congress has advocated, to support 
the Iraqi opposition in overthrowing Saddam, by arming them and creating 
safe havens in Iraq. People are saying that the timing of these strikes 
today is no coincidence. Do you think that we are seeing domestic 
factors at work here with United States foreign policy. It is possible. 
Certainly, the timing of the strikes, on the eve of the impeachment 
debate, leaves that interpretation open. At the same time, the United 
States, looking at other factors, is acting without a new Security 
Council resolution from the United Nations. What do you think the 
implications of this might be? Less significant than the corrosive 
qualities that emerge when the administration uses force without clearly 
explaining the reasons for doing so and the goals it hopes to achieve. 
In terms of the kind of force that we're hearing about today, it appears 
at this point - and it is, obviously, early in the game - that the 
United States has unleashed an enormous amount of military force and 
has more to spare. What do you make of the kind of response that Iraq 
is capable of? Well, I think the Iraqis were prepared for this. They 
are hunkering down. One of the things that is possible in the short 
term is to see terrorism, because Iraq, I believe, is working with 
fundamentalist terrorists, like Osama bin Laden, and we may see such 
things directed against the United States or its allies in the region. 
Can you be more specific? Well, for example, there may be an attack 
by Egyptian fundamentalists against an important Egyptian target, 
and it will look to us like this is the Egyptian opposition to Saddam 
- to President Mubarak, but we will not understand, because we Americans 
haven't been watching carefully enough to see that there's an Iraqi 
hand in this, and this is a way of splitting the coalition against 
Saddam. For example, I believe that the Luxor attack last year, which 
occurred during the first Iraq crisis, Iraq was involved in, and a 
devastating blow to Egyptian tourism. Some 70 tourists were killed 
as a result of a fundamentalist attack. All we saw in America were 
the fundamentalists, and we didn't see that which suggested another 
hand, Iraqi intelligence, involved in that. Things like that can occur, 
and we have to pay attention. One final question, Lori Milroy. You 
have watched what's been happening between the United States and Iraq 
for some time. You have met Saddam Hussein. I wonder what you will 
be watching for over the next 24 hours, in terms of the attack and 
the response to it. One, try and understand what the U.S. hopes to 
achieve in this attack, to get an idea of how sustaining and meaningful 
it will be, and two, how the Iraqis will respond, as they surely will. 
Lori Milroy, thank you very much. Thank you. Lori Milroy is the publisher 
of "Iraq News." 
</TEXT>
</DOC>