<DOC>
<DOCNO> PRI19981216.2000.2608 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
We'll have more on the military strikes against Iraq today coming 
up in just a few minutes, but first, in light of those strikes, the 
House of Representatives is considering delaying its vote on the impeachment 
of President Clinton. Meanwhile, more undecided Republicans are making 
up their minds, and the news is not good for the president. Among 
the latest to decide to vote for impeachment are Iowa's Jim Leach, 
New York Representative Sherwood Burlott, Brian Beray of California, 
and Ohio Congresswoman Deborah Price. Our favorite letter writer, 
Eddie Mayer, has been watching the events unfold from London. Eddie 
admits he's not sure what to make of all of this, but he writes, "It's 
a great conversation starter." The sex life of President Clinton has 
been as big a talking point over here as it has been over there. Since 
the Monica Lewinsky story broke - oh, what is it, about 150 years 
ago - the media in Britain has followed every twist in the story. 
Stand-up comedians pepper their material with cigar and pizza references, 
and newspaper cartoonists have had a field day. It's the price you 
pay for being the most powerful man in the world's most powerful country. 
What's fascinating to people in Britain is that Bill Clinton is still 
in office at all. This isn't a moral judgement, simply an observation, 
that if our prime minister was to do half of what the president's 
been up to, he would have been hounded from office by his party, or 
the press, or the people, or, more likely, all three. The British 
are becoming less prudish about s-e-x. We now have two openly gay 
cabinet ministers, and nobody bats an eyelid. Compare that to 15 years 
ago, when a man no one had heard of was simply trying to become a 
member of Parliament, announced he was gay, he was berated by the 
press and rejected at the ballot box. Also, sexual infidelity by members 
of Parliament, while not exactly a vote winner, results only in embarrassing 
headlines, not resignations these days. But the higher up the political 
food chain you go, the more pure you have to be. If Tony Blair had 
so much as suggested the possibility of perhaps at some point in the 
future necking a Downing Street intern, he would have been out of 
office before you could say "family values." All this, of course, 
contrasts sharply with the views of our fellow Europeans. The Italians, 
for example, regard Mr. Clinton as some kind of stud they'd like to 
lead their country, and, given the frequent changes of government 
there, he'll probably get his turn. The French view sexual infidelity 
on the part of their leaders as essential. If you're able to combine 
it with pot smoking and avoiding the draft, you are in the Alizi palace 
for life. Here in Britain, we viewed with some amazement the incredible 
times and fortune for the Clintons. I remember a headline from last 
January, when the Lewinsky storm reached its first peak. Clinton stares 
into the abyss. Since then, of course, he stepped back from the abyss, 
marched up to the top of the hill, back down again, and peered into 
the abyss so often it's difficult to keep up. Such has been his ability 
to emerge unscathed from the worst political wreckage, that it's still 
hard to imagine he might be formally impeached. Suffice to say, we 
find the Clinton story as fascinating as anyone in America. It's just 
a general view that we're glad it's there and not here. Until next 
time, yours truly, Eddie Mayer. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>