<DOC>
<DOCNO> PRI19981216.2000.1012 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
U.S. forces are not alone in the strike against Iraq today. Speaking 
outside his Downing Street residence in London, the prime minister, 
Tony Blair, said British involvement in the military operation is 
significant. He accused Iraqi president, Saddam Hussein, of having 
lied constantly and said there was no option other than to act militarily. 
Michael Vinion is the diplomatic editor for the "Times of London." 
Can you tell us, Michael, first, what you are hearing on that end? 
Has the prime minister been giving any further details of the attack? 
No details at all, except he's said that Britain is taking military 
action with real regret but real determination, and he said that the 
reason is that, essentially, our patience is exhausted. Diplomacy 
can go no further, and there was no other option. But he's not actually 
said which forces have been involved, where they have been in action, 
or what they've yet done. Over the past 24 hours, the rhetoric that's 
been coming out of London has been notably stronger than what's been 
heard here in Washington. How influential was London in insuring that 
the attacks went ahead? I think it was pretty influential. I think 
that the word from Britain was, if you're going to do it, do it straight 
away. There's no point waiting any further. I think London was quite 
influential in suggesting to Mr. Clinton the last time around that 
the West should give the Iraqis one more chance, and, hence, Mr. Clinton's 
order to abort the action after it had already been launched. But 
I think this time around, the British have said, as far as we are 
concerned, in Europe and certainly in Britain, there's no point trying 
any further to find a solution to Saddam Hussein if he clearly has 
no intention of cooperating. And very briefly, there is, as you may 
have heard, a certain amount of divisiveness in Congress in terms 
of support for the attack today. How much support is there from the 
British Parliament for the military action against Baghdad? There's 
going to be an emergency debate in Parliament tomorrow, and we'll 
know who is in favor and who's against. There are one or two figures 
on the left of the Labor Party who are clearly opposed to it and have 
been all along, but on the whole, I would say that almost unanimity, 
across the Parliamentary spectrum, the conservatives will certainly 
support the Labor government. The bulk of the Labor Party, of course, 
will support its own government, and virtually everybody else in Parliament, 
I think, feels that there wasn't any other option. Michael Vinion 
is the diplomatic editor for the "Times of London." Thank you very 
much for speaking with us. More updates on the attack against Iraq 
today coming up on THE WORLD. You're listening to PRI, Public Radio 
International. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>