<DOC>
<DOCNO> PRI19981216.2000.0375 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
This is THE WORLD. I'm Lisa Mullins. The United States has launched 
an air strike against Iraq. President Clinton gave the order this 
morning after reviewing the latest U.N. report detailing Baghdad's 
failure to cooperate with U.N. weapons inspections. He is addressing 
the nation now. The president came under fire himself earlier from 
Republicans who criticized the timing of the attack. The House of 
Representatives was poised to vote on whether to impeach the president 
tomorrow. That vote may now be postponed. We'll have more on that 
story shortly. First, though, we turn to Harvey Sickerman, president 
of the Philadelphia based Foreign Policy Research Institute. Mr. Sickerman, 
I know you have been listening to the president's address. What do 
you make of his reasoning for the attack so far? PRESIDENT, FOREIGN 
POLICY RESEARCH INSTITUTE: Well, he has put forward many of the reasons 
that he's advanced in the past, to wit, that the purpose of the attack 
is to destroy or to damage Saddam's capacity to build weapons of mass 
destruction and to threaten his neighbors. He has also very carefully 
put the timing of this attack to the report of the UNSCOM commission 
on its three-week trial period following the last agreement. And so, 
in this way, he is explaining that his actions have been governed 
by the U.N. commission. It was the report of Ambassador Butler of 
UNSCOM that, in effect, cocked the pistol that he has now fired. And 
in terms of the kind of reasoning that he is giving, he has, of course, 
cited Iraq's use of chemical weapons against the Kurds. He has talked 
about the firing of Scud missiles. Is he presenting a convincing argument? 
Well, he's - to me, he's presenting a very convincing argument, that 
Saddam is a dangerous fellow, and he has to be --he has to be licked, 
and just knocked about and put down. The problem is that when you 
sketch out a danger of this considerable magnitude, you also have 
to be able to say when you're finished with it that you have really 
diminished that danger considerably. And the problem in the past has 
been that the American rhetoric sketched this fellow as a kind of 
Iraqi Hitler, and yet, in the end, we have not taken the kind of action 
that we took against the Hitler. So, this is where you have to balance 
out the tone of the speech. At what point will the objectives be satisfied. 
What else are you noticing in terms of the president and the source 
of arguments that he is making? I'm noticing that it's - it's a familiar 
litany. He's giving a very carefully prepared speech, citing chapter 
and verse. He is also taking the protection of the United Nations, 
that the United States is not simply acting for itself, although our 
national interest is involved, but we're also acting with the cooperation 
of the international community, in short, that the coalition quorumed 
to deprive Saddam of his conquest of Kuwait, and to chain him up, 
as it were, that that coalition is still intact and fully support 
the American actions. There are reports coming over on the wire that 
this attack could last up to four days. If that is true, what kind 
of effect do you think that might have on Iraq? Well, it depends how 
devastating the attack is, but it also depends on whether there is 
a second phase. At this point, there is one aircraft carrier in the 
Gulf. A second aircraft carrier will be arriving within a few days, 
and so it may very well be that what you're seeing here is an initial 
assault, and then there will be a second wave as soon as that second 
carrier shows up, and then we're in the position to say to the Iraqis, 
"well, here, you've had a taste of this. If you want more, we're prepared 
to give you more." But that means that after three or four days, there 
will be an opening of some kind of a negotiation where we will again 
demand compliance of the Iraqis. And if it turns out to be not much 
more than that, then I think the United States will be in a bit of 
trouble. We'll be accused once more of just having caused a modest 
amount of damage, but not having seriously undermined him. And what 
about, Mr. Sickerman, in terms of Iraqi fire power, what kind of defenses 
does Iraq have and how good are they? Could they, for instance, actually 
hit Cruise missiles heading toward Baghdad? They probably won't be 
able to hit the Cruise missiles. The question is whether they're going 
to hit a manned aircraft, and if we do the job of suppressing their 
air defenses, then those aircraft should be relatively safe, particularly 
if they're flying at a very high altitude. The difficulty with very 
high altitude bombing is that it's not nearly as accurate as when 
you're coming in low, and so this is going to be one of those military 
balances. The worst thing that could happen from the American administration's 
point of view is that if they knock down a couple of planes and capture 
the pilots. And talk more about that. I mean, in this kind of operation, 
of course... Yeah. ...it is expected that there will be some casualties... 
Yeah. ...obviously on both sides. To the extent that there might be 
U.S. casualties, can you make a comment about that? I do not subscribe 
to the notion that the American people will flinch from casualties. 
The American people will flinch from casualties suffered for an operation 
that either does not have an apparent objective, or that is too small 
to achieve its objectives. Then it looks like you're simply wasting 
- you're wasting people for no good reason. So, I think that people 
are sufficiently aware of Saddam's danger, that the American people 
are prepared for some casualties, and to pay that price if - and this 
is a very large if that must be underlined many times - the operation 
justifies it, meaning that it's an operation that's intended to damage 
Saddam very severely and prepare the conditions for his overthrow. 
Mr. Sickerman, thank you very much for speaking with us. Thank you. 
Harvey Sickerman is president of the Philadelphia based Foreign Policy 
Research Institute. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>