<DOC>
<DOCNO> PRI19981216.2000.1185 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
This is THE WORLD. I'm Lisa Mullins. For two and a half months now, 
NBA fans have been hearing more about salary caps and escrow tax systems 
than about fast breaks and slam dunks. With no negotiations scheduled 
to end the lock-out, some pro basketball fans are giving up on the 
season. Even some players are considering alternative plans. Stephon 
Marbury of the Minnesota Timberwolves says if the season is cancelled, 
he will head for Europe, and Vlade Divac of the Charlotte Hornets 
is also said to be considering a tour of duty on the other side of 
the Atlantic. But THE WORLD's Stephen Beard in London says Europeans 
shouldn't get their hopes too high for an influx of NBA superstars. 
Hey, this is the bird man, Alton Bird, and welcome to the Wembley 
Arena for the climax of the British basketball season. Britain is 
in awe of America's basketball prowess. The U.K. frequently uses American 
commentators to cover the game. The head of the British basketball 
league, Mike Smith, salivates at the very suggestion that some of 
the great American players could also cross the pond. We would love 
to have Michael Jordan. Who wouldn't? We'd love to have Karl Malone. 
I think there's a possibility of one or two of those players with 
the bigger clubs coming to Europe, and that would be a wonderful coup 
for basketball. A stampede of top American talent across the Atlantic 
seems unlikely. For one thing, there are only four months of the European 
season left, and, under the rules, there's a roster limit of only 
two Americans per European team, but Mike Smith is, nevertheless, 
optimistic. I do think there is the opportunity of one or two superstars 
to come to Europe, enjoy the delights of Italy, Spain, or Greece, 
less demanding as a schedule, more relaxing, I think, and ability 
to continue to play, which is what players want to do. He throws. 
He's about to save his second. He's got eight points so far in the 
game. That one takes him to nine... If the NBA season is cancelled, 
and more U.S. players do come to Europe, they'll find a rather different 
style of game here, slower, less athletic, more regimented than what 
they're used to. It could mean a painful process of adjustment, says 
sportswriter, Ian Whittle. He says that players who've only -- ever 
had NBA experience could quickly find themselves on a collision course 
with the referee. It's a lot - lot, lot more physical in the NBA. 
They guys are so much bigger, so much stronger, so much faster, that 
you can get away with a lot more body contact in the NBA. Now, in 
Europe, you're going to find a lot of these Americans are going to 
get into fowl trouble early because, as you probably know, you're 
only allowed five fowls in a game before you fowl out in Europe. And 
a lot of these guys could well find themselves not playing very many 
minutes in the early days, as they struggle through just a different 
style of referee. Doesn't go, but meanwhile, the fowl is called off 
the ball, and it looks like it's against Danny Lewis of London Towers... 
There could be another culture shock in store for the pampered Americans, 
says Whittle. The fans, particularly those in continental Europe, 
are not quite as forgiving as their American counterparts. You know, 
in a lot of these countries -- Greek fans, especially, Italian fans 
- can be very demanding, and if you're on a winning team, and you're 
doing well, then great. Literally, you get the red carpet treatment 
wherever you go. But if your team's not doing particularly well and 
you're not doing particularly well and you are being paid $5 million 
for five minutes work, then they'll come up to you and let you know 
about it. That's putting it mildly. John Ameche, a Briton, who's played 
both in the NBA and in continental Europe, says that in Greece, his 
team, Panatha Nicos, frequently came under a hail of missiles on the 
court, and they were always escorted in and out of the arena by the 
police. When we lost our last game in Greece, and I was due to stay 
for another week, I actually ended up leaving that night because two 
or three Greek fans had told me they knew where I lived and they were 
going to come and get me for losing. So I left that night right after 
the game. They take their basketball very seriously. Arms out, put 
your head up. OK. We're ready. Let's go. They don't take it quite 
so seriously here in the U.K. Overshadowed by soccer, British basketball, 
both amateur and professional, lags way behind the continental European 
game, and it's a universe away from the NBA. Footloose NBA stars seem 
most unlikely to fetch up here, but these eight year old basketball 
players have already convinced themselves that Michael Jordan is on 
the way, and they've prepared some pertinent questions. How much money 
do you win every week? And - and I do. And could I maybe come and 
see one of your matches? If any of the NBA superstars came to Britain, 
they'd be welcomed by small, but adoring crowds. They'd find the managers 
compliant, the coaches grateful, but they'd be paid a pittance. Faced 
with the prospects of comparative poverty in Britain and the perils 
of playing in continental Europe, the superstars may well decide to 
stay at home. For THE WORLD, this is Stephen Beard in London. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>