<DOC>
<DOCNO> PRI19981216.2000.2962 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Amatcia Baram is a professor of government at Georgetown University. 
He's also an expert on Iraq. Professor Baram, you have been monitoring 
the events in Iraq. Could you tell us how Saddam Hussein has been 
preparing for these strikes? What has his strategy been? Well, until 
about 24 hours ago, he didn't think the Americans would strike, but 
the last, maybe, 12, 15 hours, he got some intelligence for sure that 
something very serious was going to happen. So he is preparing against 
the two main dangers which he sees. One is a popular insurrection, 
and the other is a military coup-de-taut. He partitioned Iraq into 
four strategic zones with army groups in each one at the disposal 
of an army general who is in charge, and this way, he's sending a 
message to the populace, "if you revolt, if you rise against me as 
President Clinton is telling you to do, I'm going to squash you." 
And in Baghdad, he kept - and around Baghdad - he kept the special 
guard and the republican guard, which are his crack troops, and that's 
against a coup-de-taut which he considers to be the most important 
- the most serious danger. Now, can you explain that? When you say 
he partitioned Iraq into four different quadrants, what was the strategy 
going on there? Well, each part of Iraq consists of the parts -- which 
he sort of partitioned now consists of a very special kind of population. 
You have Kurds, you have Shiites, you have Sunites, and you have the 
center, which is Baghdad, which is mixed. In each area now there is 
an army group in charge of keeping the public order. The main danger 
is in Baghdad, because you have a city in which 65 to 70 percent are 
Shiites. So Baghdad now is in danger of an insurrection, and the south, 
the Shi south - these are the most dangerous areas. So in these areas, 
he has now - he has now large forces which he's assigning the job 
of putting down any - any popular insurrection. So what you're saying 
is that perhaps Saddam Hussein, more than fearing a United States 
or international attack, feared internal opposition? Yes. He is fearing 
internal opposition, and American bombardment, and under the cover 
of smoke and dust and explosions, and when communication has broken 
down, which will be the case within an hour or two, and with the lights 
off, because electricity also will be off, he, I think, correctly, 
identifies his main danger not so much from the bombings, but chaos. 
There's a chaos, and within the chaos, this kind of insurrection or 
a coup d'etat or both. And what about your feeling on that as an observer? 
How likely do you think an insurrection actually is during the bombings 
or after? I give insurrection 20 percent, 25 percent chance to happen, 
to occur. I do - I believe when it does, the Americans this time will 
try to help. But still, the chances are probably 20 or 25 percent, 
no more. And I give a coup-de-taut between 10 and 15 percent, but 
it's still there. It's a possibility. What do you think that the U.S. 
objective is in all of this? And, for instance, do you think that 
part of the strategy behind the attack is to try and pave the way 
perhaps more for an insurrection within Iraq? Without any doubt. Without 
any doubt. Also, if nothing happens during the bombing, the American 
hope is that when Saddam gets out of the private home at which he's 
going to spend a few - next few days in downtown Baghdad hiding among 
the population where he is not in danger of being spotted by the U.S. 
When he gets out of his house and looks around and sees the destruction 
of his military machine, he'll say, "God forbid." This is what I would 
call the God forbid test. If he says that, it means that the damage 
was such that now his life is in danger because his own officers might 
turn against him. Do you think there's a greater chance of that happening 
than, for instance, his being one of the targets of a U.S. bomb? Oh, 
much greater, yes. Much greater. The U.S. bombs - well, I give it 
one percent chance if he's there, but one percent chance that the 
bomb will hit the guy, but 99 percent chance that he will find a place 
where he can hide and - yes, and avoid a direct hit, yes. What do 
we know, in fact, about where Saddam Hussein goes during previous 
attacks? Well, we know a lot. We know that during the Gulf War, he 
spent almost all the time - 90 percent of the Gulf War he spent in 
Baghdad - in Baghdad in their own living quarters. Spending time in 
this private home, that private home - he's got private homes all 
over the place, and he can get there without any previous notice, 
early notice, and it's in the middle of a perfectly civilian and just 
a quiet living quarter, you know, that you don't know of. And so, 
because you don't want to kill Iraqis, which is perfect justification 
- you don't want to have civilian casualties, you really cannot find 
him. Aside, then, from emboldening the opposition, as you suspect 
may be the outcome of this, what other kind of effect do you think 
that the air strikes could have? Well, it will have only a limited 
- even though useful, but still limited effect on destroying his weapons 
of mass destruction. Most of the places where he keeps those weapons 
and develops them, you don't know. You do know of a few. That's very 
true. And I'm sure these few places will be decimated, especially 
his missile production unit where he's producing kosher missiles. 
You have kosher and non-kosher. OK. The kosher ones are under 160 
kilometers of range. The United Nations allows him to do that. However, 
he is using the same premises exactly to prepare the infrastructure 
for producing longer - longer range missiles. If you destroy the installation 
as a whole, you destroy his capacity of producing long term missiles 
as well. I have no doubt that the U.S. will go for these things, and 
here and there, some chemical - chemical production units and so on. 
But most of it - don't know where it is. You will, however, touch 
his military infrastructure in other areas, in other fields, and that 
also can be very traumatic to him. And talk about the - how formidable 
that military force is on Iraq's side, and - in terms of what kind 
of a danger it could present to United States and international forces. 
Well, Saddam's conventional forces don't pose any danger for America, 
and very little danger to the neighbors, and a tremendous danger to 
the Iraqis themselves, because they can put down any insurrection. 
But not to the neighbors. Saddam's non-conventional potential is huge, 
absolutely huge, including - he can become a nuclear power within 
a year. So I would say that the main idea should be to get rid of 
the guy, and I think that's where the American main effort is going 
to be now, hitting him in places where they know it's going to hurt 
him, like the military establishment and the infrastructure, knowing 
that they really cannot decimate his non-conventional industry, which 
is right now hidden and hard to detect. Thank you very much for speaking 
with us. Amatcia Baram is a professor of government at Georgetown 
University. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>