<DOC>
<DOCNO> PRI19981216.2000.2289 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
One American group that has long been opposed to U.S. policy toward 
Iraq, specifically enforcement of the economic sanctions, is called 
Voices in the Wilderness. The Chicago based organization has sponsored 
18 trips to Iraq, taking medicine and toys to the country. It is done 
so without seeking authorization, by its own admission, seeking to 
stir up controversy. One of the group's organizers, Kathy Kelly, returned 
from her latest trip to Baghdad a couple of weeks ago. She says the 
Iraqi people have been expecting an attack for months. A 10 year old 
girl said to us in February, "I would rather be killed by bombs than 
by sanctions." We've heard people say to us, "We know we will be hit, 
even as the threats are lifted, at one point, in any way. We are hit 
every day by these sanctions." One elderly man was asked, "Will you 
go underground? Will you seek a bomb shelter?" And he said, "But even 
the shelters get hit," and he was referring to the Amnarea massacre 
in February of 1991, and so, yes, we come back really feeling frantic 
almost to get the word out, because here in the United States, most 
people don't understand that we've been at war consistently with Iraq 
since the bombing war of 1991. There is, as you know, a mechanism 
in place to soften the blow of the sanctions, and that, of course, 
allows to Iraq to sell oil in return for food aid. There have been 
complaints made and observations made, but the money is simply not 
going to the people who need it most. Would your efforts not be better 
rewarded if you tried to get those goods that are coming in legitimately 
through this program to the right people? You know, the United Nations 
is completely responsible to supervise distribution of food and medicine. 
Dennis Halladay, after working for the United Nations for 34 years, 
recently resigned because he said, in conscience, he could no longer 
go along with a sanctions regime that is claiming the lives of six 
to seven thousand Iraqi children every single month. What happens 
is that even though the United Nations people are earnestly trying 
to assure that this food and medicine gets moved around property, 
first, the Iraqis don't have the equipment to pump out enough oil 
- remember, we have falling oil prices now - in order to meet the 
quota that they are allowed to get through the oil for food sales. 
Secondly, when they do get money coming into the country in order 
to buy needed medicines, desperately need food, many of the contracts 
are stalled, including contracts for equipment that's necessary. And 
thirdly, there simply was never any allowance for any kind of cash, 
which is absolutely indispensable in order to be able to move food 
and medicines of that volume around efficiently. Do you find fault 
with the Iraqis at all, and with the administration of Saddam Hussein, 
in particular? Surely, the suffering of Iraqis, the suffering that 
they're enduring at this point, is at least, in part, you have to 
admit, the fault of the Iraqi leadership. They're the ones, of course, 
that refuse to cooperate with the United Nations inspectors, who continue 
to blatantly issue provocative challenges to the international community. 
Do you find no fault with them? But, Lisa, may I look at that first 
part of your question about the Iraqi people. Wouldn't it be fair 
to say that the United States is basically telling Iraqi people today, 
"Look, we're holding 6,000 of your children hostage, and if you don't 
force your government to unconditionally comply with every demand 
we make of it, we'll slaughter these children, and if you don't believe 
it, check your statistics from last month." I'm not an apologist for 
anybody's government, and I think that anyone who prevents the sanctions 
from being lifted, or who allows for the ongoing threat of military 
strikes, is doing something that's unconscionable and ruthless. But 
I think here in the United States, it's crucial, since democracy is 
based on information, that at least the United States people understand 
that we defeated a country, then subjected the civilian population 
to eight years of the most comprehensive state of siege ever imposed 
in modern history. And now, we're prepared to follow a huge strike 
that will cause, minimum, 10,000 lives. Kathy Kelly is with the group 
Voices in the Wilderness, speaking to us from Chicago. Thank you. 
Thank you, Lisa. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>