<DOC>
<DOCNO> PRI19981216.2000.0066 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
For THE WORLD, this is Pamela McCall in the BBC newsroom in London. 
Attacks have been launched on Iraq by the United States and Britain. 
President Clinton informed Congress that he had ordered substantial 
air strikes to go ahead. Minutes after reports of heavy aircraft fire 
and explosions in Baghdad were heard. We now go live to President 
Clinton as he addresses the nation on the air strikes being launched 
on Iraq. Good evening. Earlier today, I ordered America's armed forces 
to strike military and security targets in Iraq. They are joined by 
British forces. Their mission is to attack Iraq's nuclear, chemical, 
and biological weapons programs, and its military capacity to threaten 
its neighbors. Their purpose is to protect the national interests 
of the United States, and, indeed, the interests of people throughout 
the Middle East and around the world. Saddam Hussein must not be allowed 
to threaten his neighbors or the world with nuclear arms, poison gas, 
or biological weapons. I want to explain why I have decided, with 
the unanimous recommendation of my national security team, to use 
force in Iraq, why we have acted now, and what we aim to accomplish. 
Six weeks ago, Saddam Hussein announced that he would no longer cooperate 
with the United Nations weapons inspectors called UNSCOM. They are 
highly professional experts from dozens of countries. Their job is 
to oversee the elimination of Iraq's capability to retain, create, 
and use weapons of mass destruction, and to verify that Iraq does 
not attempt to rebuild that capability. The inspectors undertook this 
mission, first, seven and a half years ago, at the end of the Gulf 
War, when Iraq agreed to declare and destroy its arsenal as a condition 
of a cease fire. The international community had good reason to set 
this requirement. Other countries possess weapons of mass destruction 
and ballistic missiles. With Saddam, there is one big difference--he 
has used them, not once, but repeatedly, unleashing chemical weapons 
against Iranian troops during a decade-long war, not only against 
soldiers, but against civilians, firing Scud missiles at the citizens 
of Israel, Saudi Arabia, Bahrain, and Iran, and not only against a 
foreign enemy, but even against his own people, gassing Kurdish civilians 
in northern Iraq. The international community had little doubt then, 
and I have no doubt today, that, left unchecked, Saddam Hussein will 
use these terrible weapons again. The United States has patiently 
worked to preserve UNSCOM, as Iraq has sought to avoid its obligation 
to cooperate with the inspectors. On occasion, we've had to threaten 
military force, and Saddam has backed down. Faced with Saddam's latest 
act of defiance in late October, we built intensive diplomatic pressure 
on Iraq, backed by overwhelming military force in the region. The 
U.N. Security Council voted 15 to zero to condemn Saddam's actions, 
and to demand that he immediately come into compliance. Eight Arab 
nations, Egypt, Syria, Saudi Arabia, Kuwait, Bahrain, Fedar, United 
Arab Emirates, and Oman, warned that Iraq alone would bear responsibility 
for the consequences of defying the U.N. When Saddam still failed 
to comply, we prepared to act militarily. It was only then, at the 
last possible moment, that Iraq backed down. It pledged to the U.N. 
that it had made, and I quote, "a clear and unconditional decision 
to resume cooperation with the weapons inspectors." I decided then 
to call off the attack, with our airplanes already in the air, because 
Saddam had given in to our demands. I concluded then that the right 
thing to do was to use restraint and give Saddam one last chance to 
prove his willingness to cooperate. I made it very clear at that time 
what unconditional cooperation meant, based on existing U.N. resolutions 
and Iraq's own commitments, and, along with Prime Minister Blair of 
Great Britain, I made it equally clear that if Saddam failed to cooperate 
fully, we would be prepared to act without delay, diplomacy, or warning. 
Now, over the past three weeks, the U.N. weapons inspectors have carried 
out their plan for testing Iraq's cooperation. The testing period 
ended this weekend, and last night, UNSCOM's chairman, Richard Butler, 
reported the results to U.N. Secretary General Annan. The conclusions... 
President Clinton addressing the nation on air strikes in Iraq. This 
is Pamela McCall in the BBC newsroom in London. Stay with THE WORLD 
for more of Mr. Clinton. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>