<DOC>
<DOCNO> PRI19981216.2000.0736 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Joining us on the line now from Washington, D.C. is Emily Harris of 
THE WORLD. President Clinton has just addressed the nation, Emily. 
Could you summarize what you have heard of the president's message 
so far for us? of Saddam Hussein being the one who has brought this 
action on himself. Clinton outlined - he said for - at the beginning 
that he wanted to explain why he has decided to take this action right 
now. He reviewed history a little bit. He did note that he had the 
unanimous recommendation of his national security team to go ahead 
and take military action now. And then he went back to review what 
happened in the most recent crisis confrontation with Saddam Hussein, 
when the military - the UNSCOM inspectors left about six weeks ago, 
when we almost got to this point previously. President Clinton said 
that that was Saddam Hussein's last chance, and he has now -- messing 
up, basically. He has not allowed the weapons inspectors access to 
sites. In fact, Clinton did outline some specifics of Richard Butler's 
report yesterday, who is the chief arms inspector, and he mentioned 
that the report - he - President Clinton called the conclusions of 
the report, quote, "stark, sobering, and profoundly disturbing." He 
outlined several instances in which Iraq has not cooperated, including 
-- by not letting the weapons inspectors into the Boffe party headquarters, 
by stopping a biological weapons team from videoing a site and from 
copying documents. Another example he cited was that they - the Iraqis 
emptied out an entire building that was slated for inspection. In 
fact, Clinton went ahead and said that Saddam Hussein has, basically, 
disarmed the inspectors rather than the other way around, and that 
he -- he can't be allowed to get away with this, is Clinton's basic 
message. How about in logistics? What is he saying about the scale 
of the attack and how long it might continue? It appears that it will 
continue probably for two or three more hours today, and then on for 
two to three days. Ramadan, the Muslim Holy Month, does start this 
weekend, and it's assumed that, in Washington - that the president 
would like to have this taken care of by then. But President Clinton 
is going to come under a whole lot of pressure to make this attack 
look different from past attacks. For example, we have a public statement 
released by Senator Jesse Helms, who is one of the most powerful voices 
on foreign affairs in Washington, and he says he supports military 
action, but - but he wants to make a point that this has to be very 
sustained, this has to make a difference, and won't be supportive 
of a short lived strike that doesn't actually make any difference. 
In terms of some of the support that the president is getting or not 
getting on Capitol Hill, we heard earlier from the Senate majority 
leader, Trent Lott, who is unhappy with the coincidence of this action 
against Iraq coming the same week of the impeachment vote. How representative 
is that kind of feeling and that kind of criticism on Capitol Hill? 
I think it's fairly widespread. Lott didn't directly say - accuse 
the president of plotting this or going ahead with this action to 
avert impeachment hearings. But the discussion - and it was made clear 
pretty early in the day, before these strikes actually happened, that 
if, in fact, the U.S. were - was engaged with - in military action 
against Iraq, that the impeachment hearings would be delayed, and 
that - that issue was taken care of hours before this military action 
went forward. But there are other people who are really quite blatantly 
tying --questioning Clinton's motives for doing it right now, and 
what he's going to have to do is convince, particularly Republicans 
on Capitol Hill, that now is different than before. Now was - we had 
to do it now. And there's some question of, you know, why did - did 
Butler decide to turn in his report yesterday. There's going to be 
a lot of looking into exactly - exactly why now, and Jerri Solomon, 
a Republican from New York, in fact, said that Clinton had backed 
off in the past, and she was wondering why he - why the president 
got a backbone now, obviously pointing up the issue that the president 
would rather not have impeachment hearings happen tomorrow, and, in 
fact, now he won't. That was Emily Harris speaking to us from Washington, 
D.C. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>