<DOC>
<DOCNO> VOA19981216.0500.1310 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
At a ski resort near Denver, Colorado, about 600 people with various 
disabilities came together at the 11th Annual Hartford Ski Spectacular. 
With funding from the Hartford Insurance Company and others, the event 
shows participants from the world -- around the world how to live 
active lives despite disability. Joining this year's program held 
at the Breckinridge Ski Resort were eight people who've been disabled 
by acts of terrorism. VOA's Martin Secrest has more. P.J. Allen is 
the youngest survivor of the Oklahoma City bombing. Just 20 months 
old at the time of the blast, he is now 5 years of age. The boy was 
badly burned and suffered lung damage in the bombing but got his first 
taste of skiing and fun on the slopes at Breckinridge. He and seven 
other survivors of terrorism were flown to the Rocky Mountain resort 
courtesy of an American airline to take part in specially tailored 
skiing or snow boarding programs. Kirk Bauer is the executive director 
of Disabled Sports USA which organizes the yearly event. One of the 
things that we want them to come away with is the sense of hope and 
expectation and optimism that they can lead active lives despite their 
disability. The Hartford Ski Spectacular provides instruction for 
people with a wide range of skill levels as well as training for athletes 
on the U.S. Disabled Ski Team. Some learn to ski on three tracks, 
that is standing on one leg supported by smaller skis attached to 
hand-held poles. Others who have lost arms or hands learn to ski with 
one pole or no poles. Kirk Bauer says that the Hartford Ski Spectacular 
offers premier sports instruction for the disabled. Because it's a 
national event, the best instructors and trainers in the country are 
here, and so the people that are taking part in these activities are 
with the very best. We also have all of the adaptive equipment manufacturers 
here who are doing expos, and what people are learning is all of the 
different devices that are out there that will enable them to take 
part in sports, despite their disability. One of the people taking 
part in the activities is 17-year-old Michelle Mimnagh from Omagh, 
Ireland. She lost a leg in a terrorist bombing in Omagh last August 
following the signing of the Irish peace accord. She came to the event 
with 12-year-old Nicola Hamilton, another survivor of the explosion. 
Miss Mimnagh says her spirits got a lift from skiing in Colorado. 
Since I came over here, I have met other American people, too, with 
disabilities, you know, and it's very good like to meet the whole 
family, you know, to see what they're like and what they've achieved 
and how they can get on. It gives you a lot of confidence, you know. 
Michelle Mimnagh says that, while in Colorado, she discovered she 
can do something for which she had given up all hope. Now I know I'll 
be able to ski. I'd like to come back, you know, later on and do it 
again, you know, because like after I lost my leg, I never thought 
I'd be able to ski, you know, or nothing. It's great just to know 
that I can now. And Kirk Bauer of Disabled Sports USA says the experience 
also helped Miss Mimnagh clarify her future plans. She had wanted 
to become a physical therapist before, and she said now she is even 
more determined to become a physical therapist because of the therapy 
she's going through now, and she's been able to talk to people here 
who are physical therapists who've had amputations like hers and knows 
that she can be a therapist, she can follow her dreams, despite her 
disability. Kirk Bauer knows firsthand the plight of the disabled. 
He lost a leg in the Vietnam War but went on to become a champion 
disabled skier. He says that people who lose limbs in explosions suffer 
a heavy emotional toll. And you feel like, you know, any control over 
your life has been completely taken away from you and, you know, in 
my case, as many others, it felt that your whole was destroyed. You 
know, you lost a part of your body. You spent months in the hospital, 
and it's a devastating experience to try to come back from. Kirk Bauer 
says that some of those who have come from overseas to the Hartford 
Ski Spectacular will return to their homelands to show other disabled 
people ways to enjoy winter sports. He says that that very thing was 
done last year when some disabled skiers from Bosnia returned to Sarajevo 
to open a ski school for war victims. One of the instructors at this 
year's event was Edward Stewart, a pioneer in adaptive snowboarding. 
He taught Jami Goldman, a double-leg amputee, to snowboard despite 
her disability. When asked how he thought his first lesson went with 
Miss Goldman, Mr. Stewart said, "I got this girl snowboarding. I don't 
care what else happens. My week is complete." 
</TEXT>
</DOC>