<DOC>
<DOCNO> VOA19981216.0500.0616 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Here in the United States, more Republican lawmakers have come out 
in favor of impeaching President Clinton, dimming his hope for winning 
this week's vote in the House of Representatives. The lawmakers, who 
previously positioned themselves as undecided, announced their decision 
on Tuesday saying they cannot put the president above the law. Democratic 
Senator Joseph Lieberman says the momentum is clearly going in the 
direction of the House approving articles of impeachment against Mr. 
Clinton. And as VOA's Nick Simeone reports now, Mr. Clinton has returned 
from the Middle East with a dwindling set of options. Just days before 
Congress is set to begin debating articles of impeachment, the White 
House has yet to reveal a strategy that would keep undecided Republicans 
from moving into the pro-impeachment camp. It may be too late. Some 
Republicans have been saying they want to hear the president confess 
to lying under oath, something Mr. Clinton says he did not do, despite 
indications to the contrary. Former Clinton political strategist Dick 
Morris, who the president has turned to repeatedly for advice on political 
and policy decisions, believes the president may still have some options 
left. I still think that if, when he comes back from Israel, he gets 
30 or so moderate Republicans in a room and he says, "I lied. I lied 
under oath. I lied under oath in the grand jury, and I did it for 
thus and such a reason, and I apologize, and I ask you not to impeach 
men, and you can fine me and you can censure me, but please don't 
destabilize this country by impeaching me," and so on -- I think that 
he's making it more and more difficult for himself by delaying it, 
and Wednesday is the 11th hour. All along, as the House Judiciary 
Committee pushed through four articles of impeachment, the White House 
appeared to be relying on the president's apologies as well as solid 
public opinion running against impeachment to make the case that Congress 
should drop the matter and move on. Congressional allies of the White 
House, such as Democratic Congressman Gregory Meeks, have been making 
the same argument to undecided Republicans. Mr. Meeks was on the phone 
to a number of these Republicans from New York state but indicated 
he had not changed many minds. I think the president has done all 
that he can and probably all that he should do in this scenario. Those 
individuals that are steadfast with reference to impeachment are going 
to vote that way no matter what the president does, and I think that 
was the situation even from the beginning. It's quite a different 
scenario from the one the White House might have expected following 
last month's surprising congressional elections in which voters seemed 
to send a message that they were fed up with the seemingly endless 
scandal and investigation. When House Speaker Newt Gingrich, one of 
the president's chief Republican antagonists, took the responsibility 
for the party's election showing and resigned from his post, there 
was a sense that the worst days of the Clinton presidency may have 
been over. Senator Joseph Lieberman, one of the first Democrats to 
criticize the president's conduct in the Monica Lewinsky affair, now 
concedes that prediction was premature. Honestly, I didn't think we'd 
be here with the probability now that there will be a trial in the 
Senate. I would guess most of my colleagues didn't think so either, 
but that's where we are. It's a very serious and largely unprecedented 
moment in American history. Wednesday will give the president perhaps 
his final chance to make the case that he should be allowed to serve 
out the remainder of his term before the full House begins considering 
his impeachment. To that end, he's planning a meeting with at least 
one wavering Republican, Christopher Shays of Connecticut. Mr. Clinton 
would also have had plenty of time to sway votes during his trip to 
the Middle East. A number of undecided Republicans were on the long 
flight accompanying him to Israel, presenting an ample opportunity 
to persuade a captive audience. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>