<DOC>
<DOCNO> VOA19981216.0500.2105 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Members of the U.S. House of Representatives returned to Capitol Hill 
today for closed-door party meetings, setting the stage for Thursday's 
impeachment debate. Democratic Senator Joseph Lieberman says the tide 
is clearly running in the direction of impeachment. The formal articles 
of impeachment which are about to be released say Mr. Clinton disgraced 
his office and must be removed. A minority dissent by House Judiciary 
Committee Democrats disagrees, saying Mr. Clinton's actions don't 
reach constitutional standards for impeachment. VOA's Capitol Hill 
Correspondent Paula Wolfson reports that by the end of the week Congress 
will vote on four charges against President Clinton, all stemming 
from his efforts to cover up his relationship with former White House 
intern and subordinate Monica Lewinsky. The ranks of the undecided 
are growing smaller by the hour, and the news for the president is 
not good. The erosion in support for Mr. Clinton was dramatic Tuesday 
among moderate Republicans. About 12 announced their intention to 
vote for impeachment. Among them was New York Congressman Michael 
Forbes. The highest-ranking elected official in our land cannot be 
judged to be above the law, and by our words and by our deeds, all 
of us have an obligation to teach our children right from wrong and 
that, when you do wrong, there are consequences. Like Mr. Forbes, 
most of the moderate Republicans are conservative on fiscal issues, 
much less so on social matters. They tend to defy their party leadership 
from time to time, and they come from districts with large numbers 
of registered Democrats. They were the president's best hope for avoiding 
impeachment. Now that hope is fading. Mr. Forbes says there is nothing 
the president can do to reverse the trend, not even an admission of 
perjury and an apology for lying under oath. My colleagues who are 
desperately asking him for an apology -- I would join them in that, 
but I think it may be too late. Mr. Forbes says his decision was agonizing. 
Louisiana Republican Billy Tauzin says he's still sorting through 
the evidence and searching his conscience. When I took the oath of 
office to join the United States Congress, I really thought of it 
as taking an oath to legislate, to come here and make laws and to 
build consensus and do some good things for our country. I never dreamed 
that I would be in this position of judging a president of the United 
States on an impeachment issue. Still other members are continuing 
to push for a different punishment. They say a bold gesture by President 
Clinton could change some minds in the House, such as a willingness 
to accept a strong statement condemning his actions combined with 
a large fine. But House Republican leaders stand opposed to any option 
short of impeachment. If there is a vote to impeach, the Constitution 
calls for a Senate trial to determine if Bill Clinton will remain 
in office. Paul Wolfson, VOA News, Capitol Hill. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>