<DOC>
<DOCNO> VOA19981216.0500.2680 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Anybody who has children knows that mothers have a great deal of influence 
when it comes to what their children do, but can you imagine that 
this power extends to the success of a kidney transplant? Well, Brian 
Sislac reports that, in selecting a donor organ from one of your brothers 
or sisters, what Mom says matters. In the United States alone last 
year, over 11,000 kidneys were transplanted. In Europe and North America, 
many thousands more people are on dialysis waiting for an appropriately 
matched donor kidney. If you're lucky enough to have an identical 
twin, there's no problem. If you have a living, healthy, brother or 
sister, your odds are much better than with an unrelated donor, but 
they're still dicey. Rejection looms as a possibility. Now researchers 
at the University of Wisconsin-Madison and other institutions have 
come up with a way to make kidney donations from siblings less chancy: 
Do a tissue workup on Mom. Writing in "The New England Journal of 
Medicine," the researchers say that, even if a donated kidney match 
is not perfect, the donor organ will function just as well as a perfectly 
matched kidney if the mismatched characteristics are inherited from 
-- you guessed it -- Mom. Those characteristics are called HLA or 
human leukocyte antigens. As the University of Wisconsin's William 
Burlingham explains, there are six different ones. If you're matched 
for all six of these, you have the best match that we can offer, and 
then in the case of sibling transplantation, there's a possibility 
if the -- you've got four people in your family that one in four of 
those has got the same six HLA images as you have, and they're -- 
they're -- we call those an HLA-identical or HLA-matched sibling. 
Now that gives the best -- the very best kidney transplant survival. 
But with a less than six-for-six match, the chances of organ rejection 
increase no matter how close you thought you were to your brother 
or sister. However... What we found was, even if you only match for 
three of the antigens, if the other three antigens that you didn't 
match for came from the mother, that is were maternal antigens, this 
was as good as having a complete six-antigen match. So it was almost 
as if you had completely wiped out any differences based on the match. 
What Dr. Burlingham and his colleagues think happens is that, when 
you are just a tiny unborn child inside the womb, you became very 
familiar with those maternal antigens. You were exposed to them intimately 
during pregnancy, during the period in utero, and also what we found 
is that, even in the breast milk, the babies are ingesting large amounts 
of theses antigens. So you end up developing a lifelong immune tolerance 
to those antigens. So when you encounter those same maternal antigens 
later on as part of a donated kidney from your brother or sister, 
the immune tolerance you developed prevents rejection, even though 
it's not a perfect match. Dr. Burlingham says these research results 
could end up increasing the pool of really outstanding living kidney 
donors by about 10 percent. Where it's going to make an impact is 
when we have a choice. Where there are two siblings, both of which 
are only half matched -- that is they're not a full match -- if one 
of them has the maternal antigens, it's going to be very easy to identify 
somebody who will give the much better result in the long run. But 
what if Mom isn't around to do a tissue match? The techniques are 
advancing rapidly to the stage where a locket of Mother's hair or, 
you know, any -- anything like that can be used for typing, but I 
should add that if Mother's not available, the information from Father 
can also help us, by a process of elimination, figure out which antigens 
came from Mother. The University of Wisconsin researcher says that, 
as of January 1st, his institution will routinely begin typing mothers 
in all sibling transplants they do. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>