<DOC>
<DOCNO> VOA19981216.0500.0360 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
President Clinton returned to the White House from a three-day trip 
to the Middle East after failing to persuade Israel to pull more troops 
from the West Bank on this coming Friday as called for in the Wye 
River peace accord. Nevertheless, Mr. Clinton says his three-day visit 
was a success, and he has expressed hope that Israeli troop pullbacks 
will resume soon. Mr. Clinton said his talks with Prime Minister Benjamin 
Netanyahu and President Yasser Arafat were very frank. Joining us 
now from the VOA Jerusalem bureau is correspondent David Gullust. 
Both sides accuse each other of violating the Wye River peace agreement. 
David, I hear that both sides are apparently becoming more entrenched 
about those accusations, even though the president tried to mend some 
fences. Well, that's right, Paul. The president has departed, and 
his departure has given way to a lot of infighting among Israeli politicians 
over the Clinton visit. The president was obviously disappointed that 
he could not persuade Prime Minister Netanyahu to agree to carry out 
the scheduled troop withdrawal on Friday. That has sent off a lot 
of political recriminations in Israel. There is more talk now that 
Israel may be headed for early elections. The prime minister is due 
to face a vote of no confidence in parliament on Monday. As it looks 
now, he will not survive this, and if his government fell on Monday, 
Israel would have an early election -- an election within 60 days, 
but there are various parliamentary ways of wriggling out of this 
and, right now, there's a lot of negotiation here. The Palestinian 
side, I think, is very happy about the way the trip went. President 
Clinton went and visited the Palestinian Authority leaders in Gaza, 
of very high symbolic importance for the Palestinians. They certainly 
say it can't hurt their aspirations for statehood, and there are some 
Israeli politicians who are criticizing Prime Minister Netanyahu for 
giving the Palestinians a diplomatic trial. Now, David, Mr. Netanyahu 
has faced a number of challenges in the parliament. Has this one gotten 
a lot more serious? I mean, just how tenuous is his hold on power 
right now? Well, the Knesset has 120 seats, and Netanyahu needs 61 
votes to survive this vote of confidence and, actually, it does not 
look like he has the votes right now, but he has a few more days for 
political negotiations. David Levy, who's the head of a centrist party, 
a former foreign minister, a major political figure here -- it was 
thought a couple weeks ago that Levy would rejoin the government. 
Now he is playing hard to get. Levy insists that he will not be part 
of a Netanyahu government. Levy has been somewhat critical of Netan 
-- excuse me -- Netanyahu's handling of the peace process. It's still 
possible he may come back and that Netanyahu may pull it off because 
he's famous for these last-minute victories in this political negotiation 
process. Well, there seems to be one problem in that, David, and that 
is the government's finance minister has resigned, and you were telling 
me a little bit ago that there is speculation that Yitzhak Mordechai 
may soon resign as defense minister. This can't bode well for his 
future -- for Prime Minister Netanyahu's future. That's correct. I 
think the -- there's a great deal of significance to Mordechai's unhappiness 
with the Prime Minister Netanyahu. It is expected that Mordechai will 
appear on one of the major TV interview programs here late in the 
week and announce his plans, but, certainly, he is a proponent of 
going ahead with these troop withdrawals. If his -- his support is 
very critical to the prime minister. Now the finance minister who 
is resigning -- there is some speculation still that he -- if he departs, 
that may open the way for the -- David Levy to come back in the government 
which would at least for a while stave off elections. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>