<DOC>
<DOCNO> VOA19981216.0500.2310 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
The Association of Southeast Asian Nations, or ASEAN, wrapped up a 
two-day summit in Vietnam Wednesday. The leaders of the nine-0nation 
regional grouping ratified measures to enhance closer cooperation 
in order to deal with the devastating Asian economic crisis. Now covering 
this has been VOA Correspondent Gary Thomas in Hanoi. The documents 
ratified by the ASEAN leaders contain no real surprises. As expected, 
the leaders push for greater and freer trade through faster implementation 
of the ASEAN free trade area, or AFTA. Tariffs are to be eliminated 
by the year 2003, except for Vietnam, Laos, and Burma which have additional 
time to comply. In their final declaration, the leaders pledged to 
keep their markets open, recognizing that attracting investment is 
crucial to stabilizing regional economies. The Sultan of Brunei, Haji 
Hassanal Bolkiah, who is vice chairman of the summit, said there was 
a common recognition that coordinated efforts are necessary to pull 
the region out of its economic turmoil. We share a common understanding 
on the gravity of the crisis afflicting the region and the urgency 
to address it. We know that there are no soft options. The only way 
to pull ourselves out of the crisis is to press on with economic reforms 
and regional economic cooperation. In pledging their commitment to 
accelerating financial reforms to shore up their sagging economies, 
they also called for corresponding reforms at the global level. On 
security issues, summit leaders called for a resolution of the territorial 
dispute over the Spratley Islands in the South China Sea by peaceful 
means and in accordance with the U.N. convention on the law of the 
sea. Leaders also called for the strengthening of the ASEAN regional 
forum as a primary arena for dialogue on political and security issues. 
In an interview, Malaysian Foreign Minister Abdullah Ahmad Badawi 
said the summit achieved about the best that could be achieved given 
how each country has been affected difficulty by the Asian financial 
crisis. I think as far as we could go, we have been able to address 
a lot of various issues and particularly issues relating to the economy 
at the moment, and I think the heads of government have said -- of 
ASEAN have said a good job considering that this business and that 
we are at different stages of experiencing the economic and financial 
crisis. In a face-saving compromise over the Cambodian membership 
issue, it was announced that leaders have agreed to admit Cambodia 
as the tenth and final member of ASEAN. However, they added that Cambodia 
must still wait for a formal induction ceremony in Hanoi at an unspecified 
time. Mr. Abdullah said that was also the best compromise that could 
have been reached. Well, now we -- I would like to see the head of 
Cambodia sitting together with all the other ASEAN leaders. That was 
what I wanted to see, but it was not possible for their decision. 
We don't want to quarrel about that. We have had a discussion on it, 
and by now there is already a -- some kind of a compromise decision 
regarding it, everybody were happy, the best that we could have received, 
and that was very decide by and the marriage has already been registered, 
but we are waiting for the traditional ceremony. That ceremony is 
not expected to take place for at least several weeks, according to 
officials. Gary Thomas, VOA News, Hanoi. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>