<DOC>
<DOCNO> APW19981222.0210 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Serb police carried out a sweep of a Kosovo Albanian stronghold in 
retaliation for the killing of one of their officers in escalating 
violence that has increased fear of a return to all-out war in the 
troubled province. The events occurred as Sadako Ogata, the U.N. High 
Commissioner for Refugees, toured the province Monday to get a firsthand 
look at the people on both sides of the ethnic conflict who have been 
displaced in past fighting. Ogata then headed for Belgrade for a possible 
meeting Tuesday with Yugoslav President Slobodan Milosovic. In Belgrade 
on Monday, heads of Yugoslavia's Serb-led army met with NATO's top 
commander in Europe, Gen. Wesley Clark, who repeated warnings that 
the alliance might intervene if fighting between Serb security forces 
and ethnic Albanian rebels continues, sources close to the talks said 
on condition of anonymity. Milosevic averted threatened NATO airstrikes 
when he signed a U.S.-sponsored deal last October, promising an end 
to the military campaign against separatists in the overwhelmingly 
ethnic Albanian province of Serbia, the dominant republic in Yugoslavia. 
According to a spokesman for the Organization for Security and Cooperation 
in Europe, Monday's sweep began after the slaying of Serb policeman 
Milic Jovic. The spokesman, Jorgen Grunnet, said a column of Yugoslav 
army vehicles, including seven T-55 tanks, left a military barracks 
just south of Podujevo. Afterward, OSCE staff heard tank and heavy 
machine gun fire from the direction of the village of Dobrotin but 
there have been no reports of casualties. The vehicles rebased shortly 
after noon Monday and were fired upon while passing through the village 
of Perane, also near Podujevo. ``We have no reports of any direct 
fight,'' Grunnet said but added that the army ``returned fire when 
heading back to the barracks.'' But Hysen Fazliu, a spokesman for 
the main ethnic Albanian party in Podujevo, claimed Serb forces clashed 
with the rebel Kosovo Liberation Army and that an unspecified number 
of ethnic Albanians had been arrested. The KLA spokesman in the Podujevo 
region, Luizim Oraca, said the clash lasted two hours and that the 
``enemy was forced to withdraw, and one of their tanks was destroyed.'' 
The reports could not be independently confirmed. Podujevo, 40 kilometers 
(25 miles) north Pristina, is an overwhelmingly ethnic Albanian town 
near central Serbia. Tensions there have risen in past weeks as local 
Serbs complained of a growing guerrilla presence and demanded the 
government protect them. Jovic's killing is the latest in a series 
of setbacks for Kosovo's fragile truce. It is certain to enrage the 
Serbs, already furious over last week's killings of six Serb youths 
in a Kosovo bar and of a prominent Serb official. The attack on Jovic 
also heightens fears that violence in Kosovo is moving from the rugged 
countryside to the towns. Ogata, accompanied by the William Walker, 
the American head of peace monitors in Kosovo, visited a part of the 
ethnic Albanian majority Serbian province where both Serbs and ethnic 
Albanians have been displaced. Part of her trip Monday took her to 
recent refugees' dwellings without electricity, running water or other 
basics. In the central Kosovo town of Malisevo, a former KLA stronghold 
retaken by Serb police and largely deserted by its ethnic Albanian 
population, Ogata was told by ethnic Albanians that they would not 
return to their homes as long as police were present. Later, Ogata 
heard Serb demands to help in the search for over a hundred Serb civilians 
missing in rebel territory since July. ``All I have to say is that 
a political agreement and peace can solve your problems,'' Ogata said. 
``Then you will be able to return to your homes and live together.'' 
</TEXT>
</DOC>