<DOC>
<DOCNO> APW19981222.0212 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu opened what promises to be a bare-knuckles 
re-election campaign Tuesday by deriding the ``fantasies and ambitions'' 
of his political rivals and insisting the public will back his tough 
stance toward the Palestinians. ``We will go to the people and the 
people will give us the support to achieve peace with security,'' 
the prime minister told Israel radio a day after Israel's parliament 
voted overwhelmingly for early elections and rejected Netanyahu's 
peace policies. The collapse of the prime minister's hard-line governing 
coalition and the start of what is expected to be a 4-month-long contest 
for the prime minister's job appeared to put the already ailing Mideast 
peace process on hold. That is drawing bitter protests from the Palestinians, 
who insist Israel is bound to honor the Wye River accord despite the 
political turmoil, just as it remains committed to other pre-existing 
international agreements. ``It's really unfortunate that the only 
thing that Mr. Netanyahu has decided to stop is the peace process 
with us,'' chief Palestinian negotiator Saeb Erekat told the AP on 
Tuesday. Erekat called on the Clinton administration to press Netanyahu 
to move ahead with the promised handover of West Bank territory. In 
Washington, the State Department said Monday that Israel should go 
ahead with the pullback, as stipulated by the accord. Netanyahu refused 
anew Tuesday to do so, but said the election upheaval did not play 
a part in the continued freeze on Israeli compliance. If the Palestinians 
meet demands laid down over the weekend by the Cabinet, ``Israel will 
carry out its part in the agreement, without any relation to the election 
schedule,'' the prime minister's office said in a statement. Netanyahu's 
latest conditions to the Palestinians, which they have rejected, include 
a renunciation of claims to statehood rights and Jerusalem; a confiscation 
of arms; an end to violence and incitement to violence; and a renunciation 
of claims that Netanyahu had agreed to release Palestinians jailed 
for killings. The prime minister, who remains in his job until the 
election, referred indirectly but pointedly to Palestinian leader 
Yasser Arafat's oft-made assertion that the Palestinians have a right 
to declare a state in May 1999. ``We won't give territory to the Palestinians 
when they say they will simply take that territory and will continue 
the violations and will decide unilaterally on our future,'' he told 
Israel radio. The elections are likely to take place by the end of 
April. In addition to Netanyahu and Labor Party leader Ehud Barak, 
a half-dozen other figures have indicated they will jump into what 
is shaping as a wild political free-for-all. Netanyahu brushed aside 
polls suggesting he would lose by a slim margin to Barak and by a 
considerably wider margin to popular former army chief of staff Amnon 
Lipkin-Shahak, who has indicated his intention to form a centrist 
party. ``The fantasies and ambitions of all those who want to be prime 
minister _ please. We will allow the voters to decide who needs to 
lead the state,'' he said in the radio interview. He predicted he 
would draw ``utmost, massive'' support from voters affiliated with 
his conservative Likud party. Likud, though, was already weathering 
a storm of defections. Dan Meridor, Netanyahu's former finance minister, 
said Tuesday he was quitting the party and entering the race for prime 
minister himself. Others likely to declare their candidacy include 
hard-liners such as Benjamin Begin, the son of the late Prime Minister 
Menachem Begin, and Limor Livnat, Netanyahu's communications minister. 
Livnat's rumored candidacy has troubled ultra-Orthodox legislators 
who question a woman's fitness for leadership. The early elections 
bill given preliminary approval by lawmakers on Monday must pass two 
more parliamentary readings, but Netanyahu has said he will not try 
to block its final passage. The unraveling of Netanyahu's coalition 
began with the signing of the U.S.-brokered Wye River peace accord 
two months ago. The pact's land-for-security provisions infuriated 
far-right lawmakers _ a small but powerful faction in Netanyahu's 
government _ who insist on Israel's biblical claim to all the West 
Bank. The dovish opposition Labor party promised Netanyahu support 
as long as he stuck to the agreement, but that fell apart earlier 
this month when the prime minister scrapped a scheduled troop withdrawal 
from 5 percent of the West Bank after a wave of anti-Israel violence. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>