<DOC>
<DOCNO> APW19981222.1032 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
The banana stalks stand brown and brittle in the abandoned Chiquita 
fields, like sculptures of despair. Around them, the people who for 
decades have worked the fields are little better off. A month after 
Hurricane Mitch destroyed the Honduran production of Chiquita Brands 
International and crippled Dole Food Co. plantations, desperation 
is settling in for the thousands who survive off the crop that gave 
this country its claim to fame as the original Banana Republic. Next 
year promises to be even harder. ``I've been left with nothing,'' 
said Danilo Sanchez, a 37-year-old Chiquita worker who now herds a 
pair of bone-thin cattle into the banana fields to feed on rotting 
fruit. Thousands of workers have lost their jobs. Others are working 
a few days a week. Some have lost medical benefits. Most seasonal 
workers, like Sanchez, were let go immediately. After the hurricane 
passed, Chiquita rented aircraft and boats to help rescue stranded 
people, and donated millions of dollars in food, medicine and transportation 
to Central America. It also let 1,200 seasonal workers go and suspended 
most of its 7,300 permanent workers for a year. To ease the pain, 
the company offered full-time workers bonuses and advances averaging 
dlrs 370. Workers also can borrow up to dlrs 40 every two weeks. Workers 
say the loans won't do. ``That's no help to me,'' said Magdelena Sevilla, 
a single mother of two who has been camping out in front of her house 
since it was covered in mud. ``That's just cutting my throat, because 
I'll never be able to work off that debt.'' Chiquita is letting workers 
harvest the 1,700 acres of its 25,000 acres that survived here. The 
company also says it will continue to provide schooling and free medical 
care in addition to housing for about two-thirds of the workers. ``Up 
to this point, the company has acted with great social responsibility,'' 
said Jimmy Zonta Sing, Chiquita's human resources and labor relations 
manager at the La Lima headquarters. Most of the 4,000 full-time workers 
for Dole, known as Standard Fruit in Honduras, will continue working 
a few days a week, according to their union. To avoid suspending workers, 
the union agreed to a reduction in medical benefits: health workers 
will treat serious and chronic illnesses, while regular health insurance 
will not resume until operations are in full swing again. ``We don't 
think it's just,'' said Juan Carlos Medina, vice president of the 
union representing Dole workers. ``But our backs were against the 
wall.'' Chiquita union leaders say their colleagues paid too high 
a price, especially now that a rise of diarrhea and dengue _ a mosquito-borne 
illness that can be fatal _ has put the country on an epidemic alert. 
Labor leaders say the health reductions are only one of many gains 
that were swept away by the storm. ``The companies are taking advantage 
of the disaster situation and using it to introduce changes that we 
have been fighting against over the past 10 years,'' said Juan Funez, 
president of the union that represents Chiquita workers. ``But what 
can we do, strike? There is no work. We have no strength, no power 
to demand anything.'' Company officials plan to implement a new work 
system long opposed by unions that assigns more tasks to each worker, 
to make operations more efficient. Labor leaders fear it's a prelude 
to reducing the work force. Officials at Cincinnati-based Chiquita, 
which wrote off dlrs 50 million this quarter alone, say they're doing 
their best to soften the blow while the company makes adjustments 
to get back on its feet. Chiquita gets about 15 percent of its bananas 
from Honduras. Only Panama and Costa Rica supply Chiquita with more 
bananas. Even under the best conditions, Chiquita could not begin 
replanting until next year and would have nothing to harvest until 
2000, said Steven Warshaw, Chiquita's chief operating officer. John 
Tate, chief financial officer for Dole in Westlake Village, Calif., 
said the company estimates its loss from the hurricane at about dlrs 
100 million. He said about 25 percent of Dole's total banana production 
came from Guatemala, Honduras and Nicaragua, and half to three-quarters 
of that crop was lost. ``To fully rehabilitate, we think, it will 
take about two years.'' The workers, meanwhile, are trying to rehabilitate 
too. Some have taken up temporary residence in flooded encampments 
that surround the mosquito-infested banana fields. Peasants have moved 
into the railroad cars used to take bananas to port. And others have 
stayed in their three-room wood-slat homes, which several generations 
of banana workers often share. Bertilia Contreras shares one room 
with her five children and a three-foot-tall plastic Christmas tree. 
She put it up to cheer her children, but said they probably won't 
find anything under it on Christmas Day. ``When I look out my door, 
I feel sad. Everything looks so ugly now,'' she said. ``It's going 
to be a sad Christmas.'' 
</TEXT>
</DOC>