<DOC>
<DOCNO> APW19981222.0495 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
LUANDA, Angola (AP) _ UNITA rebels shelled Kuito on Tuesday, striking 
the center of the key central highland city for the first time since 
launching a retaliatory offensive two weeks ago to break the government's 
grip on the area. Several people, apparently civilians, were killed 
and others were wounded during the morning attack, according to the 
private Radio Eclesia. Rebel artillery shells landed near the palace 
of the provincial governor in the center of Kuito, about 500 kilometers 
(300 miles) southeast of the capital Luanda, the radio said. A building 
where several displaced people had taken shelter, and a missionary 
school were also hit by mortar fire. Kuito's population has risen 
to some 160,000 from 100,000 with the arrival of thousands of displaced 
people fleeing the fighting between UNITA and the government that 
began earlier this month throughout the central highlands. Kuito, 
the capital of the province of Bie lying on a vast plain, has been 
the most embattled spot. The government launched an attack earlier 
this month aiming to gain control of UNITA's central highland strongholds 
Andulo, also in Bie, and Bailundo, in the neighboring Huambo province. 
The rebels were able to secure the bases and then launched an offensive 
throughout the central zones, especially in the provinces of Huambo, 
Bie and Malange. A UNITA spokesman in Lisbon, Portugal, said UNITA 
was targeting government positions in Kuito because the army's attack 
on the Andulo had started from there. ``Once Kuito is neutralized, 
the rest (of Bie province) will be secured,'' said Carlos Morgado, 
adding that Kuito was the last town in Bie under the government's 
hold. During the two-week-old offensive, the rebels have targeted 
Cunji, a village seven kilometers (4 miles) away that overlooks Kuito. 
They also have kept Kuito's airport under siege to choke the government's 
air supply line. UNITA reportedly has three well-equipped regiments 
totaling about 9,000 men entrenched in a diameter of 18 kilometers 
(11 miles) around Kuito. The government is said to have a 10,000-strong 
battalion holed up in the city. A defense analyst for the London-based 
International Institute for Strategic Studies said the Angolan government 
might pull out of other spots to defend Kuito. ``From a political 
and logical point of view, it would be a very important blow'' for 
the government to lose the provincial capital, Terry Taylor said by 
phone. The government has held Kuito since 1994, following heavy battles 
with rebel forces which began when UNITA leader Jonas Savimbi rejected 
his defeat in the country's first elections and returned to war, breaking 
a 1991 peace agreement. ``It might make (the government) think seriously 
about their deployment in the Republic of Congo,'' Terry Taylor said 
by phone. The Angolan army has about 400 troops in the Republic of 
Congo to support President Denis Sassou-Nguesso against insurgent 
outlawed militia groups. The government, along with Zimbabwe and Namibia, 
is also supporting Congo's President Laurent Kabila against insurgents 
who are backed by Rwanda and Uganda. Angola has withdrawn at least 
one battalion from Congo following the upsurge of fighting against 
UNITA rebels. UNITA _ the National Union for the Total Independence 
of Angola _ on Monday accused Namibia and Zimbabwe of sending troops 
to support President Jose Eduardo dos Santos in the renewed fighting. 
Angolan Defense Ministry officials on Tuesday denied the claims. UNITA 
and the government fought a two-decade civil war following the country's 
1975 independence from Portugal. A 1994 U.N.-brokered peace agreement 
unraveled this year amid continuing hostilities between both sides 
which have evolved into full-scale war. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>