<DOC>
<DOCNO> CNN19981222.2130.0044 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> CAPTION </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
"CNN Headline News," I'm Lori Geary. The possibility of a presidential 
censure may be gaining popularity among congress members on both sides 
of the aisle. Today, four moderate house republicans who voted for 
impeachment said they aren't opposed to an alternative for President 
Clinton. And many democrats say Washington is ripe for a compromise. 
Chris black has more. The night before Christmas. a familiar tale, 
a classic scene -- President Clinton reads a Holiday favorite, surrounded 
by children in the cozy confines of the White House. Not a creature 
was stirring, not even a mouse. But much is stirring. Just 72 hours 
after the house impeached Mr. Clinton on charges of perjury and obstruction 
of justice, momentum is building for censure. There is a growing sense 
that we should find some quick bipartisan solution to this situation 
that falls short of a long, protracted trial. But there is some question 
about how much lobbying the White House should do for a compromise. 
I think there is some momentum behind a censure motion. Obviously, 
there are various perspectives about how tough the censure, when it 
comes, the degree to which the White House should be involved in negotiating 
some acceptable censure. The most senior democrat in the Senate, Robert 
Byrd, of West Virginia, put the Clinton White House on notice. Don't 
tell the Senate what to do. Senator Byrd is absolutely correct. Once 
this goes to the Senate, the 100 senators are in control of how it's 
disposed of or how it's dealt with. I think the White House needs 
to be very concerned about advocating something that would make it 
even more difficult for republicans and perhaps even democrats to 
support. So the advocacy of a position by the White House may actually 
have a Counterproductive impact that we need to be cognizant of. Still, 
another democrat says it is important to capitalize on the budding 
momentum. What happens over the next three or four or five days are 
going to be the critical period here. If you're able to reach some 
agreement on a structure that would allow for this matter to be considered 
by the Senate and come to some quick result is a very critical time. 
Despite the warnings, White House officials are leaving nothing to 
chance. Discussions are under way with a number of senators. One senior 
official said, if there is a deal it won't be by immaculate conception. 
Chris black, CNN, the White House. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>