<DOC>
<DOCNO> CNN19981222.2130.1465 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> CAPTION </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Even if the fa La La of holiday music has you saying bah humbug, you 
might want to step into your local record store anyway. 'tis the season 
when record companies release some of their best CD box sets. Dennis 
Michael has a look. The incomparable miles Davis is one of the highlights 
of the jazz section of this holiday season box set output. Columbia 
records has put out a six-CD compilation of "the complete sessions 
of the miles Davis quintet," from 1965 to 1968. But the champion jazz 
box set of the year comes from one of the greatest names in the jazz 
universe -- blue note. Obviously, great music is on other labels, 
as well, but we tend to think that blue note had a very high caliber 
of art. There's very important artists through all those years. Day 
in, day out Pop music collections include a three-disc set of "the 
Johnny mercer songbook" -- I know I'll never love this way again a 
Rhino records three-disc retrospective of Burt bacharach music called 
"the look of love," a four-CD set featuring Peggy Lee -- never know 
how much I love you never know how much I care And an exhaustive collection 
for fans of the legendary Judy garland -- through thick and through 
thin all out or all in it's win, place or show you may say I'm a dreamer 
but I'm not the only one John Lennon's "anthology" is a four-disc 
set of classic post-Beatles tracks, and compiler yoko ono carefully 
chose among the odd snippets and previously unheard studio strangeness 
that were found in the vaults. They even explained to me that if Beethoven 
was in his private room and just going on, on, on the piano, kind 
of rambling on, then you would like to hear it now, won't you? And 
I said, "well, maybe. But maybe Beethoven wouldn't have wanted that, 
you know?" And I thought that it had to be something that John would 
not be ashamed of. Some tracks that may well inspire shame can be 
heard Nevertheless on Rhino's embarrassingly complete "'70s music 
collection." This is a seven-CD set with a shag carpet cover, basically 
covering all those records you can't get out of your head. You're 
damn right it was your song that made me see it was your voice that 
gave me wings Garth Brooks' "the limited series" takes six discs to 
show what the country legend can do. I do country music. And as long 
as they let me stand under that flag, that's where I'll be. And no 
matter what kind of music you like, you'll find a box full of it this 
Christmas. Dennis Michael, "CNN Entertainment News," Hollywood. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>