<DOC>
<DOCNO> MNB19981222.2100.0397 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> CAPTION </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
If a trial happens in the Senate, our next two guests will serve on 
the jury. Senator Joe Biden is a democrat from Delaware. And senator 
Charles Grassley is a democrat republican from Iowa. Good evening 
to you both. Congressman delay says that if senators were to see the 
evidence, votes would appear out of thin air. What has the public 
not been told here? I have no idea what he's talking about. I just 
hope that we don't replicate what they did in the house. I think the 
public is tired of angry politicians hollering at one another. We 
are differ than the house. Hour function is different than the house. 
Our responsibility is to look at the two articles of impeachment that 
were sent over and determine, one, whether the facts sustain the allegations 
and, two, whether or not even if they do, they are impeachable offenses 
as envisioned by the constitution. Mr. delay is, well, we are not 
the house and we don't have -- we don't have many Mr. delays in the 
Senate, fortunately. What is in the record that congressman delay 
is talk about? Have you seen it? I don't know, and of course Mr. delay 
is not on trial, the president of the United States is on trial. And 
all we have to worry about is putting the country first, putting constitution 
first. Let the impeachment process find its way out. As Joe says, 
relate the facts to the evidence, listen to everything that goes on 
in the Senate in a trial environment and then vote guilty or not guilty 
based upon those facts. Senator Grassley, will you then take the opportunity 
to go look at the evidence that congressman delay is talking about? 
At this point I'm going to look at the evidence that's presented by 
the house in the United States Senate and I'm going to consider the 
prosecution side and I'm going to consider the president's defense 
and that's all I have to weigh at this point. Senator Biden there 
feels now like there is a momentum towards censure. Where do you stand 
on that right now? We have basically three options. There is some 
momentum that way. We could agree if the majority of the Senate wanted 
to censure and could agree before the trial even begins, that would 
be permissible. Secondly, after the trial begins, the majority and 
minority leader E. meeting with house leaders, could conclude as to 
how the trial probes. So we do this in a dignified way and if during 
that process there emerged a Consensus for a censure motion, that 
would be appropriate as well. The only thing I don't want to see us 
do is begin this process without having worked out the ground rules 
because these rules have not been tested for 130 years. So it's important 
we set out the ground rules and then do what Chuck sase said, look 
at the evidence. By the way, this notion of looking at other evidence, 
if you were a juror, can you imagine saying I'm going to listen to 
the prosecutor and defense and then hire my own investigators and 
do my own research? That's not the way it's supposed to proceed. The 
house makes its presentation to sustain its charges, the Senate will 
respond and we make a decision. Is there some feeling among Senate 
republicans that there's some obligation to hold 9 trial? There is 
on my part because I think that we've got to go through the impeachment 
process. I think the constitution requires that. And look at the evidence 
and base our decision on the evidence. And by the way, censure is 
not part of the impeachment process. Censure is a legislative process. 
The chief justice will not be presiding over the Senate in a legislative 
process, and that is censure. But senator Grassley, many have said 
there are not enough votes to sustain any kind of conviction here. 
Isn't that a waste of the senators' time, and for the nation? Nobody 
has asked me how I would vote. It would be wrong for me to say how 
I would vote and if I say how I would vote I should recuse myself 
from being on the jury. No member of the Senate should be asked how 
he will vote and the president of the United States should not be 
lobbying the senators in an impeachment trial like he would in a legislative 
process. We should go ahead and have the hearing the way the constitution 
intends and do our job according to the good of the country. Could 
I make one comment? I have great respect for Chuck. There is a legitimate 
disagreement as to whether or not since articles of impeachment were 
voted on in the house, whether there is a requirement in the Senate 
that there be a trial. The overwhelming constitutional evidence and 
the scholars who have looked at this and a long, detailed memorandum 
I've just submitted to my colleagues overwhelmingly concludes that 
there is no absolute requirement to have a trial. If the majority 
sentiment in the Senate, bipartisan, were that there should be censure 
instead of a trial, that is constitutionally permissible. The most 
thing to me after weigh thought to be a not particularly glorious 
display in the house this past month, is that we be fair, fair, and 
secondly that we have a bipartisan judgment. Speaking of that not 
particularly glorious affair if you can jump in for a Second, what 
do you think, senator Biden, are the consequences of holding a Trial 
in the Senate? If we do it like I think we should, I think we can 
do it with dignity, and like the American people expect us to do it, 
without shouting at one another. But people should be aware that there 
are many, many imponderables. We've never been down this road before. 
What are the rules of evidence? Are we bound by the federal rules 
of evidence? Could, for example, the majority leader say, and he has 
no intention of saying this, to the best of my knowledge, say we have 
a committee of 10 people to listen to the evidence and not the Senate 
as a whole. The president says he's not feeling badly today. Do you 
think this is an indication of a lack of remorse? I think what the 
president feels is unimportant to me. I must listen to his defense 
and when we do this we have to leave our democratic and republican 
labels at the Senate door. When we sit on the Senate floor as jurors, 
we're neither republican nor democrat. I agree. Merry Christmas. Thank 
you both. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>