<DOC>
<DOCNO> MNB19981222.2100.2299 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> CAPTION </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Jesse Ventura hasn't even begun his new job as governor of Minnesota 
but simply by virtue of his election he's made people who don't care 
about politics sit up and take notice. General tura is the former 
wrestler who stunned analysts and even his fellow minnesotans by defeating 
two well-known, established politicians to win the state's highest 
office. But now that he's got the job, what will he do with it? "Dateline's" 
Maria shriver visited Jesse Ventura to find out his game plan. Your 
office is going to be up there, right? U go up these stairs, up the 
flight of stairs, I think. I think it's right up there, right, and 
you go left. I think the governor's office is up there. It's what? 
Straight back, right around here. Oh, the governor isn't to the left? 
You got to find out where your office is, Jesse. Well, let's go find 
out. This is one of the few moments in Jesse Ventura's life that he 
cops to being disoriented. But who can blame him? Walking the corridors 
of power is heady stuff for a guy who rose from rows from little more 
than an entertaining media curiosity to the chief executive of Minnesota 
despite overwhelming odds. Why did I do it? What was my passion? The 
challenge in my eyes and heart of whether the American dream was dead. 
And what I mean by that is, can a person who is not a career politician 
and not corrected to these two major parties, the democrats and republicans, 
win? And I felt that if I could win this, it would -- it would -- 
it would regenerate inside me a great belief in America. Had that 
belief died? Somewhat. It was in question to me. Jesse "the body" 
Ventura, causing havoc here in the wrorled wrestling federation. This 
is a man who has always believed in the American dream where you can 
be who or what you want to be, no matter how outrageous, bizarre or 
downright dorky. Though still legally James janos, the world knows 
him by his assumed bad-boy name from pro wrestle be of Jesse "the 
body" Ventura. But he didn't start out beating people over the heathead 
with chairs. He was a high school jock who went straight into the 
naivey after graduation and married his high school sweat heart 23 
years ago and to this day openly wore ships her and their two children. 
He coaches high school football and wrestling. This big man is ha 
happiest with a stogey, a beer, and talking sports with the boys. 
Is that Moss the real deal or what? But on November 4, life for this 
47-year-old former pro wrestler, former shock jock whose only prior 
political experience was as mayor of a small town, changed forever 
and with it so did all sorts of ideas about politics in America. Jesse! 
Jesse! That's when Jesse Ventura, running as a reform party candidate, 
stunned the political pundits by defeating not only the well-known 
political machines but defeating two well-known, established politicians 
to win the state's highest office. While the country's average voter 
turnout was 31%, Minnesota led with 63%. Jesse Ventura's grassroots 
campaign is credited with much of that, including bringing in 300,000 
new voters, especially young people. I think I've talked about their 
hope, the American dream, that someone other than the selected people 
won. I was rocky balboa, you know, the guy who would fight to the 
end, wasn't given a chance, but he couldn't really win, could he? 
But now Jesse Ventura is discovering it's one thing to Buck the system, 
it's another to make it work. This is our learning experience, I think 
of going out and discovering what every department does. Suddenly 
38,000 state employees answer to him. We have the W.I.C. program, 
children with special health needs. Financial, management, accounting. 
Internally, externally, eliminating health disparities. It's enough 
to make the nerdiest wonk get a headache. But this former Navy seal 
with only one year of college under his belt, who's never had an office, 
much less a secretary, says he's undaunted. You've always enjoyed 
being outside the system, your own man, independent. Now you're in 
a big bureaucracy. You have a lot of changes that might make I feel 
constricted, that you're not who you've always been. But I'll adapt. 
I'll adapt. I committed to do it, and I'll fulfill the commitment. 
Happily? Sure. It's got good sides to it too, Maria. When I walk around 
now and say jump, there's about five people who go "how high?" That's 
not scarery? Coming in here, with all this history and the eyes of 
the world one, you're going to take this oath? I think scary would 
be the wrong word. I think exciting. Nerve-racking is more like it 
to some minnesotans who worry about the fate of their state government 
in the hands of a charming amateur. The state of Minnesota is going 
to crumble up and disappear within the four years Jesse Ventura is 
governor? That's not going to happen. Are you conscious of people 
who have been here in politics for a long time, making people nervous 
about what you will do to Minnesota? They better be. Not about what 
I might do to Minnesota, but to them. What are you going to do to 
them. I'm not part of the good old boy network. We believe strongly 
that that's what's wrong with the system today, saul these other politicians 
are bought and sold by special interests. All these lobbyists are 
panicked right now because they have no in with me. I owe them nothing. 
That's no strings, see? There's no strings on me. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>