<DOC>
<DOCNO> MNB19981222.2100.1804 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> CAPTION </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
For better or worse, 1998 will be remembered in the annals of American 
history. Indeed, history has often been the watchword during these 
past months. First there were the comparisons to Watergate, some apt, 
some inappropriate. Then members of the house Judiciary committee 
were warned to consider how future historians will judge their actions. 
And the president as we are often told has his gaze fixed on some 
future place, on how the long view of history will treat him. But 
history can be fickle with what it chooses to remember. There are 
so many irresistible comparisons to Watergate from, the hearings held 
in the same room, to the recurring characters, reappearing in the 
words of one, as -- Three ghosts of impeachments past. Watergate changed 
the way Americans think about politics. That there was a cancer growing 
on the presidency and if it was not removed the president himself 
would be killed by it. It is almost surreal, being here and watching 
these proceedings. Watergate even introduced its own vocabulary. What 
did the president know and when did he know it? But when with the 
history of moneygate is told, what will people remember? Whether we 
have 1990's nostalgia, the gap blue dress will be what everybody is 
wearing. As a feature writer at "T.V. guide," Greg Fagan sees elements 
of this story that will stay with us. There are things that will have 
legs, no matter what. Certain temples, certain people have entered 
popular culture and are here to say. For comedian Harry Shearer, many 
characters are already on their way to immortality. Obviously Linda 
Tripp, who could be described as the anti-Oprah. She is America's 
bad girlfriend and I think no matter how many interviews she ends 
up doing with Diane Sawyer, that will be her legacy. Now to the hearing 
room. During Watergate, congressional careers were made here. Peter 
rodino, the chairman of the impeachment hearings for Richard Nixon 
was not well known and as he conducted the hearings he became better 
known and much loved by the American people. We discovered he wrote 
poetry when not conducting the affairs of Congress. Today as then, 
the stand-outs in this room are becoming household names. Lindsey 
Graham, of sock secret who coined the phrase -- Is this Watergate 
or Peyton place? I don't know. Whoo he touched and when he touched 
it. Congressman Barney Frank of mass Martian, who is very fast with 
a one-liner or a quip but very deliberate on trying to make the point 
that what the president did was wrong but not impeachable. And after 
Watergate, dictionaries added this to the definition of the wordgate 
-- political scandal often involving the concealment of wrongdoing." 
Since words and their meanings are at this heart of this episode, 
certain words will forever be scoshede with monicagate. That's what 
we lawyers do, we supposed to parse the statements I'm not going to 
parse the statement. We still have the legal-technical parsing -- 
I'm not going to parse the statement. One of the most interesting 
groups are just the regular phrases that this made it to common currency 
here, like in Watergate you had plausible deniability, now you have 
a bunch of especially sex-related things that are funny or interesting 
or would make good rock band names like sex dress or presidential 
kneepads. I think the phrase that is going to go down in history encapsulating 
this sorry year is -- It depends on what your definition of "is" is. 
You got to remember the timing. You got to make that pause. "is" is. 
The mostgrapheric and I think long-lasting image is the television 
picture of the president wagging his finger at the press -- I did 
not have sexual relations with that woman, miss Lewinsky. That's going 
to stay with people for a long, long time. Probably the one that still 
rings in my mind is -- This vast right-wing conspiracy. Whether or 
not you buy into it or whether or not you believe it at all, it is 
still a term that Hillary Clinton made her own and will -- was a Brilliant 
branding effort on her behalf. To sort of make a point that it's a 
vast right-wing conspiracy. It parses really nicely. It may not be 
what the president or historians had in mind but this scandal has 
definitely changed us and firmly lodged itself in our history. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>