<DOC>
<DOCNO> MNB19981222.2100.0997 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> CAPTION </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
A Senate trial Whether a deal can be worked out to avoid a Senate 
trial depends to a large degree to what the president will or will 
not glit to. Lanny Davis served as special counsel to the president 
and is now he an mSNBC analysts. Good evening, lanny. Good evening 
of the What do you believe the president would be willing to admit 
to in a censure deal? First of all, you introduced me on the break 
as speaking for the White House. I'm no longer at the White House 
so I'm on my own, but I can tell you my observations. I think the 
president has admitted to wrongdoing, to having misled the american 
people. His press secretary said publicly the president was less than 
truthful. I think there's some formulation if necessary to allow senators 
to vote for censure, knowing that the president acknowledged his wrongdoing 
and wishes to move ahead to do the business of the country. But what 
about acknowledging lying under oath? Some senators indicate it may 
be that specific. I'm sorry, that's never going to happen because 
the president is not going to admit to a crime where he hasn't been 
prosecuted yet and most say there could never be a perjury prosecution 
in circumstances like this. That is only a Tom delay, rabid partisan 
attack gofmente? But doesn't a potential deal hinge on that very line, 
if you will? The only thing that hinges on is Tom delay. He has become 
the most rabid, extremist partisan. What he said today shows his true 
colors. He talked about constitutionality when he thwarted and prevented 
his colleagues from voting on censure on the floor of the house. 73% 
of the American people, 10 points higher than before Mr. delay began 
his partisan attack on President Clinton are now supporting the president. 
And his frustration -- you heard senator Biden -- slap it with the 
back of the hand. But Daschle, who says that if the president will 
not admit to lying, it will "encumber our job immensely." ? I never 
heard him say that. When did he say that? In an interview today with 
NBC news. I think the president has said that he misled people, that 
he went into the paula Jones deposition, an illegitimate process, 
and did deliberately mislead them because he was not respectful, as 
I think he shouldn't have been, about how he got into that room. I 
certainly think he has to acknowledge he was less than truthful in 
the jones deposition but I think he already has and I don't think 
Tom Daschle or anybody who is fair-minded is requiring President Clinton 
to plead guilty before he's ever been charged with a crime. That isn't 
fair. 73% approval rating, 2-1 against impeachment. We know the numbers 
</TEXT>
</DOC>