<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981222.0167 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Even when the weather is warmer than usual, there's something about 
December that makes me think of stew. I'm a confirmed soup aficionado, 
but this is the time of year when a stew, in all its density, seems 
the best defense against even the threat of winter. When I think of 
stew, though, I'm not contemplating the beef-and-carrot standard. 
A big pot of vegetables can cook into a superb stew. Short ribs, normally 
served solo, can be converted into a fine stew, too, with or without 
the bones. The secret to stews lies in the thickening, the same element 
that sets a braise apart from a brothy soup. Stews may contain more 
solids, or the savory liquid in which they cook may be thickened. 
Either way, there is that satisfying density. Many times, the thickening 
is added at the beginning of a stew, as when chicken parts or chunks 
of meat are tossed in seasoned flour before being browned. The flour 
binds with the cooking fat to make a more substantial broth. In other 
instances, the stew is thickened toward the end of cooking, when a 
paste of cornstarch and cold water, called a slurry, is added and 
simmered briefly. A mixture called a beurre manie, made by kneading 
together equal parts of butter and flour, will also thicken a stew. 
But there are sneakier ways. Ingredients like potatoes are natural 
thickeners: as they cook, they soften and break down to dissolve throughout 
the liquid. Barley will also act as a thickener by absorbing liquid 
as it cooks; it continues to thicken if the stew is allowed to sit 
and is then reheated. Then there is the gelatin that seeps out of 
bones as they stew. As we know from Jell-O, gelatin thickens anything. 
Okra is the vegetable kingdom's version of gelatin; as it cooks, it 
releases a viscous substance that will bind together the most disparate 
ingredients. That's the principle of gumbo, whose name stems from 
the Bantu word for okra. In gumbo, a hodgepodge of ingredients hangs 
together thanks to okra. Okra works especially well in the vegetables-only 
stew recipe at right, which evokes the Caribbean more than Cajun country 
in its seasoning. It and the other recipe here, for a short-rib stew, 
are especially straightforward and easy. There are only a few tips 
to note. To season the vegetable stew, add the lime juice before adjusting 
the seasoning and adding more salt. Because the stew is so thick, 
with barely any liquid, the rice should be cooked separately and added 
at the end. The rice also makes the whole dish taste less spicy, but 
those with fragile taste buds can reduce the amount of hot pepper. 
If the short ribs are cut in overlarge sections, there will be fewer 
than 12 pieces. If so, cook them as described and remove the meat 
from the bones before dividing it evenly among the bowls. WINTER SHORT-RIB 
STEW Total Time: 2 hours 30 minutes 3 pounds short ribs, cut across 
and between the bones to form 12 pieces about 2 inches square (The 
butcher will do the cross-cutting.) 6 cloves garlic, smashed and peeled 
3 cups diced canned or sterile-pack tomatoes 1 bay leaf 4 1-by-4-inch 
strips orange zest 1 1-by-3-inch strip lemon zest } cup pearl barley 
1 pound green string beans, tips and tails removed 2 tablespoons kosher 
salt, or to taste 1 large bulb fennel, stalks removed, cut in half, 
cored and cut into thin strips 1 tablespoon coarsely chopped fresh 
oregano 1 tablespoon coarsely chopped fresh thyme 1 10-ounce package 
frozen baby lima beans, defrosted in a sieve under warm running water 
Freshly ground black pepper, to taste. 1. Place a rack in the middle 
of the oven, and heat oven to 500 degrees. 2. Place the short ribs 
in one layer in a medium roasting pan, and roast for 25 minutes. Turn 
the pieces, add the garlic, and roast for 15 minutes more. 3. Remove 
the ribs to a tall, narrow stockpot. Spoon the fat from the roasting 
pan, and pour any juices over the bones. 4. Place the roasting pan 
on top of the stove over medium heat, and add 1{ cups water. Bring 
to a boil, scraping any browned bits off the bottom of the pan with 
a wooden spoon. Pour this liquid over the bones. 5. Add the tomatoes, 
2 cups water, the bay leaf, 2 pieces of orange zest and the lemon 
zest. Cover the stockpot, and bring to a boil. Uncover, lower the 
heat, and simmer for 40 minutes. 6. Stir in the barley, the string 
beans and 2 cups water. Cover, and bring to a boil. Uncover, lower 
the heat, and simmer for 30 minutes. 7. Occasionally poke the string 
beans down into the liquid. Add 2 teaspoons salt, and simmer for 10 
minutes. 8. Skim the fat. Add the fennel and the herbs. Bring the 
pot to a boil. Lower the heat, and simmer for 5 minutes. Add the remaining 
salt, the lima beans, two strips of orange zest and 2 cups water. 
9. Bring to a boil, lower the heat, and simmer for 5 minutes. The 
meat should be falling off the bones. 10. Remove the meat and the 
bones from the stockpot. Place two pieces of meat (with or without 
the bones) in each of six bowls, and divide the vegetables and liquid 
evenly over them. Yield: 6 hearty servings. VEGETABLE STEW Total Time: 
1 hour 15 minutes 2 tablespoons unsalted butter 1 large yellow onion, 
diced into \-inch cubes 3 medium cloves garlic, smashed, peeled and 
coarsely chopped 2 medium bunches Swiss chard (about 1} pounds), washed 
well, the leaves separated from the stems, the stems cut across in 
\-inch slices and the leaves cut across in \-inch-wide strips 1 bay 
leaf 1 large pinch ground allspice 2 medium dried hot red peppers, 
crumbled 1 medium butternut squash, peeled, seeded and cut into 1-inch 
cubes (about 4 cups) 2 medium sweet potatoes, peeled and cut into 
1-inch cubes (about 3 cups) 1 pound okra, trimmed and cut across into 
\-inch rounds 1 tablespoon kosher salt, or to taste 2 tablespoons 
plus { teaspoon lime juice or to taste 4{ cups white rice cooked in 
salted water. 1. In a medium stockpot, melt the butter over medium-low 
heat. Stir in the onion, and cook, stirring occasionally, for 5 minutes. 
Stir in the garlic, and cook, stirring occasionally, for 3 minutes, 
or until the onion and garlic are translucent. 2. Stir in the Swiss 
chard stems and cook, stirring occasionally, for 3 minutes. Add 3 
cups water, the bay leaf, allspice and hot peppers. Cover, and bring 
to a boil. 3. Stir in the squash and sweet potatoes. Cover, and return 
to a boil. Lower the heat, and simmer, covered, for 10 minutes. 4. 
Add the Swiss chard greens and the okra. Cover, and return to a boil, 
pushing the greens and okra down into the liquid once in a while to 
aid the wilting. 5. Lower the heat slightly, cover the pot, and boil 
gently, stirring occasionally, for 10 minutes, or until the Swiss 
chard and the okra are cooked through. There will be very little liquid 
left at the end, so be careful not to let it burn. 6. Season with 
salt and lime juice. Serve over rice. Yield: 6 servings. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>