<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981222.0309 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
They snuck in and nabbed the majority of gold-medal players fresh 
off the 1996 Olympic podium and handed out six-figure salaries for 
their stars. They savored the coup of being the first to capitalize 
on women's basketball as it hit the pop chart and defied gravity by 
launching a dunk contest. But for all their muscle and skill and daring, 
the American Basketball League was marketed with Polaroids and magic 
markers next to the glossy product the Women's National Basketball 
Association put on as summertime family entertainment. The ABL flailed 
for attention, corporate dollars and television deals until its money 
ran out. Deep in debt, the ABL folded Tuesday one-third of the way 
through its third season and announced that it will file for bankruptcy 
protection under chapter 11. ``The league is out of money,'' ABL co-founder 
Gary Cavalli said in a statement. ``While this was an extremely painful 
decision, we had no choice but to shut down. Ultimately, we exhausted 
every option and pursued every lead, but could not generate the revenues 
or financing necessary to sustain operations. And our lack of television 
had a lot to do with that. ``TV exposure is critical to sponsors, 
licensees and investors. This year, we offered millions of dollars 
to the TV networks for air time, but couldn't obtain adequate coverage. 
``It became clear that, although we had the best product, we could 
not find enough people willing to confront the NBA and give us the 
major sponsorships and TV contracts we needed.'' The NBA posed too 
ominous a mountain for the little engine pushing the ABL. Now, the 
NBA-backed WNBA, which would never entertain merging with the ABL, 
will likely capitalize from the fall of the league. Although some 
players, including the star Dawn Staley, recently defected to the 
WNBA, many argued that the best players _ like Jen Rizzotti of the 
New England Blizzard _ were still on the rosters of the ABL. Along 
with college players like Tennessee's Chamique Holdsclaw _ who has 
no American option but to play in the WNBA _ the elite ABL players 
could end up lifting the level of the WNBA via free agency or a draft 
pool although there was no clear answer on these issues Tuesday. WNBA 
officials said it was too premature to determine what will happen. 
And Cavalli, declining to comment on the advice of legal counsel, 
was limited to his released statement and the information provided 
on a telephone recording at the league's headquarters in Palo Alto, 
Calif. There were hints of problems in the ABL, with a franchise in 
Long Beach, Calif., folding last month. But there was no foreshadowing 
to indicate a league near doom. As the day unfolded, shocked players 
listened to a recorded message telling them that the league is working 
on a plan to pay players ``as much as possible for the month of December.'' 
Just Tuesday morning, the coach of the New England Blizzard, K.C. 
Jones, was watching film in his office in Hartford around 2 p.m. when 
he received a call from the league's player personnel director, Tracey 
Williams. ``I got a call from Tracey saying that the league was closing 
down,'' said Jones, whose Blizzard team road the coattails of UConn's 
popularity and drew a league-high average crowd of 7,000 with fan 
favorites Rizzotti and Kara Wolters on the team. ``It was a shocker.'' 
Most believed the ABL had a chance to survive for another year, but 
the league could not find a way to use the NBA's six-month old lockout 
to its advantage. It was never viewed as an alternative to the void 
left by the NBA. ``During the NBA lockout, the ABL still has been 
unable to buy TV time,'' Cavalli stated. It was a grim way to end 
for the enthusiastic Cavalli. The ABL came onto the scene as an unpolished 
but scrappy league that intended to use its good timing to attract 
attention and find momentum. A year earlier, the UConn women's basketball 
program, complete with its wholesome appeal and loyal fans, helped 
catapult the game onto the national landscape. Then came the Olympics. 
With exposure courtesy of the NBA's marketing machine, the women were 
thrust into the mainstream as national darlings who captured audiences 
on their way to a feel-good gold medal. That's when the ABL pounced 
on the game, sneaking onto the court ahead of the NBA-backed WNBA. 
It was clear the NBA had nothing but disdain for the ABL and thought 
of it as second-class rivals. But the WNBA never sweated the ABL's 
existence. While the nine-team ABL was a winter league lost in the 
fray of college basketball and saddled with an average attendance 
of 4,333 fans, the WNBA was soaring in merchandise sales as an average 
of 10,869 people filled NBA arenas in the summer. While only spare 
television coverage from Fox Sports Net and BET put the league into 
households, the WNBA had deals with NBC, Lifetime and ESPN to televise 
several games a week. The ABL did not have glamour as a lure for players, 
so it reached deep _ perhaps too deep _ into its pockets to land talent 
with high salaries. Last year, Kate Starbird, a star from Stanford, 
opted for the ABL after Portland dangled a $150,000 salary in front 
of her. Starbird and Wolters, also paid $150,000 a year, were the 
top-paid players. Others faired well, too, tapping into the league's 
disappearing well for an average salary of $80,000 for a five-month 
season. Meanwhile, the WNBA could offer more endorsement opportunities 
but only a $40,000 average for a shorter, six-week season. More than 
cash, the WNBA had much more promise than the ABL from the start. 
As much as the WNBA shoved the ABL aside _ and likely pushed it toward 
a collapse with its hold on the market _ the league was not publicly 
gloating Tuesday. It took a more diplomatic approach. ``This is an 
unfortunate setback for the women's sports movement,'' WNBA commissioner 
Val Ackerman said in a statement. ``We applaud the efforts and passion 
of the ABL players and all the league personnel that labored so hard 
to sustain it.'' Ultimately, the ABL's basement-like operations were 
no match for the WNBA. ``We are proud of what we accomplished as a 
pioneer in women's professional sports,'' Cavalli said. ``We put a 
great product on the floor. ``We gave it our best shot; we fought 
the good fight, and we had a good run.'' 
</TEXT>
</DOC>