<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981222.0151 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Two weeks ago, Sherry-Lehmann &AMP; Co., the New York wine merchant, 
offered its customers a taste of Taittinger's Comtes de Champagne, 
a premium wine from the superb 1990 vintage. Even an experienced Champagne 
hand was surprised at what happened. ``It was astonishing,'' said 
Gerard Yvernault, who works for Taittinger's importer, Kobrand &AMP; 
Co. ``People fought their way to the counter for a taste, then said, 
`Delicious. I'll take three or four.' No one questioned the price, 
which is $110 a bottle.'' Perhaps the buyers were just caught up in 
the spirit of the holiday season. Perhaps they were celebrating a 
prosperous year. Or maybe these shoppers had heard the rumors that 
Champagne will be in short supply as the 20th century comes to a close 
and were simply stocking up _ for next year's New Year celebrations, 
as well as this one's. Not to worry. There is no shortage of Champagne. 
Supplies are abundant now and still will be this time next year. What 
may be hard to find are the most expensive wines, the ones the French 
call tetes de cuvee and we call super premiums. Besides the Comtes 
de Champagne, they include Moet &AMP; Chandon's Dom Perignon, Bollinger's 
R.D. (for Recently Disgorged), Krug's Clos du Mesnil, Roederer's Cristal, 
Pol Roger's Cuvee Sir Winston Churchill and Veuve Clicquot's La Grande 
Dame. While all Champagne prices are expected to increase next year, 
some of the prestige labels may climb beyond $300 a bottle. There 
is little doubt that such wines will find buyers, especially in this 
country. After all, the less consumers know about what's in the bottle, 
the more they are willing to pay for the label. Not that this lack 
of knowledge about Champagne is entirely the consumer's fault. Champagne 
is not an integral part of American life: most people drink it only 
a few times a year, at weddings and holidays. You cannot learn what 
you like, let alone what is good, when sipping is so seldom. What 
makes a good Champagne? Facile scribblers from Voltaire to Hemingway, 
passing through Byron, Kipling and Shaw, have tried to explain, but 
when it comes to taste and smell, poetic metaphor is not much help. 
So here goes: Its color, except for rose, should be yellow, though 
it can range across the spectrum from pale old ivory to the burnished 
gold of a Roman coin. It should be fresh, lively and perfectly clear. 
It should offer an array of delightful aromas from citrus to newly 
baked bread, but not all at once. It should produce tiny bubbles that 
last until the bottle is empty. Its taste can differ from bottle to 
bottle, from brand to brand, and in vintage wine, from year to year. 
I look for Champagnes with a nutty flavor, hazelnuts mostly, that 
come from older reserve wines in the blend. Beyond that, I too fall 
back on metaphor, borrowing a particular one now and then from old 
Dom Perignon. Once, after sipping a memorable glass, he is supposed 
to have sighed and said, ``I am tasting stars.'' Poetry aside, no 
wine should be intimidating, and for those occasional drinkers, here's 
a tip: It's not necessary to spend a lot to get a good bottle of Champagne. 
There are plenty of excellent ones in the $25 to $40 range. At that 
price, of course, you are buying non-vintage Champagne, made from 
a blend of grapes that were harvested in different years. The occasional 
Champagne drinker will not be disappointed with such non-vintage wines 
as Veuve Clicquot's Yellow Label, Lanson's Black Label, Pommery's 
Brut Royale, Bollinger's Special Cuvee or Moet &AMP; Chandon's Brut 
Imperial. Of course, to a Champagne devotee, a vintage wine _ one 
from a terrific year _ that on the lower end could cost $45 to $65, 
and for premium wines in the hundreds of dollars, may be well worth 
the money. These Champagnes are made in limited quantities and can 
be scarce at any time. Demand for them has been heightened because 
the current vintage for most of them is 1990, one of the finest vintages 
in recent years. Many of the 1990s are already sold out, and connoisseurs 
are looking back to the previous great vintage in Champagne, 1985. 
Stocks of 1985, and of 1988 and 1989, both exceptional years, are 
small and the prices are correspondingly high. Krug's all-chardonnay 
Clos du Mesnil 1989 is $250 or more in good wine shops. The next top-quality 
vintage is 1996, but it will be available in only limited amounts 
by New Year's Eve 1999. By law, vintage Champagne cannot be marketed 
until three years after the harvest and, in practice, many of the 
super-premium wines are held for up to five years before being released. 
In theory, vintage Champagnes are made only in outstanding years. 
In the past, most Champagne houses declared no more than two or three 
vintages in a decade. Now there can be six or seven. Better grape-growing 
and wine-making techniques may account for some of the increase, but 
the public's obsession with vintages certainly plays a role as well. 
Is vintage Champagne better than non-vintage? Sometimes, and from 
some producers, but, for the occasional Champagne drinker, not often 
enough to justify the difference in price. Champagne's reputation 
is based as much on skillful marketing as good wine-making, and the 
industry is well prepared for the millennium celebrations. Special 
cuvees in engraved bottles, often housed in elegant wooden boxes, 
are already to be found in some markets. They are, needless to say, 
overpriced. I have never drunk a vintage Champagne that was inferior 
to its non-vintage counterpart, but I've had more than a few that 
were not appreciably better. What's more, there are Champagne makers 
who privately scoff at the vintage mania. Skillful blending is the 
essence of their trade, and that includes the blending of wines of 
different vintages. More than any still wine, Champagne is a brand 
product, and the people who make it pride themselves on the styles 
that distinguish their brands. A Champagne producer will set aside 
as much as a third of each year's wine as a reserve for making future 
blends. A final non-vintage blend from a major Champagne house may 
include more than 100 different wines from ten different years and 
25 different villages in the Champagne region. Aside from an occasional 
foray into the prestige Champagnes, notably to Bollinger's R.D. and 
Krug's Grande Cuvee, my own taste runs more to non-vintage wines like 
Laurent-Perrier's Brut, which is often 50 percent chardonnay; Veuve 
Clicquot's Yellow Label, a rich, ripe wine with a long finish; Mumm's 
Cordon Rouge, a round and fruity Champagne, and Perrier-Jouet's Grand 
Brut, a wine with attractive richness and an intriguing biscuit taste 
on the finish. These run $25 to $45. These wines are mostly light- 
to medium-bodied Champagnes. For a big bodied, assertive wine, there 
is no substitute for Bollinger's Special Cuvee. Someone once described 
the Bollinger style as ``almost beefy.'' That may be exaggerated, 
but for serious holiday toasting, it would be my choice. Oh, and keep 
in mind that Champagne doesn't benefit much from aging; it's made 
to be drunk when it's released. But a year in a quiet, dark corner 
can't hurt it, either. Even if it's not packaged for the millennium. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>