<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981222.0376 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
The New York Times said in an editorial on Wednesday, Dec. 23: The 
Senate seems inclined to treat Bill Clinton's misconduct in a fair 
and responsible way, provided the president will let it do so. Though 
Senate sentiment has not yet coalesced around a specific plan, both 
Republicans and Democrats are talking of censure as the most appropriate 
punishment. For the last couple of days Clinton and his aides have 
seemed in better touch with political reality. They can help keep 
the Senate on a conciliatory course by dispensing with the legal quibbling 
that has helped bring his presidency to the brink of destruction and 
by continuing to send receptive signals about censure. Sen. Robert 
Byrd, D-W.Va., the guardian of Senate constancy, removed a potential 
roadblock to censure this week by declaring that a full trial of the 
charges against Clinton need not be the only response to the two articles 
of impeachment approved by the House. That gives the Senate the latitude 
to consider a variety of options that would lead quickly to a strong 
censure resolution. Even if a trial must be opened to satisfy the 
Constitution or Republican concerns about belittling the House, it 
could be terminated at any time by a simple majority vote. But Clinton 
must recognize that even Senate Democrats who favor censure are dismayed 
by his conduct and fed up with his failure to square himself with 
the law. The surest way to assemble the 67 votes needed to convict 
and remove him from office is to treat the Senate with contempt. White 
House aides who are so certain the numbers can never turn against 
Clinton need only recall their predictions after the November elections 
that the House would not vote to impeach. The lawyers and political 
advisers who have so poorly served Clinton must give up the self-defeating 
idea that they can win this case through parliamentary maneuvering 
and legal pettifoggery. Sen. John Breaux, D-La., offered wise counsel 
when he urged the White House not to try to block Senate action by 
arguing that the impeachment vote of a lame-duck House has no standing 
when the new Congress convenes in January. Most importantly, Clinton 
must discard the empty assertion that he did not lie under oath before 
a federal grand jury. Though Byrd has urged his colleagues to develop 
their own response without negotiating with the White House, it seems 
all but inevitable that any censure resolution would condemn Clinton 
for giving false testimony under oath. Such a resolution would also 
come with the expectation that Clinton would publicly accept it. That, 
in turn, should be sufficient for Kenneth Starr to promise not to 
prosecute Clinton when he leaves the White House. For the first time 
in weeks, the political dynamic in Washington is moving toward censuring 
Clinton. Even some of the moderate House Republicans who voted for 
impeachment articles that explicitly call for his removal from office 
are now, belatedly, embracing censure. With some help from Bill Clinton, 
it could happen soon. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>