<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981222.0262 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Malls around the country, in a growing move to stem shopper defections 
to the Internet, catalogs and their competitors down the highway, 
are enticing customers this season by giving them something new: a 
reward for shopping. Taking a cue from frequent flier programs, long 
distance telephone companies and the like, many shopping malls are 
now seeking to build brand loyalty, retain customers and track spending 
patterns by offering shoppers extra rewards. These range from prepaid 
calling cards, magazine subscriptions, a year's supply of soft drinks, 
to health club discounts, Caribbean vacations and new cars. Even credit 
card companies such as Visa have cards linked to shopping malls. Keeping 
better track of shoppers and their preferences can give retailers 
an edge over a growing number of rivals. ``The retail industry is 
getting extremely competitive,'' said John Konarski, vice president 
of research at the International Council of Shopping Centers, a trade 
group. ``Malls are trying to cultivate a relationship where customers 
will shop at their centers.'' Profits also can get a kick from higher 
spending levels of loyal customers, said Mike Hand, president of apparel 
services at the NPD Group, a market research firm based in Port Washington, 
N.Y.. ``It's easy to raise prices with loyal customers.'' At 15 malls 
operated by the Wellspark Group, customers can show their receipts 
and receive a card tallying their shopping points. The new program 
offers instant prizes _ gift certificates, store discount coupons 
and compact discs. Depending on how much is spent, shoppers can earn 
free tickets to sporting events, and weekend trips. Generally, customers 
earn a point for every dollar spent. For programs linked to credit 
cards, usually shoppers earn points totaling about 2 percent of their 
bill when shopping at a participating mall; they earn about 1 percent 
on all other card purchases. The points are then redeemable in the 
form of gift certificates, which can be used in any mall store. ``We 
know who our top 10 shoppers are and where they go,'' said Adrienne 
Davis-Brody, senior vice president of marketing at Wellspark. Kellie 
Piche, a schoolteacher in North Providence, R.I., has already redeemed 
about $12,000 worth of points, exchanging them for several $40 prepaid 
Mobil gasoline cards and a weekend hotel stay in Newport, R.I.. ``It 
was just nice to get something back,'' said Ms. Piche, 28. ``We had 
to buy these things anyway,'' she said of the new carpet, appliances 
and furniture she and her fiance bought to remodel their condominium. 
While the rewards program did not spur Ms. Piche to shop at the mall, 
it will keep her going back, she said, adding that she hasn't yet 
redeemed the points she earned for her Christmas shopping. Various 
spending levels can qualify shoppers at the Newport Center mall in 
Jersey City to receive discounts at the J.C. Penney optical center 
or for car rentals, Broadway theater tickets or Caribbean cruises. 
``This Christmas season is really important,'' said Jim Roberts, regional 
marketing director for the Simon Property Group, which operates the 
mall. ``That's when a lot of people are looking for incentives and 
rewards.'' At other malls around the country, shopping incentives 
can range from free parking to special VIP rooms, to entertainment 
to keep children amused while parents shop. Since 1987, the number 
of malls in the United States has jumped about 40 percent, to almost 
43,000, according to the International Council of Shopping Centers. 
New malls average more than 1 million square feet of space, about 
70 percent larger than a decade ago. With their mix of restaurants, 
multiplex cinemas, carousels and virtual-reality arcades, they are 
being billed as entertainment centers and tourist attractions. Shoppers 
are expected to spend about $1 trillion at malls this year, 53 percent 
of all non-auto retail sales. And the stakes are higher than ever. 
The retail industry has been buffeted by unseasonably warm temperatures, 
stock market gyrations, and political tensions, which has dampened 
some spending. Although many Wall Street analysts still expect about 
a 4 percent to 5 percent increase in holiday sales this year, at least 
one firm has lowered its forecast for department stores. Discounters 
will continue to gain this year. But analysts at Salomon Smith Barney 
believe department stores will remain under pressure, and now forecast 
sales at those chains to increase about 1.5 percent, down from an 
estimate last week of an increase of 2.4 percent. And some department 
store executives are already looking to the after-Christmas sales 
to buoy lackluster holiday profits. In the retail industry, Neiman 
Marcus is generally credited with introducing the first customer loyalty 
program in 1984. Customers who spend at least $3,000 on their Neiman 
Marcus card are eligible. Higher spending totals _ much higher _ qualify 
customers to receive Hawaiian or European vacations, a lifetime supply 
of Salvatore Ferragamo shoes or a new Jaguar sedan. Mall programs 
have not reached that level _ yet. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>