<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981222.0386 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Fending off weeks of criticism that the Japanese central bank's financial 
strength is eroding, the bank's governor said Tuesday that it had 
one of the world's safest pools of assets, second only to that of 
the U.S. Federal Reserve. The remarks by Masaru Hayami, governor of 
the Bank of Japan, were an effort to bolster Japan's international 
image in the financial world and allay fears of investors at home 
and abroad. The concerns have been growing because Japan continues 
to be mired in its worst recession in six decades and because the 
government has said it would use the cash it controls to revive the 
economy rather than to buy up big blocks of government bonds. Fears 
that private investors will not have the appetite to buy the large 
number of the government bonds that remain helped send bond prices 
plummeting this week. The government on Monday proposed a record budget 
for next year and said it would issue a record amount of new bonds 
to finance the outlays. That has stirred alarm that a flood of government 
bonds would push down bond prices and raise yields and long-term interest 
rates. Higher rates could stifle an economic recovery. On Tuesday, 
the yield on the benchmark 10-year bond rose 25 basis points, to 1.75 
percent, and was as high as 1.8 percent at one point. Some analysts 
have projected that long-term yields could surge past 2 percent soon. 
Private economists have also been concerned that the Bank of Japan 
has been expanding beyond its means, pouring money into lower-quality 
securities that could end up nibbling away at its solid reputation. 
The Bank of Japan's troubles underscore the problems that the nation 
as a whole is facing. Japan is caught in a series of binds, choosing 
between worsening the recession or worsening its fiscal balances, 
and the central bank is torn between preserving its high-quality balance 
sheet and intervening by lending to troubled corporations and institutions 
that desperately need cash. (On Wednesday, Standard &AMP; Poor's Corp. 
lowered its credit ratings for seven of Japan's 10 largest banks: 
Sumitomo Bank Ltd; Dai-Ichi Kangyo Bank Ltd.; Sakura Bank Ltd.; Sanwa 
Bank Ltd.; Industrial Bank of Japan Ltd.; Tokai Bank Ltd., and Daiwa 
Bank Ltd. ``Although the six-month results were generally in line 
with expectations, all of the banks, except Dai-Ichi Kangyo Bank and 
Fuji Bank, announced expectations of sharply increased credit costs 
in the second half of the year,'' the credit-rating agency said in 
a statement.) Hayami acknowledged the concerns among private economists 
that the Bank of Japan's rapid expansion of lending, which is intended 
to inject money into the financial system, might increase the bank's 
bad loans. With Japan stuck in its worst recession since the end of 
World War II and with banks cutting loans and selling assets in a 
struggle for survival, the Bank of Japan has had to step in as the 
lender of last resort to corporations caught in a credit squeeze. 
The bank, which has always been lauded for its prudent management, 
has come under attack since it decided last month to ease credit by 
loosening its open-market operations. Thus, the Bank of Japan, which 
typically puts more than two-thirds of its funds into top-rated Japanese 
government bonds, has been placing more money in securities sold by 
lower-quality, cash-starved corporations. Over the last year, the 
Bank of Japan has stepped in repeatedly to pour liquidity into the 
financial system. And as a result, its assets have expanded to 88.3 
trillion yen, or $765 billion, a hefty 40 percent rise from last November. 
Now, some economists are worried that the burden of bad loans that 
has crippled the nation's giant banks will in part be transferred 
to the Bank of Japan. But Hayami pointed out that European central 
banks do not own as high a percentage of government bonds as does 
the Bank of Japan, and that they instead often inject money into the 
financial system by buying corporate commercial paper. Only the U.S. 
Federal Reserve, he said, had a higher proportion of its assets in 
government bonds. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>