<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981222.0295 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
In the Broadway revival of Leonard Bernstein's ``On the Town,'' there's 
a hilarious sendup of a pretentious, boozy voice teacher called Madame 
Maude P. Dilly, played with gusto by Mary Testa. In the scene, the 
character Ivy Smith, who works as an exotic dancer at Coney Island 
but harbors higher aspirations, has come for her lesson. Madame Dilly 
puts Ivy through the whoops, shouts and scales that constitute the 
vocal warm-up regimen of opera singers. For good measure, she throws 
in a stern admonition about dedication to art: Do do re do Love life 
must go, If you'd be a nightingale instead of a crow. The lyrics are 
by Betty Comden and Adolph Green, who also wrote the book for this 
1944 show, their first. This would not be the only time the celebrated 
team of lyricists poked fun at opera. In ``Two on the Aisle,'' a 1951 
collaboration with the composer Jule Styne, they wrote a duet called 
``Catch Our Act at the Met,'' in which Bert Lahr, as a fur-clad Siegfried, 
and Dolores Gray, as a leggy chorus line Bruennhilde, fantasize about 
bringing some show-biz verve to the citadel of opera. Opera always 
has been fair game, and a pretty easy target, for Ms. Comden and Green, 
both 83 and professional partners for 54 years. But they never expected 
to actually enter the inner sanctum of the opera house. Last year, 
however, David Kneuss, the executive stage director at the Metropolitan 
Opera, approached them with an operatic idea that seemed right for 
them. The result can be seen Thursday night when the Met presents 
``Die Fledermaus,'' the popular operetta by Johann Strauss, with a 
new book and spoken dialogue by Ms. Comden and Green. There is precedent 
for musical theater people trying to make Strauss' familiar operetta 
zippier and up to date. When the work returned to the Met's repertory 
in 1950, after an absence of four decades, the production was directed 
by the screenwriter and playwright Garson Kanin, with irreverent new 
dialogue by the Broadway lyricist Howard Dietz. Some of the problems 
in preparing new dialogue for this 1874 operetta are built in, as 
Ms. Comden and Green have found out. ``The dialogue has to fit Strauss' 
score,'' Green said. ``It's very difficult. We had to find a way to 
get in and out of every aria and ensemble, and keep it consistent 
with the existing music.'' The original version of the opera, with 
lyrics and spoken dialogue by Carl Haffner and Richard Genee, was 
based on a French comedy by Henri Meilhac and Ludovic Halevy, the 
librettists of ``Carmen.'' The humor in the original is cynical. Set 
in the Belle Epoque years of Vienna, the story takes place on one 
long, inebriated night. When it begins, Rosalinde, the young wife 
of Gabriel von Eisenstein, a well-to-do Viennese citizen, is being 
serenaded outside her window by a former lover, a tenor, Alfred. The 
song comes at a dangerous time, for Rosalinde has a weak spot for 
tenors, and her husband is about to report to prison to serve five 
days for assaulting a police officer. Eisenstein bursts into the room, 
furious that his incompetent lawyer, named Blind, has somehow managed 
to get his sentence increased to eight days. But Eisenstein's friend, 
Dr. Falke, shows up with a plan. Prince Orlofsky, a bored, wealthy 
Russian eccentric, is throwing a masked ball, and Falke wants his 
friend Eisenstein to have one last fling, without his wife, at the 
prince's party. Dr. Falke is getting even for being the butt of a 
practical joke: Eisenstein, Rosalinde and Adele, their maid, are being 
manipulated by Falke to appear at the ball, where infidelities will 
be revealed and scores settled. In their new book, Ms. Comden and 
Green have the Dr. Falke character call the little domestic comedy 
he is arranging ``She Knew but He Didn't Know She Knew That He Didn't 
Know That She Knew,'' which is a pretty good summation of the entire 
plot. The operetta was an immediate success at its 1874 premiere, 
and from the start a tradition developed, sanctioned by Strauss, of 
allowing some tomfoolery into the show. During the prince's ball, 
surprise guests usually show up to entertain the revelers. In Strauss' 
day, the guests were usually singers performing songs from other Strauss 
works. Over the years at the Met, Prince Orlofsky's guests have been 
entertained by Enrico Caruso offering Neapolitan songs, Birgit Nilsson 
singing ``I Could Have Danced All Night'' and, in 1994, the soprano 
Harolyn Blackwell doing a mock striptease. The other scene where broad 
comedy has been encouraged involves the drunken jailer Frosch, a nonsinging 
role that has been a vehicle for Victor Borge, Sid Caesar, Jack Gilford, 
Dom DeLuise and others. But with the fun has come a problem: Audiences 
now expect Strauss' wry operetta to be a gagfest, and this has led 
to inclusion of lame humor and dumb sight gags. So the task faced 
by Ms. Comden and Green, as they explained, was to spice up the dialogue 
without resorting to bawdy jokes and topical humor. The biggest chance 
they took, Green said, was changing Dr. Falke into Sigmund Freud. 
But since they have shifted the date of the story, as a nod to the 
millennium, to New Year's Eve of 1899, they felt it made sense. In 
another change, Eisenstein is made a newspaper editor who is going 
to prison for punching a music critic who dared to write negatively 
of his wife, Rosalinde, in this version an opera singer. Also, the 
jailer Frosch's drunken scene has been eliminated. ``Drunk scenes 
are done to death,'' Ms. Comden said. ``We rewrote the character, 
made him an out-of-work actor and introduced him in Act II.'' Instead 
of a staggering drunk routine, Frosch entertains his prisoners with 
a one-man play called ``The Bell Ringer of Notre Dame,'' which turns 
out to be a setup for a series of intentionally bad puns: lowbrow 
comedy in the tried-and-true theater tradition. Strauss' operetta 
will be performed in the original German (with title translations 
available), but the new dialogue will be spoken in English. For the 
first time in many years, these veteran show people will hear a work 
of theirs performed without any amplification. ``In the old days, 
audiences worked harder,'' Ms. Comden said. ``They leaned forward 
and paid attention.'' Green added, ``Now they expect to be spoon fed.'' 
They seem happy with the cast, which includes Carol Vaness as Rosalinde; 
the Danish baritone Bo Skovhus in his Met debut as Eisenstein, and 
the American conductor Patrick Summers, also in his Met debut. Now 
that Ms. Comden and Green have worked in an opera house, they are 
willing to try it again. After all, Ms. Comden said, ``it's still 
the theater.'' 
</TEXT>
</DOC>