<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981222.0273 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
For six days, only the dogs and chickens were left living in Union 
Progreso, a nearby village at the foot of a mountain in the southern 
state of Chiapas. But this week, the farmers, their wives and their 
children _ 163 people in all _ came out of hiding, even though they 
feel terrified that their neighbors are going to sneak into town and 
kill them in their sleep. ``We could not stand living in the forest 
any more,'' said Mario, a community leader who refused to give his 
full name and covered his face with a blue bandanna. ``We feel that 
if we are going to die, it would be better to die in our homes than 
in the mud, like animals.'' When asked about his hostile neighbors, 
Mario said: ``There have been many threats. They want to kill us, 
like what happened in Acteal.'' One year ago, 45 people, most of them 
women and children, were killed as they prayed in a church here. The 
massacre, the deadliest single attack in Chiapas since the Zapatista 
rebellion began in January 1994, touched off outrage around the world. 
President Ernesto Zedillo promised to identify and punish all those 
responsible and to step up efforts to bring peace to the strife-torn 
region. Today, some 97 people, including 11 police officers, are being 
detained on charges that they took part in the attack. The former 
governor, Julio Cesar Ruiz Ferro, resigned over the scandal and several 
high-level officials, including the state attorney general and the 
state director of public security, have been barred from holding public 
office for at least eight years. Still, as some 2,000 people gathered 
Tuesday at the graves of the dead from Acteal to commemorate the first 
anniversary of the massacre, there were few expressions of reconciliation 
and healing. About 300 residents of the village _ many of them survivors 
of those killed _ entered the ceremony waving a banner that read, 
``Welcome to Acteal, an Open Wound.'' Zapatista rebels, their faces 
covered with black ski masks, chanted ``Death to President Zedillo, 
Assassin of the 45 Martyrs of Acteal!'' And another group of Acteal 
residents put on a re-enactment of the massacre, complete with men 
wearing police uniforms, women and children falling over as if dead 
and firecrackers set off to reproduce the sound of gunfire. The re-enactment 
was interrupted by a military helicopter that circled overhead. Such 
demonstrations, people here said, and the plight of communities like 
Union Progreso show that the kind of tragedy that shattered this nation 
one year ago could happen still today. The Rev. Carlos Morfin Otero, 
a Jesuit priest who serves Acteal, said that many in the community 
were still afraid of attack because the high-level police officers 
involved with the massacre remained free. And the military presence, 
he said, has been increased around Acteal, with one soldier for every 
12 civilians. ``The situation is exactly the same as it was a year 
ago, or maybe worse,'' Morfin said. ``Despite what the government 
says, there is still no security. People have no faith in the police, 
and their distrust creates a tense atmosphere.'' Indigenous communities 
across the Chiapas highlands have been torn by violence since the 
uprising, in which some 145 people were killed. Talks between the 
government and the rebels remain stalled, and efforts to obtain a 
true cease-fire have failed. Human rights observers said that some 
200 people have been killed in conflicts between pro-government paramilitary 
groups and armed Zapatista sympathizers. And, the observers report, 
more than 15,000 indigenous people have been forced to flee their 
homes. The crisis in Union Progreso offers a look at how people get 
driven away. The community of farmers, which sits at the of a mountain 
so high that clouds crash against its cliffs, supports the Zapatistas. 
On the ridge above is the community of Los Platanos, whose 2,800 residents 
are largely members of the PRI, the governing party. The two villages 
have been fighting for months over issues like land, control of a 
new water system and politics. Men in both communities have been killed. 
In June, hundreds of police officers _ helped by residents from Los 
Platanos _ raided Union Progreso to execute several arrest warrants. 
Five young men _ between the ages of 16 and 22 from _ Union Progreso 
were killed in the gunfight that ensued. On Sunday, tensions flared 
again when a convoy of trucks from Los Platanos was ambushed by four 
gunmen wearing masks. An 11-year-old boy was killed. Rumors spread 
that the boy's family blamed residents of Union Progreso and vowed 
to avenge his killing. Residents of Union Progreso fled in the middle 
of the night. They spent six days hidden in a forest, about a two-hour 
walk from their village. The residents said it rained most nights. 
Their children began suffering high fevers and many developed severe 
rashes on their faces, feet and ears. They ate mostly dried tortillas. 
By Monday, their suffering became intolerable, they said. And they 
decided, by unanimous vote, to return to their homes. Carrying babies, 
knapsacks and potato sacks of clothes on their backs, many people 
smiled during the entire two-hour journey back home. ``We are scared, 
but it's better to be home then out in the cold,'' said a village 
resident named Ramon, who did not want his last name used. He walked 
slowly, he said, because he had been suffering a high fever and his 
words were interrupted by a hacking cough. The resident returned home 
with no police escort, and with no promises of protection from government 
officials. They were thankful, they said, that their return was being 
recorded by the press. ``We want the press to tell the world the truth 
about our situation,'' Mario said, upon arriving back at his home 
of cinder block and tin. ``If there is a massacre here, the government 
will be responsible. They have not offered to help us.'' 
</TEXT>
</DOC>