<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981222.0299 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Facing a shortage of a crucial component of nuclear warheads, the 
Energy Department announced today that it will use three of the Tennessee 
Valley Authority's civilian reactors to make the material, tritium. 
Energy Secretary Bill Richardson acknowledged Tuesday that the arrangement 
with the TVA, which is subject to congressional approval, breaks down 
a longtime distinction in the nuclear world by using a civilian reactor 
for military purposes. However, he said, lining up the TVA's reactors 
encouraged nuclear nonproliferation because it eliminated the need 
for the United States to break ground on an expensive new military 
plant. Such a plant to produce tritium might be far larger than ever 
needed, if new arms control agreements are signed. The department's 
last reactor for making tritium was shut down for safety reasons 10 
years ago. For the past 10 years, weapons decommissioned under arms 
accords have been the military's source of tritium, and until now, 
the pace of weapons retirements has been faster than the pace of tritium 
decay. But unless Russia approves a new arms control agreement soon, 
the United States will need new tritium in six years to sustain its 
arsenal. Richardson said the Energy Department had used provisions 
of a 60-year-old law, the Economy Act, to require the TVA to sell 
tritium at cost. Department officials said that if they had not been 
able to strike a deal, they would have asked the Navy requisition 
the reactors under national security provisions. In a test that began 
15 months ago, the Energy Department is already making tritium at 
Watts Bar, near Knoxville, Tenn. Technicians loaded metal rods into 
the reactor containing an isotope of lithium metal; when these are 
struck by the neutrons that sustain the chain reaction, the lithium 
breaks up into tritium and helium. In February 1999, when the plant 
shuts for refueling, technicians will remove the rods to extract the 
tritium. The rods take the place of neutron-absorber rods that are 
used to control the reaction. They do not reduce power output, engineers 
say, and they expect to persuade the Nuclear Regulatory Commission 
quickly that they pose no additional risk. The TVA had asked for $85 
million a year to make tritium at three of its reactors. Richardson 
did not say Tuesday what the cost would be. But he said using the 
reactors, Watts Bar 1 and Sequoyah 1 and 2, near Chattanooga, is ``the 
best option for our national security.'' ``It is a proven technology, 
it is the best deal by far for the taxpayer, and it has the flexibility 
to meet our present and future tritium needs,'' he said. If he had 
chosen a dedicated military plant, or a linear accelerator, construction 
would have had to begin soon, he said. By relying on reactors already 
built, the work would be done only as needed. ``We may not need to 
exercise this option for many years,'' he said. The department says 
it needs about 5.5 pounds of tritium a year to maintain the current 
arsenal, beginning in 2005, and 3.3 pounds if the strategic arms reduction 
talks, or Start 2, agreement is approved, beginning in 2011. The decision 
drew mixed reactions. Some arms proliferation specialists said it 
would undermine the U.S. position in asking other countries not to 
divert material from their civilian nuclear programs into bombs. The 
Energy Department contends, though, that unlike plutonium, which is 
made in reactors and is the heart of a bomb, tritium is not controlled 
by law and cannot be used by itself to make a bomb. The Alliance for 
Nuclear Accountability, a coalition of 28 environmental and peace 
groups, mostly around Energy Department weapons plants, said the decision 
is ``unnecessary, undermines nonproliferation efforts, wastes taxpayer 
dollars, and threatens public health.'' At the Nuclear Control Institute, 
a Washington-based group advocating nonproliferation, Paul Leventhal, 
the president, said using existing reactors was ``the cheapest, most 
assured method of producing tritium on an as-needed basis.'' But he 
said the use of civilian reactors should be reserved for national 
emergencies. Members of Congress from South Carolina wanted Richardson 
to build a linear accelerator at Savannah River, and some officials 
near Hanford, the nuclear reservation in central Washington state, 
wanted Richardson to use the Fast Flux Test Facility, a plutonium 
reactor there. Richardson said Tuesday that he would decide next year 
whether to permanently shut that plant, which began life as part of 
a research program for plants that would make plutonium. But Richardson 
also announced Tuesday that the department will build a plant at Savannah 
River, near Aiken, S.C., for converting plutonium from warheads into 
a powder, an intermediate step toward destroying the plutonium. The 
TVA was also disappointed. It wanted to supply the department with 
tritium in exchange for a payment of $2.3 billion, which it would 
have used to complete its Bellefonte reactor in northern Alabama. 
It stopped work on the reactor in 1988 because of cost overruns and 
slack demand for power. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>