<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981222.0293 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
A unit of the RJR Nabisco Holdings Corp. pleaded guilty on Tuesday 
to federal criminal charges stemming from a scheme to smuggle cigarettes 
into Canada through an Indian reservation in upstate New York and 
agreed to pay $15 million in penalties. The authorities said the guilty 
plea, filed in Federal District Court in Binghamton, N.Y., marked 
the first time that a tobacco company has been convicted of complicity 
in the shadowy and growing world of international cigarette smuggling. 
Experts estimate that nearly one-fourth of the billions of American 
cigarettes sold overseas pass through smuggling rings set up to evade 
taxes and sell major brands at a discount. Critics have long contended 
that this trade could not go on without the industry's knowledge and 
support. But while previous criminal investigations have led to charges 
against several mid-level managers, top executives at the large, multinational 
tobacco companies have always denied allegations that they encouraged 
or condoned any dealings with the contraband rings. In entering the 
guilty plea, the RJR Nabisco subsidiary, Northern Brands International 
Inc., admitted that it helped distributors evade $2.5 million in U.S. 
excise taxes on shipments that, the authorities said, were ultimately 
smuggled into Canada to avoid high taxes on cigarettes there. But 
the company's plea also could have sweeping repercussions in Washington, 
where Congress has debated whether to raise the taxes on domestic 
cigarette sales to discourage smoking. Industry executives have argued 
that any significant increase in the taxes would immediately create 
a black market for cigarettes in the United States, much as it did 
in Canada. But the guilty plea ``shows that the emperor doesn't have 
any clothes in making that argument,'' said Gregory N. Connoly, the 
director of the Commonwealth of Massachusetts' Tobacco Control Program. 
``The companies have always said that they are not directly involved, 
and they have used the threat of smuggling to dissuade Congress from 
raising the taxes,'' he said. ``But now we have evidence that the 
industry is complicit with organized criminals when it comes to smuggling.'' 
Thomas J. Maroney, the U.S. attorney in Syracuse, N.Y., said the four-year-old 
investigation was continuing. But he declined to say whether any high-level 
officials at RJR Nabisco's main tobacco operation, R.J. Reynolds Tobacco 
Co., or other tobacco companies were under scrutiny. Top executives 
and spokesmen at R.J. Reynolds, based in Winston-Salem, N.C., could 
not be reached for comment on Tuesday night. But Maroney said that 
the company had agreed to cooperate with investigators and had taken 
steps to insure that similar violations do not happen again. Bloomberg 
News quoted a R.J. Reynolds lawyer, C. Stephen Heard Jr., as saying 
that the company ``regrets this episode.'' According to the news service, 
Heard said that Northern Brands' actions were ``inconsistent with 
the way Reynolds does business'' and that Reynolds had closed Northern 
Brands. The charges against Northern Brands arose from an investigation 
that has led to guilty pleas by more than 20 people involved in smuggling 
hundreds of millions of dollars worth of alcohol and cigarettes into 
Canada. Court documents released during the investigation showed that 
R.J. Reynolds, the second-largest American cigarette maker next to 
the Philip Morris Cos., sponsored trips to a luxury Canadian fishing 
resort for several distributors who lived in upstate New York and 
smuggled cigarettes into Canada. One R.J. Reynolds sales manager even 
joked with the dealers about the smuggling, the documents said. The 
smuggling took off after Canada raised taxes in the 1980s and the 
early 1990s to discourage cigarette consumption, one of the first 
countries to try this approach. The taxes did not apply to exports, 
and affiliates of the three biggest companies _ Philip Morris, R.J. 
Reynolds and BAT Industries PLC _ started shipping large amounts of 
Canadian brands, like Players and Export A, to the United States even 
though few Americans smoke them. Maroney said that without paying 
either the Canadian or the American taxes, distributors then moved 
the cigarettes back into Canada through the St. Regis Mohawk Indian 
Reservation in upstate New York, with the help of some Indian leaders 
who also have been convicted in the case. In Tuesday's guilty plea, 
R.J. Reynolds' Northern Brands unit admitted to participating in one 
crucial part of the scheme. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>