<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981222.0275 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
With a tense marathon of diplomatic maneuvers behind them and a fair 
wind at their backs, the three crew members of the ICO Global Challenge 
balloon floated over China Tuesday, more hopeful than ever of becoming 
the first balloonists to circle the world nonstop. After beginning 
their trip last Friday from Marrakesh, Morocco, the balloonists were 
rapidly approaching the halfway mark Tuesday. Many attempts have been 
made by balloonists to circle the earth, but none so far have come 
close to surmounting the gigantic obstacles, both diplomatic and technical. 
For a time Monday, China denied the big balloon permission to enter 
Chinese airspace north of the 26th parallel. Forbidden to proceed, 
unwilling to make a suicidal landing in the towering Himalaya Mountains 
and unable to change course or turn back, Richard Branson and his 
crew mates, Per Lindstrand and Steve Fossett, faced a crisis. But 
after the intercession of Britain's prime minister, Tony Blair, and 
the British ambassador to China, Anthony Galsworthy, the Chinese government 
relented. The balloonists were permitted to continue, even though 
that meant traveling north of the 26th parallel, on condition that 
they would agree to leave Chinese air space as soon as possible. This 
the balloonists cheerfully agreed to do. But the balloon's ground 
control team at Uxbridge, England, reported that the delay in crossing 
China had cost the balloon a day's time and fuel for its hot-air burners, 
which might prove to be critical when and if the balloon nears its 
goal. However, Robert Rice, the team's chief meteorologist and a veteran 
adviser to many long-distance balloon teams, said in a telephone interview 
that wind speeds and direction would probably improve markedly. He 
said he expected the ICO Global Challenge to cross the Chinese coast 
of the Yellow Sea by nightfall Wednesday, and then to fly quickly 
over South Korea and Japan. Branson, the billionaire chairman of the 
Virgin Group in Britain, was jubilant. He said he hoped his team would 
be over America on Christmas Day and would land in Britain (or somewhere 
in western Europe) by New Year's Day. Fossett, a wealthy Colorado 
commodities broker and sportsman, has made the round-the-world attempt 
four times before, each time flying solo and setting two distance 
records. A former rival of Branson's team, he agreed to join it this 
time. Fossett made his last try last August, starting from Mendoza, 
Argentina. But a ferocious storm hit his balloon while flying over 
the Coral Sea, ripping the big gas bag and hurling Fossett's capsule 
into the water. He escaped serious injury and was later rescued by 
a yacht, but the experience left him shaken. ``Of course I'm scared,'' 
he said before the launch of the ICO Global Challenge, ``but the odds 
look good this time.'' 
</TEXT>
</DOC>