<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981222.0235 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
With the opening here this week of a debate that could change the 
way the world does business with Iraq, the Clinton administration's 
choice to lead the U.S. delegation is still under investigation by 
the Justice Department and unlikely to take up that post in the foreseeable 
future, officials said Tuesday. Richard Holbrooke, who has yet to 
be formally nominated by the White House, would have to be confirmed 
by the Senate Foreign Relations Committee, and the Senate has now 
begun the time-consuming issue of impeachment. Congressional aides 
predicted that the nomination process could take months. A. Peter 
Burleigh, a career diplomat of ambassadorial rank, has been filling 
in since August. Burleigh, an expert on Asia and the Middle East who 
nearly became ambassador to Baghdad before the Persian Gulf War broke 
out, has been piloting the U.S. mission here through a season of multiple 
crises _ in Iraq, Kosovo, Congo and Libya, to name a few. The deputy 
to Bill Richardson, who left the top U.N. job in August to become 
energy secretary, Burleigh was expected to fill in briefly until Holbrooke's 
nomination cleared the Senate. But an anonymous letter to the State 
Department's inspector general last summer set off a federal ethics 
inquiry into charges that Holbrooke had benefited illegally from contacts 
with former State Department colleagues after he left the foreign 
service in 1996 to become vice chairman of Credit Suisse First Boston, 
a New York investment bank. Holbrooke's lawyer, Richard Beattie, said 
he expected Holbrooke to be cleared of all charges. The chief American 
representative at the United Nations, a position that always carries 
the rank of ambassador and often includes membership in the president's 
Cabinet, routinely goes to a political appointee, often someone with 
close ties to the White House. Other ambassadors are of two minds 
about the political nature of the relationship. It can mean that the 
U.S. representative is often away in Washington and not attending 
to U.N. issues. At the same time, diplomats say, it is useful to know 
immediately and directly through the U.S. representative what an administration 
in Washington is thinking. In addition to political ties, Holbrooke 
has had a long and distinguished foreign career. A former ambassador 
and high-ranking State Department official, he has most recently been 
President Clinton's troubleshooter in the Balkans, responsible for 
engineering the Dayton accord that ended the war in Bosnia and for 
persuading President Slobodan Milosevic of Serbia to relax the siege 
of Kosovo. Burleigh said in an interview last month that there are 
advantages to being a career diplomat here. Most other nations, including 
all four permanent members of the Security Council _ Britain, China, 
France and Russia _ are represented by career foreign service officers 
for whom the United Nations is one of the best ambassadorial jobs. 
When the press criticized the Clinton administration for leaving the 
top U.S. diplomatic post open after the departure of Richardson, Burleigh 
said, his colleagues on the Security Council rallied to his defense. 
Furthermore, through the biggest crisis of all, Iraq, Burleigh has 
had the advantage of having worked a decade ago with Nizar Hamdoon, 
Iraq's U.N. representative. Hamdoon, who is about to return to Baghdad, 
was Iraqi ambassador in Washington during critical years of the Iran-Iraq 
war, when Burleigh was the deputy assistant secretary of state for 
Near Eastern and South Asian Affairs, and the United States was backing 
Iraq. He said he remembers Hamdoon as ``an excellent ambassador.'' 
But they had not spoken for a decade when they were suddenly thrown 
together in mid-November. Burleigh, as president of the Security Council, 
had to persuade the Iraqis to write a series of conciliatory letters 
that ultimately allowed the United States to call off an earlier round 
of military attacks. Hamdoon, who is normally frozen out of all contact 
with U.S. officials, became Burleigh's willing conduit to Baghdad. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>