<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981222.0016 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Fearing that China might force their balloon to land in the Himalaya 
Mountains, three balloonists received word early on Tuesday that the 
Beijing government had reconsidered its ban and would allow them to 
continue their round-the-world journey. Shortly after the balloon 
reached the Himalayas on Monday, China unexpectedly canceled the overflight 
permission it had granted to Richard Branson and his crew. By then 
the balloon was already over the mountains on a course from Nepal 
into China, unable to return or land. Frantic diplomatic efforts by 
Branson's ground team in London ensued, and Prime Minister Tony Blair 
of Britain appealed for Chinese overflight permission. News agencies 
reported from Beijing that the government reluctantly agreed to let 
the balloon proceed over China, provided that the crew made every 
effort to stay south of the 26th parallel, below China's most heavily 
traveled air corridors. It appeared that the ICO Global Challenge, 
which has already covered one third of the distance around the world, 
still had a chance of success. On Monday, during the fourth day of 
their flight, the three-member crew _ Branson, Per Lindstrand and 
Steve Fossett _ encountered the first serious check to their rapid 
progress. Soon after they had committed their 160-foot-high balloon 
to a course taking it over the Himalayas from India, the Chinese Foreign 
Ministry sent word that the overflight permission it had granted the 
balloonists on Nov. 26 had been withdrawn. In a satellite telephone 
interview on Monday while the balloon was over Nepal at an altitude 
of 29,000 feet, Fossett said: ``We're in a real jam. We're already 
over the Himalayas and there's no place to land. We have to keep going 
into China, and once over Chinese territory they could order us to 
land, or might even shoot us down.'' ``We can't turn back, we can't 
land and we can't avoid China,'' Fossett said. As Fossett spoke, the 
balloon was a scant 15 miles from the Chinese border. Two hours later, 
in the darkness of night, the balloon crossed into China in a region 
dominated by the highest mountains in the world. Branson (who is the 
billionaire chairman of the Virgin Group) and Lindstrand, chairman 
of Lindstrand Balloons Ltd., are British subjects. Fossett, a wealthy 
commodities broker and a champion long-distance balloonist, is American. 
Since the ICO Global Challenge rose from its launching site at Marrakesh, 
Morocco, on Friday, jet-stream winds have whisked it nearly a third 
of the way around the world. But the flight has been anything but 
relaxing. On Saturday the balloonists were forced to fly through a 
dangerous corridor between a line of powerful thunderstorms in southern 
Turkey and the border of hostile Iraq. The balloon also had to carefully 
thread its way around the borders of Iran and Russia, which had denied 
it overflight permission. Although a balloon cannot steer, it can 
rise or descend, seeking out winds blowing in the desired direction. 
For this, a team of ground-based meteorologists in London constantly 
analyzing weather data provides the ICO Global Challenge with essential 
guidance. No balloonists have ever come close to circling the Earth 
nonstop, but more teams are expected to try in the coming months than 
ever before. Seven teams besides the ICO Global Challenge have announced 
plans to try their luck. Two of them _ the Breitling Orbiter 3 from 
Switzerland and the Cable &AMP; Wireless Balloon from Britain _ are 
already at their launching pads in the Swiss Alps and Spain awaiting 
favorable weather to start. Two others hope to be ready before the 
season's weather opportunity ends in mid-February. Three other balloon 
teams are planning attempts around the world from the southern hemisphere 
next July. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>