<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981222.0389 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
The New York Times said in an editorial Wednesday, Dec. 23: It is 
tempting to regard the eight babies born to a Houston mother as a 
holiday season miracle, the fruit of a woman's fervent desire to have 
children and of modern medicine's ability to assist reproduction in 
those otherwise unable to conceive. Who does not root strenuously 
for the survival of the world's only known living octuplets as they 
cling tenuously to life in a neonatal intensive care unit? But this 
is not an event that should be overly sentimentalized or glamorized. 
It is instead a mixed blessing, illustrating the limitations of high-tech 
medicine as it strives to bring sound, healthy babies into the world 
without generating a crowd of fragile newborns. The incidence of multiple 
births has been soaring, and one of the prime causes is greater use 
of fertility drugs and other technologies to assist reproduction. 
Although the vast majority of prospective parents are seeking only 
one healthy baby, or perhaps two, the drugs carry a risk that many 
more fertilized eggs will be produced, leading to such large broods 
as the septuplets born in Iowa last year and the eight births in Houston 
this month. Both sets of births attracted a flood of attention from 
the media and from companies eager to supply free groceries or baby 
supplies for a share of the publicity. Record-setting multiple births 
are admittedly hard to ignore. But this trend should not be encouraged. 
Such multiple births are dangerous to the babies, who are born so 
tiny and premature that they are at high risk of lifetime health complications. 
Even if the babies emerge healthy, the parents are faced with an enormous 
burden of care that few are prepared to meet without outside assistance. 
Moreover, the cost of multiple births is very high and can be greatly 
reduced if the number of babies is reduced. Experts say there are 
several ways to avoid such multiple births, none of them infallible. 
One is to monitor the fertility drug treatments very closely and, 
if it becomes clear that too many eggs are maturing at once, terminate 
the treatment cycle immediately. That amounts to a costly misfire 
for the patient but stops the process before an egg is fertilized 
to produce an embryo, making the termination morally acceptable to 
many patients. A more controversial technique, employed after there 
are multiple embryos or fetuses, is ``selective reduction'' to remove 
some. That gives the remaining embryos a better chance but is opposed 
by some women as tantamount to abortion. Some experts would limit 
the most aggressive use of fertility drugs to those women whose moral 
beliefs allow them to undertake selective reduction, whereas others 
urge more research on new means to prevent the maturing of too many 
eggs. Until scientists come up with a better way to limit multiple 
births, the only hope for improvement is the common sense of doctors 
and their patients. That can best be brought to bear in an atmosphere 
that recognizes that these events, however wondrous they may seem, 
are really medical mishaps that few doctors or patients desire. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>