<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981222.0315 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
One of the major themes of American policy toward Iraq has been the 
increasing sentiment in Congress and the White House that Saddam Hussein 
should be overthrown. Yet there is deep division between congressional 
Republicans and President Clinton over how aggressively Washington 
should pursue that goal. So despite Clinton's insistent calls for 
a new government in Bagdhad, little is now being done to achieve that 
objective. Consequently, the United States does not have a specific 
plan underway to overthrow Saddam, according to U.S. government officials. 
Clinton's decision to launch a four-day bombing campaign against Iraq 
was not coordinated with any new effort to mount a clandestine coup 
against Saddam, and American officials acknowledge that Congress has 
refused to permit the CIA to begin Clinton's covert campaign to topple 
the Iraqi regime. Every covert action of this sort requires a presidential 
finding, which is typically secret. Then it must be authorized and 
funded by Congress. The dispute has led to a prolonged stalemate between 
the Clinton administration and Capitol Hill over the future role that 
the CIA should play in Iraq policy. Officials say that the Senate 
Select Committee on Intelligence has blocked a CIA plan to subvert 
Saddam's government, because key Republican lawmakers are not convinced 
that Clinton is serious about overthrowing Saddam. In the middle of 
last week, Sen. Richard Shelby, R-Ala., the committee's chairman, 
joined five other Republican leaders in a letter to the president 
complaining of ``a perceived drift in U.S. policy toward Iraq.'' ``There 
is a lack of leadership in the administration on this issue,'' a congressional 
official said. ``How was the bombing related to a strategy for an 
overthrow of Saddam? And what is the administration doing to get us 
there? Nothing.'' Administration officials counsel patience, saying 
there is no quick fix available to overthrow the Iraqi leader. But 
officials acknowledge that the Clinton administration is not yet willing 
to undertake the aggressive military and intelligence actions they 
believe would be essential to support a coup against Saddam anytime 
soon. ``Nobody that I know of has a strategy that they think will 
get rid of Saddam in the next six months or year, unless you are willing 
to put in a large U.S. ground force there,'' said one administration 
official. Administration officials believe that last week's bombing 
campaign, which targeted the Iraqi Republican Guards and other critical 
elements of Saddam's regime, did erode his ability to control his 
country. But the administration has never shown a willingness to link 
such aggressive military actions against Iraq directly to a coup, 
officials acknowledge. For example, Iraqi opposition groups and others 
in the region have proposed that the United States pledge to provide 
air support for potential coup plotters who might rise up from within 
the Iraqi military in Bagdhad, officials said. They said that the 
United States could support coup plotters by extending the no-flight 
zone to cover Bagdhad and central Iraq. It is not publicly known whether 
there are any current Iraqi military leaders willing to mount a coup. 
Dissatisfied Iraqi military officers have made it clear that they 
would need protection from Saddam's attack helicopters before they 
would be willing to take on the regime, government officials in the 
Middle East and people knowledgeable about American activities in 
the region say. ``The military units, the tribes, have always said 
they are afraid of what Saddam would do with his helicopters,'' said 
one of these officials. ``They say 'we need protection from that.''' 
The current no-fly zones, which are maintained under the authority 
of the United Nations, bar Iraq from flying military aircraft in the 
areas. They apply only to fixed-wing aircraft, and so would have to 
be modified to protect a military uprising from Iraqi helicopter forces. 
But the United States, which now maintains no-fly zones over northern 
and southern Iraq, has never agreed to impose a countrywide no-fly 
zone. One administration official said the idea was briefly considered 
in 1996, when the United States expanded the southern no-fly zone 
slightly further north. But the official said that Washington could 
not generate enough support from other countries in the region and 
abandoned the idea. Such a plan would strain U.S. air resources in 
the region, posing logistical nightmares that would make it difficult 
to maintain for long. ``Extending the no-fly zone is an option we 
have looked at from time to time, but it has serious logistical constraints,'' 
one administration official said. Yet officials acknowledge that, 
short of a U.S.-led ground invasion, providing air support could be 
one of the most important things the United States could do to support 
an anti-Saddam coup. In fact, U.S. air support for coup plotters has 
often surfaced as a key issue in past conflicts around the world. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>