<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981222.0205 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Claude Chabrol devotes his 50th feature, ``The Swindle,'' to the suave 
trickery that has been so alluring throughout his long career. It 
centers upon the wily teamwork of Isabelle Huppert and Michel Serrault, 
who play veteran con artists with a most cryptic connection. During 
the course of the story, questions arise about whether these longtime 
partners in crime are trying to hoodwink each other, but the story's 
duplicitousness reaches further than that. While the principals play 
their tricks, Chabrol (who weaves in allusions to some of his earlier 
work here) keeps busy fooling you. Ms. Huppert plays Betty, the kind 
of femme fatale whose long red talons can be found pouring a dose 
of sleeping potion into the drink of an unsuspecting lawn mower salesman 
she has picked up in a hotel. Betty excels at parts of this job like 
calling herself the director of an insurance company or sitting seductively 
in a black slip waiting for the man to pass out so Serrault's character 
can go through his wallet. And her partner brings just as much zest 
to such larcenous situations. Chabrol wrote the film with precisely 
these two actors in mind and told Serrault (making his 127th film 
appearance) to think ``he enjoys himself'' while playing the role. 
As to who Serrault's character actually is, that is more of a mystery. 
He favors pseudonyms like ``Col. Emmanuel Victor'' and plays an officer 
and a gentleman with panache. But what exactly does he have to do 
with Betty? One of the film's most interesting gambits is to keep 
the essence of their connection out of reach. The two stars play their 
roles with such coy agility that they can seem to be lovers or father 
and daughter or merely longtime colleagues, all at the same moment. 
``The Swindle'' entertainingly observes the two in action for a while, 
until they embark on a scam that proves bigger than both of them. 
Betty changes names and wigs and heads for the Swiss resort Sils Maria, 
near St. Moritz, to wreak havoc on a dentists' convention. But when 
he arrives a bit later, the so-called colonel finds something amiss. 
Betty, now impersonating a Russian blonde named Sissi, has latched 
onto a handsome businessman (Francois Cluzet) who is either a perfect 
target or an uninvited third partner in crime. All it takes is a briefcase 
full of money, which the businessman is scheduled to bring to Guadeloupe, 
to bring treachery into this menage. Exactly how and why it happens, 
with Serrault registering comic chagrin and Ms. Huppert relishing 
each chance to confound him, is at the heart of this film's considerable 
charm. Even when it threatens to sink into the familiar mechanics 
of a double-dealing heist story, Chabrol keeps curiosity piqued, the 
actors delightful and the outcome in sufficient question. The performances 
are so winkingly adroit that ``The Swindle'' becomes as much a character 
study as a caper story. Thanks to the sleek, psychologically astute 
direction that has been Chabrol's hallmark, it glides gracefully as 
both. PRODUCTION NOTES: `THE SWINDLE' Written (in French, with English 
subtitles) and directed by Claude Chabrol; director of photography, 
Eduardo Serra; edited by Monique Fardoulis; music by Matthieu Chabrol; 
production designer, Francoise Benoit-Fresco; produced by Marin Karmitz; 
released by New Yorker Films. With: Isabelle Huppert (Betty), Michel 
Serrault (Victor), Francois Cluzet (Maurice), Jean-Francois Balmer 
(Monsieur K) and Jackie Berroyer (Chatillon). Running time: 105 minutes. 
This film is not rated. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>