<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981222.0224 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
If there was anything that brought unity to the fractious Israeli 
Parliament, it was bringing down Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu 
in the overwhelming majority vote on Monday to dissolve the government 
two years early. There was no clearer image of a leader alone than 
Netanyahu on the floor of parliament, with a single colleague, Justice 
Minister Tsahi Hanegbi, sitting stone-faced by his side. Nearby, legislators 
gathered in big, voluble groupings, crossing party lines in spirited 
conversation, even bonhomie. When the prime minister rose to deliver 
his 11th-hour pitch for a unity government, members of parliament 
laughed loudly and mockingly. Sinking back into his seat, Netanyahu 
tore paper into confetti-like shreds, his face frozen in a pallid 
smirk as the leader of the opposition Labor Party, Ehud Barak, turned 
him down. A newspaper opinion poll published Tuesday showed the prime 
minister facing certain defeat in new elections next spring. In general 
the newspapers, which Netanyahu constantly maligns and says he does 
not read, buried him with unrestrained glee that he had finally gotten 
his comeuppance. ``His hubris, his paranoia and his arrogance have 
proved to be his downfall,'' Yoel Marcus wrote in a column in the 
daily Haaretz. ``He finds himself without partners, without friends.'' 
And yet. Although the political body came together in the vote on 
Monday night, it is expected to splinter now onto one of the broadest 
playing fields in the country's electoral history, where no outcome 
is predictable. The columnists and the pollsters were certainly clueless 
the last time, in 1996. Until the final moment, they underestimated 
the shrewd and charismatic campaign skills of Netanyahu. An outsider, 
he stirred together a stew of those outside the corridors of power 
long controlled by the Ashkenazic elite: the strictly Orthodox, the 
Sephardic working class, the Russian immigrants and the far-right 
ideologues. ``If there is one thing that can be said with certainty 
about the prime minister, it is that always, but always, it is too 
early to eulogize him,'' Hemi Shalev, a political analyst, wrote in 
the newspaper Maariv. On Monday, before the vote, Netanyahu had given 
up lobbying. His office was empty except for security guards. He met 
only with Hanegbi and Foreign Minister Ariel Sharon, who not only 
remained by his side but sometimes out in front of him, the stern 
father figure of the right, scolding the unfaithful deserters. Netanyahu 
appeared utterly isolated within the political establishment. But 
he still may prove adept as ever at wooing a workingman in a development 
town or a Jewish settler in the West Bank. Playing to their fears, 
he appears ready to hammer home the same themes he struck during the 
1996 election: only Netanyahu will protect Israel from the Palestinians, 
save Jerusalem from being divided, keep the terrorists at bay. This 
time, though, after having signed a peace agreement in Washington 
in October promising to turn over to the Palestinians a significant 
chunk of the West Bank, his campaign is tinged with what some see 
as a cynical pragmatism: Where else are they going to turn? In a rush 
to provide alternatives, his former allies, like his opponents, are 
quickly splintering. Parliament, now made up of 11 parties, may include 
19 by the time elections are held. Having alienated many among the 
right wing and within his own party, both on ideological principle 
and personally, Netanyahu faces defections from a host of former supporters 
and from within his own Cabinet. It is a surge that could prove to 
be the undoing of the old Likud, which defined itself as the party 
opposed to territorial compromise until it ended up backing the land-for-security 
peace plan this fall. Scions of the old Likud aristocracy are jumping 
ship. Tuesday, Netanyahu's former finance minister, Dan Meridor, quit 
the Likud and announced his intention to run for prime minister, scathingly 
denouncing his former boss for what he called ``cynicism, manipulation 
and cockiness.'' ``The lie has become a system,'' he said, using what 
for him is unusually strong language. ``Truth has disappeared and 
broken promises have become the norm.'' Another former minister, Benny 
Begin, son of the late Prime Minister Menachem Begin, is expected 
to form a new right-wing party and also go up against Netanyahu. Within 
Likud, Communications Minister Limor Livnat is expected to battle 
Netanyahu for leadership, as will Uzi Landau, a former supporter and 
hard-line member of parliament. In a radio interview Tuesday, Netanyahu 
derided the bustle among his former allies to replace him, seeming 
as cocksure as ever. ``The fantasies and ambitions of all those who 
want to be prime minister _ please,'' he said. It does not escape 
his notice that the left may start out as fragmented as the right. 
Barak, a former general, is forced to confront a significant challenge 
from another former general, the popular Amnon Lipkin-Shahak, who 
is expected to declare his candidacy for prime minister as the leader 
of an as of yet undeclared, unnamed centrist party. Whether that center 
party merges with Meridor's center party or remains separate is still 
unclear. But what is clear is that not only Likud but Labor too risks 
hemorrhaging support into a new undefined center. Lipkin-Shahak was 
said to be willing to join forces with Barak; both are former proteges 
of the late Prime Minister Yitzhak Rabin. But Lipkin-Shahak was reportedly 
unwilling to align himself with Labor because he considers the party 
tired and disconnected from voters. Even the Russian immigrants are 
expected to split, with some remaining behind Natan Sharansky, the 
trade minister, and others aligning behind the Soviet-born Avigdor 
Lieberman, Netanyahu's former chief of staff. ``So long as we continue 
down this road, it will be difficult to build a stable government,'' 
said Shlomo Ben Ami, a historian and Labor Party member of parliament. 
``The big parties will further disintegrate, and we will end up with 
either personality politics or special interest politics or both.'' 
Some blame Israel's peculiar election reforms, which brought Netanyahu 
to power in the first direct popular election for a prime minister 
here. The members of parliament were elected on a separate ballot. 
Netanyahu cobbled together a coalition of parties to insure what ended 
up as his razor-thin majority in parliament, but the small parties 
were able to hold major votes hostage to their constituents' demands. 
``The whole issue of governance is almost down the tubes,'' said Arye 
Carmon, a historian and president of the Israel Democracy Institute. 
``It's a fragmentation that is terrible for Israeli democracy. Instead 
of struggling for the benefit of the nation, members of Parliament 
are thinking narrowly, in terms of, say, money for Orthodox yeshivas 
or housing for the Russians.'' Before voting to dissolve the government 
on Monday, parliament also voted to overturn the direct elections 
law in a preliminary bill. As of now, however, the bill will not affect 
this spring's elections, when the two major parties could be put to 
a real test. ``Everything is very fluid now,'' said Michael Eitan, 
a Likud stalwart in parliament. ``It's a new dimension of Israeli 
politics, more personal, less ideological and less partisan. Who will 
benefit? Time will tell.'' 
</TEXT>
</DOC>