<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981222.0291 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
At its last meeting before the adoption of a single currency, the 
European Central Bank signaled Tuesday that there would be no immediate 
cuts in interest rates when the euro is introduced next month. At 
a meeting on Tuesday of its central council in Frankfurt, the bank 
set a narrow one-month interest rate corridor around its main lending 
rate of 3 percent, apparently aimed at smoothing money market operations 
and avoiding rate volatility in the infancy of the new currency. Wim 
Duisenberg, the Dutch president of the central bank, said Tuesday's 
decisions were intended to demonstrate that the bank ``does not want 
to give any signal for a further easing in the foreseeable future.'' 
The moves came less than three weeks after 10 of the 11 nations in 
the euro zone simultaneously cut their main refinancing rate to 3 
percent. The 11th, Italy, dropped its rate to 3.5 percent. Duisenberg 
said Rome could theoretically remain out of step until Dec. 31, when 
the Italian central bank loses its autonomy within the European Central 
Bank system. From Jan. 4, when money markets reopen after the New 
Year's holiday weekend, through Jan. 21, the bank's marginal borrowing 
rate, its most expensive, will be set at 3.25 percent, and the deposit 
rate, the least expensive, at 2.75 percent, creating a narrow corridor 
around the central refinancing rate of 3 percent set on Dec. 3. At 
its next meeting, on Jan. 21, it said it would change this rate range, 
lifting the marginal rate to 5.5 percent and lowering the deposit 
rate to 2 percent, in a move perhaps intended to assure the flexibility 
required to deal with any global economic slowdown. This would be 
done without budging the key refinancing rate, which would stay at 
3 percent. These rates are used by the central bank to limit the interest 
rates charged each day by commercial banks. The 2 percent deposit 
rate is even lower than the German central bank's comparable discount 
rate, of 2.5 percent. Duisenberg said the narrow interest corridor 
for money market rates aimed at ``smoothing the adaptation for the 
participants in the euro money market during the initial days of monetary 
union.'' Citing signs that recessions in emerging-market economies 
were beginning to dampen European growth, economists said the decisions 
left the bank room to maneuver if conditions worsened. ``It's a conservative 
range of interest rate targets,'' said J. Paul Horne, chief European 
equity market economist at Salomon Smith Barney in London, describing 
the interest rate environment as ``extraordinary and without precedent,'' 
given the extremely low levels of inflation and dangers of global 
slowing. Horne said that the market meltdown in Russia last summer 
was having a ``fairly serious'' slowing effect on European economies, 
most notably in Britain. ``They've got to leave themselves lots of 
leeway to react credibly and appropriately,'' Horne said of the central 
bankers. But Duisenberg, speaking at a news conference after the bank's 
last meeting before it assumes rate-setting control for the countries 
embracing the single currency, was at pains to discourage expectations 
of any further rate cuts soon. He noted that the 3 percent key rate 
set early this month was ``very low by historical standards.'' The 
key rates are comparable to the Federal funds rate in the United States, 
the target rate for overnight loans between banks, which is now 4.75 
percent. The European bank will set monetary policy for Germany, France, 
Italy, Spain, Portugal, the Netherlands, Belgium, Finland, Luxembourg, 
Ireland and Austria in January, after these countries lock their exchange 
rates together to form a common currency. Coins and banknotes will 
not be introduced for three years, but all interbank transactions, 
as well as the pricing of equities and bonds within the zone, will 
be done in euros. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>