<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981222.0158 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Restaurants make such a show of rack of lamb that many people assume 
there's some trick to cooking it. But all you have to do is trim the 
excess fat and roast at extremely high heat. With really good lamb, 
all you need for flavoring is salt and pepper. The trick is buying 
true lamb. In shopping for racks of lamb, which are just unseparated 
rib chops, I've been offered a range from just over a pound to more 
than 2 pounds. More weight means a larger animal, and the larger the 
animal, the more it approaches being mutton, not lamb; in heavier 
cuts, the meat and the fat both taste gamier, and there's more of 
the latter. If you want mild flavor, ask the butcher for a rack that 
weighs less than a pound and a half. (You may need to order it.) Restaurants 
often offer a whole rack, six to eight ribs, as a serving, but even 
a small rack will serve two people; a larger one can feed three and 
sometimes four. For more, cook two racks at a time; they will fit 
side by side in most roasting pans. I cut each rack in half before 
roasting, which makes for slightly more uniform cooking and relieves 
the busy host from having to separate the individual servings at the 
last minute. The roasting itself is child's play, although it will 
produce smoke because of the high heat. I cut most of the way down 
between the ribs so that more meat is exposed to intense heat and 
therefore becomes crisp. (Frenching the ribs, or scraping the meat 
off the bones to make them look neater, is counterproductive; the 
crisp meat on the bones is one of the joys of rack of lamb.) The most 
reliable way to judge doneness is with an instant-read thermometer; 
125 degrees in the center will be nicely medium rare. If you want 
to try to improve on perfection, rub a teaspoon or more of your favorite 
spice into the flat, fleshy side of the rack before roasting. Or rub 
it with a mixture of two tablespoons of olive oil, a clove of minced 
garlic, a cup of bread crumbs and about half a cup of fresh parsley. 
You can also make a quick sauce by removing the lamb from the pan 
to a warm platter, pouring off all but a tablespoon of fat and setting 
the pan over high heat. Add a cup of good red wine or port and cook, 
stirring and scraping, until the liquid is reduced to about a third 
of a cup. Stir in any liquid that has accumulated around the lamb, 
season to taste and spoon over the meat. CRISP-ROASTED RACK OF LAMB 
Total time: 30 minutes 2 racks of lamb, each about 1\ to 1{ pounds 
Salt and freshly ground black pepper to taste 1. Preheat the oven 
to 500 degrees. Strip most of the surface fat from the lamb (your 
butcher may already have done this.) Cut between the ribs, almost 
down to the meaty eye. Divide each rack in half down the middle, sprinkle 
with salt and pepper and place in a roasting pan. 2. Roast for 15 
minutes, then insert a meat thermometer straight in from one end into 
the meatiest part. If it reads 125 degrees or more, remove the lamb 
immediately. If it reads 120 degrees or less, put the lamb back for 
about 5 minutes, no more. Remove and let sit for 5 minutes; this will 
give you medium to medium-rare lamb on the outer ribs, medium-rare 
to rare in the center. Cook a little longer for more doneness. Serve, 
separating the ribs by cutting down straight through them. Yield: 
4 servings 
</TEXT>
</DOC>