<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981222.0396 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
The U.S. Olympic Committee, seeking to reassure nervous corporate 
sponsors Tuesday that irregularities would be cleaned up in the bidding 
process for the Winter and Summer Games, named former Sen. George 
Mitchell on Tuesday to head its investigation into allegations of 
vote-buying in Salt Lake City for the 2002 Winter Games. Also, an 
Atlanta Olympic official said that free medical treatment had been 
provided to a member of the International Olympic Committee from Africa, 
who has now been linked to services provided by four Olympic bid cities. 
Mitchell, the former Democratic majority leader in the Senate who 
brokered peace talks in Northern Ireland, is chairman of the USOC's 
ethics committee. Asked whether he was shocked that obtaining an Olympics 
appears to require providing extravagant gifts and favors, Mitchell 
said, ``I spent 30 years in politics, and the last three years in 
Northern Ireland; not much shocks me anymore.'' Mitchell said that 
his five-member panel would investigate the Salt Lake bidding process 
with no preconceived notions and would seek to make sure that the 
bidding process for American cities was ``fair and above reproach.'' 
He plans to issue his report by the end of February, and told reporters 
on a conference call that the investigation would not interfere with 
his possible mediation in President Clinton's attempt to prevent being 
removed from office by the Senate. Corporate sponsors such as Coca-Cola 
and US West have expressed concern about charges that Salt Lake City 
used vote-buying to attract the 2002 Winter Games. USOC President 
Bill Hybl said Tuesday that sponsors had been assured that apparent 
mistakes made by Salt Lake City ``won't occur in the future.'' Charlie 
Battle, who was the head of international relations for the Atlanta 
bid, said that David Sibandze, an IOC member from Swaziland, had undergone 
hospital tests for chest pains during a visit to Atlanta when it was 
bidding to become host of the 1996 Summer Olympics. While on his visit, 
Sibandze brought a guest, whom Battle described as a prince in the 
royal family of the kingdom of Swaziland. During a trip to see the 
sailing competition site in Savannah, Ga., Atlanta officials bought 
a tie and a sports coat for Sibandze's guest to attend a dinner, Battle 
said. ``People can make a big deal out of stuff like that, but that's 
just decency,'' Battle said. Of Sibandze, he said: ``It wasn't like 
he just came and wanted to have his heart checked. You take care of 
them when they are stricken.'' Sibandze's son, Sibusiso Sibandze, 
also worked as an intern at City Hall in Salt Lake in 1993 and 1994, 
while the city was bidding for the 2002 Winter Games, the mayor's 
office announced last week. He received bachelor's and master's degrees 
from the University of Utah in the mid-1990s, but it is not known 
whether he was one of six relatives of IOC members whom Salt Lake 
Olympic officials say received scholarships and athletic training 
under a $400,000 program of humanitarian aid operated from 1991 until 
this year. Australian newspapers have reported that a daughter of 
Sibandze's obtained a job at a catering institute in Sydney with the 
help of the president of the Australian Olympic Committee during the 
bid process for the 2000 Summer Games. Sibusiso Sibandze also received 
a three-month scholarship offer to a Swedish university in 1985, while 
Falun, Sweden, was bidding to become host of the 1992 Winter Olympics, 
which were eventually awarded to Albertville, France. That story was 
first reported by The Sunday Times of London. Tuesday, in an interview 
with The New York Times, a former Swedish Olympic official, Wolf Lyberg, 
said that the scholarship had been arranged by the head of the Swedish 
Olympic Committee, Bo Engstrom, who died about 10 years ago. Sibandze 
did not attend the Swedish university, Lyberg said, thus the matter 
was closed. But, he said, Swedish Olympic officials warned Engstrom 
that ``he shouldn't have done it.'' A person who answered the phone 
at David Sibandze's home in Swaziland said that he was away and would 
not return until Wednesday. Marc Hodler, a senior member of the IOC 
from Switzerland, has said that Salt Lake City was a victim of agents 
who demand exorbitant amounts of money to deliver blocs of votes of 
IOC members. Hodler said that as many as 25 of the IOC's 114 members 
may be vulnerable to selling votes for gifts and favors. Sibandze, 
66, has been a member of the IOC since 1984. He is from a tiny kingdom 
between South Africa and Mozambique, and is not considered a major 
power broker within the Olympic movement. Battle said he knew Sibandze 
to be a small businessman from an underdeveloped nation who perhaps 
believed that, within established procedures of the bidding process, 
he could find opportunities for some of his eight children. Sibandze 
never asked for a scholarship from Atlanta officials, Battle said. 
``Hodler seems to act like there are really powerful, venal operators 
out there who almost blackmail you into hiring them,'' Battle said. 
``I don't think that's true at all. What I know is that you are in 
the business of trying to curry favor with people, and you can possibly 
go overboard in what you are willing to do.'' In that environment, 
Battle said, an IOC member like Sibandze might have found a bid city 
willing to provide services for him without a promise of his vote 
in return. ``If people were willing to help his children in school, 
that was a great opportunity for him,'' Battle said. ``But I'm not 
saying he ought to have done that. Giving scholarships is wrong.'' 
</TEXT>
</DOC>