<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981222.0384 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Michael Dalia has spent 21 years with the Woodbridge Police Department, 
and he was not inclined to take any chances with the little girl sticking 
her head through a railing on the upstairs level of the Woodbridge 
Center mall, even if her mother was over on a bench just a few steps 
away, chatting with a friend. ``Hey,'' he said softly. ``Watch your 
head there, sweetheart.'' The little girl, 3-year-old Brielle Trocchia 
of Brooklyn, smiled. Her mother smiled. Dalia nodded and moved on, 
continuing a routine that was as common as crowds at Christmas and 
yet a part of a growing trend in law enforcement: the public police 
officer patrolling the private territory of the mall. In New Jersey 
and around the country, local police forces in the last few years 
have become, in essence, full-time security contractors (although 
they do not like that word) to mall operators, supplementing private 
security officers. Malls increasingly provide police with fully equipped 
substations, police cars and salaries _ often plus an ``administrative 
fee'' that comes back to the police department as a kind of profit. 
In exchange, trained, sworn and armed officers walk beats that may 
take in little more than the tiled floors between Sears at one end 
and Macy's at the other. Their presence has been credited with curtailing 
crime in a way that private, unarmed security guards cannot do. And 
they do more: they reassure shoppers who tend to get nervous when 
they hear news reports of purse snatchers on the escalators or rapists 
in the parking lots. ``Every study ever done about how people choose 
where to shop have `security' and `safety' at the top of the list,'' 
said Amy McQueeney, vice president and general manager of Woodbridge 
Center. While the practice has generally been cleared by state law, 
the use of private money to pay for public police has nevertheless 
raised questions. In February, for instance, New York City Mayor Rudolph 
Giuliani was sharply criticized for approving a plan by a business 
improvement district to pay $5 million for a police substation in 
the Wall Street area. Community groups complained that officers would 
be drained from more dangerous precincts to patrol one of the safest 
areas in the city. But police officials say that having officers at 
malls is just an extension of the community policing concept that 
has been credited with helping to reduce crime rates across the country. 
And they insist that the practice does not raise questions of social 
equity _ police protection for those who can afford it, diminishing 
protection for those who cannot _ because everyone benefits. ``Our 
responsibility is to provide safety and security for the city of Stamford, 
period,'' said Chief Dean Esserman of the Stamford, Conn., Police 
Department, whose five district offices are all provided free by merchants, 
and which routinely contracts for uniformed police on overtime, or 
``extra duty'' in the department's parlance, to patrol the Stamford 
Center mall and other private businesses. And suburban police officials 
say it makes sense to send officers to malls, which have become the 
equivalent of downtown shopping streets. ``This is where the people 
are,'' said Philip Dinicola, deputy police chief in Woodbridge, about 
25 miles southwest of Manhattan, ``so this is where we are.'' Because 
the mall policing is done either by additional officers hired to handle 
the load, or by officers volunteering for the overtime, the practice 
does not take police away from other parts of town, police officials 
said. Police officials also said they had had no complaints from merchants 
outside the mall about the arrangement. ``It can only help us here 
on Main Street if the shoppers in any part of Woodbridge feel safer,'' 
said Lee Nevez, a jewelry store owner who is president of Woodbridge's 
Downtown Merchants' Association. With the Christmas season at its 
peak, Woodbridge Center now has four officers and one plainclothes 
detective assigned there full time, said James Davy, the town administrator. 
The mall also recently bought a new, $31,000 police cruiser and built 
a police substation that it equipped with computers, radios and booking 
equipment. ``It is almost universally the case that there is some 
kind of formal partnership between the local police and a shopping 
center these days,'' said Jonathan Lusher, a vice president of IPC 
International, of Bannockburn, Ill., consultants on mall security. 
``It runs from an occasional off-duty cop to many places where there 
are full-time police officers paid for by the mall. The Glendale Galleria 
in California has six full-time cops and a precinct house, for example.'' 
The contract municipal police supplement what is always a much bigger 
private security force in the mall, Lusher said. Over all, he said, 
security costs at a major mall typically run $1 million a year or 
more, often exceeding costs for services such as maintenance, since 
the publicity of even one notorious incident _ an abduction or carjacking, 
say _ could cost a mall far more in lost business. Police officers 
first started coming into malls informally about five years ago, police 
experts say, after several highly publicized abductions in shopping 
malls around the country, including that in 1992 of Gail Shollar, 
of Edison, N.J., who was seized with her 3-year-old daughter at the 
nearby Middlesex Mall and killed. The daughter was unharmed. In the 
wake of those attacks, the police started patrolling parking lots, 
and then gradually went indoors. At the same time, said Dinicola, 
malls began offering police substations inside malls, where police 
could book shoplifting suspects in less than half an hour instead 
of the three hours it would take to do everything downtown. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>