<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981222.0166 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Choucroute garni, with its pungent, pale blond sauerkraut crowned 
by sausages and rose-pink cuts of pork, is the most famous dish of 
Alsace. But Kugelhopf, a high, fluted, circular coffee bread, is perhaps 
even closer to the hearts of Alsatians, as I rediscovered on a late 
fall visit to that endearingly folkloric French province on the Rhine. 
Kugelhopf beckons from every bakery window the year round. Dusted 
with a snowfall of confectioners' sugar (preferably just when purchased 
or before being served), kugelhopf is said to go with everything at 
any time of day. Its soothingly neutral flavor, with an even balance 
of sweet and salt, is as good with morning coffee as with afternoon 
tea, evening wine or a midnight beer or, at any hour, with a shot 
of icy clear eau de vie like kirsch, mirabelle or framboise. It seems 
particularly right at this season, for holiday brunches or between-meal 
snacking. Andre Soltner, the son of Alsace who cooked his way to fame 
at Lutece, said that in olden days, a piece of kugelhopf with wine 
for men and coffee for women was served before the lengthy marriage 
ceremonies held in churches and synagogues. The bride's mother also 
baked a kugelhopf for the priest, pastor or rabbi, the mayor and schoolteacher, 
the midwife and neighbors, as tokens of good will in case their help 
was ever needed. What was surprising as I talked kugelhopf with chefs 
and bakers in Alsace was that something so totally benign could inspire 
such heated controversy. First, there is the matter of spelling, with 
the last syllable as ``hupf'' or ``hopf,'' preceded by ``kugel,'' 
``kougel,'' ``gugel'' or, in one edition of Larousse Gastronomique, 
``sugl.'' The origin is equally in dispute. In English we call the 
baking pan that forms this specialty a Turk's-head mold, which is 
a clue. The kugelhopf is as popular in Germany and Austria as it is 
in Alsace, and one story says it originated in Vienna when the Hapsburg 
forces defeated the Turks at the city's gates. In celebration, Viennese 
bakers supposedly made a cake in the shape of the sultan's turban. 
Not so, say Alsatians, who hold to another view partly explained in 
``The Lutece Cookbook,'' by Soltner. It seems that the Magi, or Three 
Kings, were walking from Bethlehem to Cologne _ don't ask why _ and 
were very tired when they got to the hilly wine village of Ribeauville 
in Alsace. There they received hospitality from a pastry chef, one 
Kugel. In appreciation, they later baked a cake in the turban shape 
and gave it their benefactor's name. In honor of that event, a Fete 
de Kugelhopf is held every June in Ribeauville. It must also be noted 
that the word ``kugel,'' in German, means a sphere or a ball, which 
might also have something to do with the name. Other disputes center 
on the number of eggs and the amount of sugar and raisins, although 
most bakers agree that for the driest, smoothest crust and best-textured 
result, the baking mold should be made of terra cotta glazed only 
on the inside. Throughout Alsace, souvenir and kitchenware shops display 
every size and color of kugelhopf mold, the most basic being the plain 
earthy brown and the fanciest having richly colored glazes and hand-painted 
flowers or other kitschy decorations. These days, metal molds are 
widely used, especially because terra cotta is so fragile. Whatever 
the truths about kugelhopf, know that the real McCoy is much closer 
to bread than to cake, made with yeast, flour, very little sugar and 
salt, small amounts of butter and, if it is a ``rich man's kugelhopf,'' 
a few eggs, an expensive ingredient not found in a ``poor man's kugelhopf.'' 
One classic variation, however, is the savory kugelhopf, enriched 
with bits of smoky bacon and crunchy walnuts, which is meant to be 
served with aperitifs. Expecting a more golden, sweeter cake, and 
finding so many samples of kugelhopf in Alsace to be dry and bland, 
I had just about decided that I preferred the richer Austrian-German 
interpretation, with its grated orange and lemon peel, candied fruit 
and a hint of vanilla. Then I was lured into the elegant Patisserie 
Jean at 6 Place de l'Ecole on a quiet, graceful square in Colmar by 
a window display of heraldic kugelhopfs, along with shelves full of 
intricate, luscious-looking pastries, petit fours, small savories 
and jewel-like chocolates. Because Jean is strictly a patisserie with 
no table service, my husband and I bought a small kugelhopf and had 
it in our hotel room the next morning, along with room service cafe 
au lait for a completely soul-satisfying breakfast. Sliced and spread 
with unsalted butter and a touch of orange marmalade or apricot jam, 
it was indeed a feast. Back in New York and thinking of that sensation, 
I searched for local versions. Most walked like kugelhopf and talked 
like kugelhopf but were more cake than bread, a triumph of form over 
content. ALSATIAN KUGELHOPF Adapted from Patisserie Jean Time: About 
2{ hours } cup warm milk \ cup sugar { teaspoon salt 2 envelopes yeast 
3{ cups flour, plus more for kneading and yeast \ cup kirsch, mirabelle 
or water 2/3 cup raisins, golden, black or a combination 2 eggs, lightly 
beaten 8 tablespoons (1 stick) unsalted butter, room temperature 8 
to 10 blanched almonds Confectioners' sugar. 1. Combine 1/3 cup warm 
milk, 1 tablespoon sugar, salt, yeast and 2 tablespoons flour in a 
bowl, and mix with fork to make a paste. Cover, and let rise in a 
warm place until almost doubled in volume, about 20 minutes. 2. Warm 
kirsch, mirabelle or water slightly and pour over raisins in another 
bowl. Set aside. 3. In still another bowl, combine 3{ cups sifted 
flour, the remaining sugar, milk and eggs with yeast paste. Mix to 
make a soft, elastic, slightly sticky mass, adding more flour (no 
more than { cup) or milk as needed. Using wooden spoon or fingertips, 
work in all but 2 tablespoons butter. 4. Turn dough out onto a lightly 
floured counter top and knead vigorously, lifting and slamming dough 
down seven or eight times until smooth and elastic. Strain raisins 
though a sieve, reserving liquid, and work into dough along with liquid. 
5. Spread remaining butter generously around the sides and bottom 
and into the crevices of an 8-inch kugelhopf mold, preferably glazed 
earthenware. Arrange almonds in indentations in bottom of mold. Gently 
shape dough into a roll 10 or 12 inches long; arrange in a circle 
in mold. Tap mold down firmly on counter top so dough settles evenly. 
Cover and let rise in a warm spot until dough doubles and is level 
with rim of mold, about 1 hour. 6. Heat oven to 450 degrees. Place 
mold on center rack and bake 10 minutes. Lower heat to 350 degrees 
and bake 40 to 45 minutes, until kugelhopf shrinks slightly away from 
sides and a slim knife or skewer inserted in cake comes out clean 
and dry. Cool in mold 5 minutes, then turn out onto a rack and cool 
at least 4 hours before cutting. For best flavor, do not cut for 6 
hours. 7. Dust liberally with confectioners' sugar just before slicing. 
Yield: About 8 servings. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>