<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981222.0057 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
The man burst into the store, one of those that smell of sugar and 
spice and things so ambrosial that your eyes burn. He needed a gift 
for his 80-year-old grandmother, he told the clerk who suggested a 
number of things. Soap, candles, maybe a sachet, she said, explaining 
it's something to put in your undies drawer. ``Do grannies have an 
undies drawer?'' he inquired. She informed him that all women have 
an undies drawer. He looked defeated, but she pushed on and finally 
scored with a Victorian styled frame for the great-grandkids' school 
photos and a lace doily to put the frame on. Bravo, I told her, after 
he left. A few doors down at a book store, a flute quartet played 
something that sounded like Bach. The musician in the middle wore 
a Santa hat. A woman shopper had on brown felt reindeer antlers. Lovely 
odd things happen around Christmas. It is not just Hallmark and Disney 
who know how to whip up the magic. Everyday human beings are quite 
capable of creating warm fuzzies for themselves and each other. In 
many ways, the Christmas setting is like being in a musical comedy. 
People will suddenly burst into song walking down the street, encouraged 
by some sidewalk violinist playing ``White Christmas.'' People wear 
flamboyant costumes they would never consider the rest of the year, 
appearing in red sweaters with giant snowmen on their chests. They 
imagine there will be a party that requires them to wear sequins. 
They sometimes are uncharacteristically pleasant to each other. A 
San Francisco crowd poured out from a matinee performance of ``A Christmas 
Carol'' and were met by three men assembled in the street and singing 
``Ain't Gonna Study War No More.'' Some of the people hurried off, 
but many lingered with big smiles on their faces until the song was 
over and the men took their applause. It is not true that Christmas 
costs more than it gives back. There are many holiday freebies. Most 
of the lights, music and the smells are free. You just have to be 
out there and paying attention. To get into an instantly festive mood, 
I recommend checking out the elegant decorations in hotel lobbies. 
City hotels have giant trees that are as tall as the chandeliers and 
old-fashioned miniature villages and train sets. The trick is to walk 
in like you belong, shrugging off your wool scarf as if it were made 
out of animal pieces. You can sip one overpriced drink for a long 
time in the lobby, look at the parade of cashmere coats and feel like 
you are Myrna Loy waiting for William Powell. Go to a hotel where 
they serve a Christmas tea. Take your daughters. Wear a hat. Eat tiny 
sandwiches. On the way out stop in the glittery gift shop and buy 
one single ornament, a golden pear, perhaps, which the store will 
wrap with the same artistry as if it were a Faberge egg. I also like 
the daylong, non-shopping shopping trip. Go after most of your required 
buying is completed. The idea is to be part of the holiday horde but 
not hassled by it. A bunch of my friends take the ferry to San Francisco. 
This way we don't have to worry about parking. There's usually a free 
concert by carolers going over and on the return, the city's skyline 
outlined in tiny white lights. In between we eat, drink, eat again, 
make merry, look in the windows, spray ourselves at perfume counters 
and browse without purpose. Getting to be a kid again at Christmas 
has nothing to do with age but letting yourself be dazzled over and 
again. A friend who used to be a school teacher said her favorite 
part of Christmas was the last day of school before it let out for 
the holidays. Everyone was nicer to each other, she said. Spirits 
were genuinely up and it wasn't just because they were getting out 
of school for two weeks. Everyone has their favorite things. I know 
a dedicated Grinch who avoids most Christmas preliminaries but admits 
there's something about Christmas morning that always sucks him in. 
For me it's Advent calendars, sugar cookies with sprinkles and the 
snow scene in ``The Nutcracker.'' A church choir in burgundy robes 
singing ``O Holy Night.'' The pope in Rome on public television after 
midnight on Christmas Eve. Getting out our own personal Christmas 
musical collection and hearing Ray Charles sing ``Silent Night'' for 
the first time in a year. Hot drinks with cinnamon sticks. Men in 
earmuffs carrying silver wrapped boxes. Pickup trucks with wreaths 
on front and construction sites with Christmas trees on top. Going 
to a Sing-Along Messiah with the same friend each year and hoping 
the people standing behind us know the alto part and sing loud. Getting 
the tree at a place where they have an old potbelly stove going and 
a sales person who can identify each tree by how long its smell will 
last. Relying on neighbors for Christmas lights at night and fireplace 
smells in the morning. A Christmas cactus blooming in December, the 
first time it's been on schedule in five years. (Susan Swartz is a 
columnist for The Press Democrat in Santa Rosa, Calif. Her e-mail 
address is sfswartz(AT)pressdemo.com) 
</TEXT>
</DOC>