<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981222.0199 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Her head twisted painfully to one side, her dark brown eyes casting 
defiant sidelong glances at the world, and speaking in dragged-out 
syllables delivered in semi-intelligible moans and groans, Helena 
Bonham Carter gives what may be the stunt performance of the year 
as Jane, a feisty young woman dying of Lou Gehrig's disease in ``The 
Theory of Flight.'' Jane, who wears her hair in a just-hatched-baby-bird 
look nested beneath a baseball cap, dresses like a race-car driver 
(in a jacket printed with the words ``Lucky Strike'') and navigates 
aggressively in a motorized wheelchair. When too exhausted to speak, 
she resorts to a voice machine that translates her typed messages 
into electronic speech. Both her spoken and typed communications abound 
in profanities. For Jane has a proudly dirty mind. Much of her spare 
time is consumed watching videos of hard-core pornography. Sad to 
say, but Jane is the only person resembling a full-scale character 
in the film, which might be described as a disease-of-the-week movie 
with comic and mythic pretensions. Directed by Paul Greengrass from 
a screenplay by Richard Hawkins, ``Theory of Flight'' imagines itself 
an inspirational romantic comedy, a sort of elevated late-90s variation 
of ``David and Lisa'' tricked out with antic humor. But because Richard 
(Kenneth Branagh), Jane's partner in mutual salvation, is such a hollow 
contrivance and Branagh's performance too bland to arouse any feeling, 
the movie seems hopelessly lopsided and empty. Richard is really more 
an allegorical construction than a human being. A failed painter who 
builds primitive flying machines, he is an overgrown adolescent dreamer 
who may be more than a touch cracked in the head. Richard gets in 
trouble with the law after he attempts to lift off from the spire 
of a London office building wearing a pair of wings and lands on a 
rescue squad's giant cushion. For the expense and trouble of saving 
his life, he is sentenced to do social-service work. His first assignment 
is to be the companion of Jane, whose bad temper has driven away every 
other caretaker hired so far. After some initial skirmishes, Jane 
takes a liking to Richard. And it isn't long before she pops the big 
question: will he help her lose her virginity before she dies? She 
doesn't expect him to be the lover, she adds hastily. In fact, she 
would prefer someone more like Richard Gere in ``American Gigolo.'' 
Goaded by Jane, Richard reluctantly undertakes the search for Jane's 
erotic deliverance, starting with employment agencies, moving to a 
topless club whose patrons are disabled, and finally settling on a 
suave professional escort he and Jane spot squiring around older women 
at a fancy hotel. To subsidize Jane's pricey journey into ecstasy, 
however, Richard decides he must rob a bank. While the search for 
a sexual partner is going on, Richard, who has moved to a shack in 
the countryside, is putting together his latest aeronautical contraption, 
a crude biplane that represents a last-ditch attempt to fly. For a 
man obsessed with invention, he exhibits an extraordinary lack of 
enthusiasm. Playing down any eccentric traits, Branagh ambles through 
his role with a suave detachment that suggests Michael Caine on Valium. 
The novelty of hearing Ms. Bonham Carter spew four-letter words fades 
quickly. So does the sight of Branagh elaborately rehearsing how to 
rob a bank. This versatile actor has many strengths, but as his wooden 
turn in ``Celebrity'' has already demonstrated, comedy isn't one of 
them. PRODUCTION NOTES: `THE THEORY OF FLIGHT' Directed by Paul Greengrass; 
written by Richard Hawkins; director of photography, Ivan Strasburg; 
edited by Mark Day; music by Rolfe Kent; production designer, Melanie 
Allen; produced by David Thompson, Anant Singh, Helena Spring and 
Ruth Caleb; released by Fine Line Features. With: Helena Bonham Carter 
(Jane), Kenneth Branagh (Richard), Gemma Jones (Anne) and Holly Aird 
(Julie). Running time: 100 minutes. ``The Theory of Flight'' is rated 
R (under 17 requires accompanying parent or adult guardian). It has 
profanity and sexual situations. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>