<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981222.0296 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Canadians live in a big country graced with an abundance of unspoiled 
places. And many of them want to keep it that way. That is why tempers 
have flared over a far-reaching attempt by the province of Ontario 
to control what happens in a territory of publicly owned woodlands 
the size of Sweden. The plan will determine how much land should be 
preserved as parks and how much would be open to logging, mining and 
other commercial uses. The draft plan so far is a balancing act that 
increases park lands while providing more diverse opportunities for 
industry. But neither side is satisfied. Part of the problem lies 
in the fact that for many people in Toronto and other urban areas, 
the sparsely populated region above the Great Lakes represents both 
the cherished Canadian ideal of a wilderness frontier and a favored 
vacation area. In conversation and weather forecasts it is called 
``cottage country'' because so many city dwellers own second homes 
there. ``It's pretty humble cottage country,'' said Nancy Jack, an 
environmental lawyer at the Ontario Ministry of Natural Resources 
who lives in Toronto but owns a small house on a lake about two and 
a half hours north of the city. She opposes the broad opening of land 
to commercial interests, especially near her getaway. ``The area was 
badly logged 100 years ago and now has recovered somewhat to poor 
quality forest. But we love it,'' she said. On the other side of the 
dispute are the logging and mining industries that see any attempt 
to restrict commercial activity as a threat to jobs and a way of life 
favored by many of the 800,000 full-time residents of the area, which 
covers roughly half the province. ``Southern Ontario is very heavily 
developed. Everything's been paved over for suburbia and shopping 
malls,'' said C. David Comba, director of issues management for the 
Prospectors and Developers Association of Canada, which represents 
mining interests in Ontario. ``Southerners have essentially ruined 
their own environment and now they think they can assuage their conscience 
by creating parks and telling people in the north that they have to 
accept a lower standard of living.'' About 83 percent of the land 
in the province is publicly owned, and environmentalists had hoped 
that the current planning process would have increased the amount 
of protected land substantially. The Conservative government, led 
by Premier Mike Harris, does plan to increase the percentage of public 
land set aside for parks and conservation in the Lands for Life area 
to about 9.5 percent of the total, up from 7.9 percent. But creating 
jobs is an even higher priority and the government wants to substantially 
enhance mining and logging opportunities while also protecting tourism, 
hunting and fishing interests. Logging and mining are two of the most 
important industries in Ontario, directly employing more than 80,000 
people, according to industry figures. Tim Gray, head of the Wildlands 
League, an environmental group, said that under the proposed plan, 
Ontario will end up ceding nearly all control over the land to private 
logging and mining companies. ``What this government is proposing 
is the most fundamental change in land use and public management of 
the land since confederation,'' Grey said, referring to the formation 
of Canada as a separate country in 1867. But John Snobelen, minister 
of natural resources, called such charges ``nonsense.'' He said the 
recommendations now being considered contain no provision that ``would 
give that kind of control,'' but simply continue the renewable licenses 
now widely used for such contracts. The Ontario government has spent 
more than a year discussing the development plan. It has received 
more than 14,000 public comments from people, including Elizabeth 
R. Tanner, the reeve, or mayor, of Burleigh-Anstruther-Chandos Township, 
in cottage country near Peterborough. The rural municipality forwarded 
a recommendation to the province to designate the area a conservation 
zone, where logging and mining would be prohibited. But according 
to the draft proposal, the township is considered an enhanced management 
area, which allows seasonal residents, snowmobiles and hunting, along 
with logging and mining. ``What it actually means,'' a dissatisfied 
Tanner said, ``is status quo.'' Snobelen said he plans to issue a 
report by the end of January giving the final draft of the northern 
lands plan. No legislation is needed for the plan to be adopted. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>