<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981222.0383 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
In any other year, this would be a light week in Roz Sacharoff's fourth-grade 
classroom, with Christmas-around-the-world lunches and holiday songs 
the order of the day. Instead, like a coach getting a team ready for 
the Super Bowl, Sacharoff has been preparing her students for the 
biggest test of their 9-year-old lives: New York state's new fourth-grade 
reading exam, which will be given over three consecutive days beginning 
on Jan. 12 and which will be used to measure their school's effectiveness. 
In case anyone is counting, and the students certainly are, that's 
just a week after they return from Christmas break, which begins at 
the final bell Wednesday. As the 31 denizens of Room 218 at Public 
School 46 looked to the future this week, their mood was anything 
but festive. Davon Livingston, 9, said he felt ``nauseous.'' Elizabeth 
Petronio, also 9, said she was anticipating that she would be ``too 
scared to go to bed early'' and would find herself up at 3 a.m. on 
the day of the test. And Patrick McGreevy was worried about his handwriting; 
no small matter, considering that in addition to shading columns of 
small bubbles, the students will be asked, for the first time on a 
state test, to take notes and answer essay questions. ``I am really 
scared,'' said Patrick, 9, his brown hair cropped short and his eyes 
obscured by thick wire-rimmed lenses. ``I want to get into a very 
good college. You must know the name of it: Harvard.'' If there was 
high anxiety this week at P.S. 46 and at other elementary schools 
around New York City and across the state, it was largely because 
they had been asked to do so much in so little time. In past years, 
the state administered its standardized reading test in the spring, 
giving teachers at least three more months to prepare students. Now, 
in addition to insuring their students' ability to read a short passage 
and then sift out the main idea, a staple of previous tests, the teachers 
must also make sure that their students can absorb the details of 
a fable that has been read to them and then construct meaningful sentences 
in response. The pressure will be intense, spread out over three days 
in sessions that, for the first time, will be timed, at an average 
of about 55 minutes each. No wonder that teaching students how to 
relax through deep breathing is now part of the daily fourth-grade 
curriculum at another city school, P.S. 125 in Harlem, called the 
Ralph Bunche School. On every Saturday morning since October, the 
school has held intensive two-hour test preparation sessions, with 
as many as half of the school's 200 fourth graders showing up at any 
one time. ``They're being sent home with a holiday package that details 
the things they should be doing every day, like sample questions,'' 
said the principal, Lauvia Sherman. But at nearby P.S. 123, whose 
strong performance on last year's test lifted it off the state failing 
list for the first time in seven years, such a packet will be unnecessary. 
While students elsewhere will be losing themselves in the new video 
games and Furbys that appeared under their Christmas trees, fourth 
graders at P.S. 123 have been invited to attend school for three hours 
a day during next week's vacation _ all in an attempt to keep the 
momentum going in anticipation of the test. ``We're offering them 
an opportunity to have a place to come, if they feel they want extra 
help or if they want to practice,'' said the principal, Edith Bly-Jenkins. 
So far, about 60 of 120 fourth graders have signaled their interest. 
Much is riding on their answers. Though it will be at least another 
year before Schools Chancellor Rudy Crew begins holding fourth graders 
back based on their test scores, he intends to use this year's scores 
in part to judge the performance of teachers, principals and superintendents. 
Moreover, the state will use the scores to determine whether a school 
is failing _ the dreaded scarlet ``SURR,'' for Schools Under Registration 
Review _ a designation that can lead to the transfers of teachers 
and administrators. Some public middle schools intend to use the scores 
as criteria for admission. To Peter W. Cookson, a professor of education 
at Teachers College at Columbia University and the author of ``A Parent's 
Guide to Standardized Tests in School'' (Learning Express), the state 
has overreached in asking 9- and 10-year-olds to sit for three days 
of such ``high stakes testing.'' ``It's a mismatch between what some 
adults imagine education ought to be _ this sort of corporatist, bottom-line, 
quantifiable outcome _ and any real understanding of what kids need 
in their developmental life,'' Cookson said. Told by a reporter about 
the concerns of Davon, Elizabeth and Patrick, the state education 
commissioner, Richard P. Mills, said he was pained. ``If I could,'' 
he said, ``I would reach into every classroom and tell the children 
not to be anxious about this. The early results this year will be 
much lower than we would first want. It's a much harder test, and 
it is intended to be.'' But he said he had no doubt they were up to 
the task. ``They are going to need the knowledge and skills tested 
here,'' he said. ``We are going to have to be patient but also consistent 
in our expectation that they actually rise to this level of performance.'' 
None of this has been lost on Sacharoff, who has been teaching fourth 
grade for seven years at P.S. 46, a red-brick schoolhouse surrounded 
by neat red-brick-and-aluminum two-family homes. Though the school 
_ many of whose students are recent immigrants from China, Korea, 
Japan and South America _ ranked 25th in the city on last year's reading 
test, with 84 percent of its students at or above grade level, Sacharoff 
and the school's new principal, JoAnn Consentino, are taking nothing 
for granted. She said she has told her students the test would assess 
skills they work on every day: distinguishing fact from fiction, putting 
the events or ideas of a story into sequence, inferring the writer's 
meaning. On Monday, during a one-hour lesson on note taking, the section 
of the test that Sacharoff's students have found most foreign, the 
teacher did not refer to the exam. But she didn't have to, the students 
said later. They knew from her demeanor that they had serious work 
to do. ``Everyone show me their `listening posture,' '' Sacharoff 
instructed, and she was quickly greeted by the sound of metal-legged 
chairs scraping along tile, as the students pulled up to their varnished-wood 
desks. Then, in a drill closely matching what the students will be 
asked to do on the second day of the test, Sacharoff told her students 
to put their pencils away and listen. Instructing them to be careful 
to make eye contact with her, she read them a short story, ``Amos 
and Boris,'' about a mouse (Amos) who fell off a sailboat and was 
rescued by a whale (Boris), only to repay the favor years later when 
Boris became beached near Amos' home. After reading, Sacharoff asked 
her students to take notes, but using a specific format, first noting 
the events in the story that related to each character and then using 
those details to describe the personality traits of the whale and 
the mouse. In a clear script that should cause him little problem 
on the state test, Patrick noted that Amos was ``good hearted'' because 
``he was kind enough to save Boris' life.'' Elizabeth, who feared 
having sleepless nights next month, also performed well, suggesting 
that Amos was ``loyal'' because ``he kept his promise to Boris that 
he would be there when he needed him.'' Sacharoff was pleased with 
her students' performance and told them so, but in the teachers' lounge 
later, she said it was a struggle to allay their fears. ``I'm a nervous 
wreck,'' she said. ``I will take the results personally.'' 
</TEXT>
</DOC>