<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981222.0157 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Foie gras, plump, extraordinarily rich duck liver, is an expensive, 
elegant indulgence. It's also surprisingly versatile. I prepare it 
year-round, changing its accompaniments with the seasons. This summer, 
I paired slices of sauteed foie gras with roasted peaches and red-wine 
vinegar; in late fall, its partners were poached quinces and pomegranate 
sauce. And for New Year's Eve, I've created this dish of seared foie 
gras, roasted pears, honey, rosemary and aged balsamic vinegar. In 
almost all of my foie gras dishes, the warm liver is paired with sweet 
fruit and something tart or acidic. The acidity balances the liver's 
richness, and the fruit is a supportive companion to its subtle flavor 
and silky texture. When I chose roasted pears to go with the foie 
gras, I decided to bolster their sweetness with a touch of honey. 
The rosemary was added to pull the dish back to the savory side. The 
idea of using balsamic vinegar as the sauce just seemed natural: pears 
and balsamic vinegar are served together all over Italy, and I knew 
that the vinegar's complex sweet-sharp flavor would work well against 
the fatty liver. If you're a first-time foie gras cook, you're about 
to learn that foie gras is the ultimate fast food _ two minutes in 
the pan, and it's done. But for it to be done properly, the liver 
shouldn't be too cold when it goes into the pan; if it is, the outside 
will cook and the inside won't. To get the temperature right, slice 
the foie gras and keep it refrigerated until 15 minutes before you're 
ready to cook. Then, be certain that the pan is medium-hot and that 
the slices get only a minute of heat on each side. As long as you're 
going all out _ and serving foie gras is going all out _ I urge you 
to try to finish this dish with a great authentic aged balsamic vinegar 
from Modena, Italy. (At my restaurant, I use rare 25-year-old balsamic, 
although a fine 12-year-old, still rare and expensive at $75 for six 
ounces, will give you the depth and layers of flavor this dish deserves.) 
But if your balsamic vinegar isn't the best, don't give up. Just concentrate 
the flavor by boiling it down by half, then drizzle it over the foie 
gras, and head for the table. SEARED FOIE GRAS WITH CARAMELIZED PEARS 
AND BALSAMIC VINEGAR Time: 45 minutes 2 tablespoons grape-seed or 
canola oil 3 large firm Bosc pears, peeled, halved and cored { cup 
honey 3 3-inch sprigs fresh rosemary, each sprig cut into 3 pieces 
\ cup port, preferably white port 1 fresh foie gras (see note), very 
well chilled Coarse salt and freshly ground white pepper 2 tablespoons 
aged balsamic vinegar 6 sprigs fresh thyme 6 sprigs fresh chervil. 
1. Remove the foie gras from the refrigerator 15 minutes before cooking. 
Preheat the oven to 450 degrees. Place a large oven-proof saute pan 
over medium-high heat, and add the oil. When it is hot but not smoking, 
add the pears. Immediately transfer the pan to the oven. Roast the 
pears, turning often, until they begin to caramelize, about 10 minutes. 
Stir in the honey and rosemary, and continue to roast until the pears 
are golden and caramelized on all sides, 6 to 8 minutes more. 2. Transfer 
the pan to the stove top over medium heat, and add the port. Stir 
briefly to scrape the bottom of the pan, and coat the pears with the 
syrupy mixture. Turn the pears into a colander and discard the rosemary 
and whatever cooking liquids have drained from the pears. Keep the 
pears warm until serving time. 3. Using your hands, carefully separate 
the two lobes of the foie gras. If there is any fat at the separation 
point, trim and discard it. Warm the blade of a sharp, thin knife 
in hot water. Dry the blade, and cut each lobe of foie gras crosswise 
into 1-inch-thick slices. Keep the blade warm as you work, dipping 
it again if necessary. (The foie gras may be sliced ahead of time, 
the slices then wrapped airtight and refrigerated.) 4. Heat a large 
nonstick saute pan over medium-high heat. Season each slice of foie 
gras with salt and pepper, and working quickly, slip the slices into 
the pan. If necessary, work in batches; do not overcrowd the pan. 
Saute the slices for 1 minute, then turn and saute 1 minute more. 
5. To serve, arrange one pear half in the center of each of six warm 
plates. Top each half with slices of foie gras, and drizzle with about 
a teaspoon of balsamic vinegar. Garnish each plate with a sprig of 
thyme and a sprig of chervil; serve immediately. Yield: 6 servings. 
Note: Fresh foie gras is available by mail order for $48.60 a pound 
from D'Artagnan; (800) 327-8246. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>