<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981222.0203 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
In this small town in eastern Angola, there is little doubt that a 
war that was dormant for nearly four years has begun again. The refugees 
from the countryside have been streaming in for months now, huddling 
around their smoky coal stoves in the crumbling, leaky sports stadium, 
in a former school building, in the abandoned railway station. They 
are by the river, too, where thousands including Lino Paulino have 
managed to build small grass huts to crawl into during this rainy 
season. Paulino, 67, said he came here after rebels of the National 
Union for the Total Independence of Angola invaded his village six 
weeks ago. Because he was the village leader, he said, the rebels 
stripped him and tied him to a tree. Then, he said, they forced his 
wives to strip and paraded them before their neighbors, saying these 
were women ``who had given birth to government supporters.'' In a 
few terrifying hours they beat others who resisted their will, took 
the food and supplies they wanted and kidnapped 15 youngsters to turn 
them into soldiers. The peace treaty that gave Angola, a country rich 
in diamond and oil deposits, its longest cease-fire in 30 years is 
in shambles. Since June the Unita rebel forces have retaken more than 
half the countryside, engaging the Angolan Army in hundreds of places 
and flushing more than 200,000 Angolans from their villages. The fiercest 
fighting came this month, when the government decided to attack two 
rebel strongholds, bombing the central towns of Andulo and Bailundo 
for three days. The attacks, however, underestimated Unita's strength 
and the army was pushed back, United Nations officials say. They added 
that Unita then laid siege to two much larger government-controlled 
cities in the central highlands, Huambo and Kuito. It downed a government 
transport plane and shelled Kuito by night and attacked the town of 
Malanje to the north. The most recent peace effort in Angola, the 
second attempt this decade to bring an end to a long and bloody war, 
has already cost the United Nations more than $1 billion. Earlier 
this year many thought it was almost complete and the United Nations 
was scaling down its presence here. Despite frequent delays, most 
of the requirements of the 1994 agreement, known as the Lusaka Protocol, 
had been achieved, at least on paper. But analysts now say that key 
provisions of the pact, including the disbanding of Unita troops, 
never really occurred. Of the 71,000 Unita soldiers who reported to 
demobilization camps, about half simply left a few months later. Of 
those who remained, many were too old or too young to have ever been 
guerrillas and were clearly sent just to collect the tools, food and 
cash that demobilized soldiers were entitled to. In addition, few 
weapons were collected. Though the accord said all demobilized soldiers 
were supposed to turn in a working weapon, more than half brought 
nothing and others brought only broken weapons. Few large weapons 
and no telecommunications equipment were ever seen. But the United 
Nations and the three countries shepherding the process _ the United 
States, Russia and Portugal, the former colonial power _ turned a 
blind eye. Peace began breaking down when the government started taking 
over the administration of former Unita areas, installing local governments 
and police officers, many of whom began a campaign against Unita supporters, 
arresting, beating and sometimes killing them. Unita began retaliating 
and hostilities grew. One factor that no doubt contributed to the 
decline of the peace effort was the death of its overseer, the U.N. 
special envoy Alioune Blondin Beye, who was killed in a plane crash 
in June. It took months to replace him. Also complicating matters 
has been instability nearby. Angola sent troops to intervene in civil 
wars in Congo Republic and Congo, the former Zaire. Some analysts 
say that gave the government delusions of grandeur and diverted its 
attention from its own problems. Diplomats in Angola and military 
analysts in South Africa say that the government has brought thousands 
of troops home in the last few weeks. In Luena, once a major agricultural 
center but now a collection of bullet-pocked houses and overgrown 
weeds, the fear is palpable. Every time a plane lands on the potholed 
runway, dozens of residents gather with their luggage hoping to bribe 
their way out of town when the plane takes off again. A recent effort 
to distribute food to the refugees was a tense affair. Fights broke 
out constantly as mothers squabbled over whose turn it was and the 
amounts being handed out. Police officers flailed with sticks and 
waved machine guns to drive them back. Most were afraid that the town 
would be invaded soon and that aid workers would be evacuated. Dozens 
of children hovered, clutching tin cans, looking for chances to race 
in and steal handfuls of salt or grain. When a bit of corn spilled 
on the grass, they fell to the ground scrambling for every kernel 
until the police whipped them. One boy, perhaps 7 years old, who managed 
to steal a cup full of grain was shot at by three officers, but escaped 
across a field. ``People are worried that this is it _ they won't 
get more,'' Maria Flynn of the World Food Program said. ``That's why 
it is so difficult.'' At night, gunshots ring out all over the town. 
Last week government soldiers drove through the streets in trucks 
rounding up young men of fighting age and taking them to the airport. 
Witnesses said that sobbing, screaming mothers and wives followed 
behind, begging for information about where their men were going. 
Some in the countryside see Angola's capital, Luanda, as a haven. 
In the last week more than 1,200 families arrived at the airport from 
Kuito alone. Aid workers said that among the refugees were 60 unaccompanied 
children, some as young as 4, with no relatives in Luanda. Their parents 
had decided that they had a better chance to survive alone in the 
capital than in Kuito. For the time being, they are in orphanages. 
But fear runs high in Luanda, too. The government has also been rounding 
up young men in the miles of slums that surround this decrepit city, 
where electricity and water are erratic and police officers known 
as ninjas patrol in groups of a dozen packed into the back of small 
pick-up trucks, their machine guns at the ready. Travel agencies are 
flooded with families trying to get their children, particularly army-age 
boys, out of the country. Most pay bribes of more than $300, a fortune 
to many Angolan, for exit visas. Information about the fighting is 
sketchy. Military hospitals are off-limits and the government shuts 
down the airports whenever it lands its planes. It has also been running 
a propaganda campaign. Government officials have lashed out at the 
United Nations, accusing it of failing to disarm Unita. It excuses 
its recent military setbacks by saying that Unita has sophisticated 
weaponry. It also accuses Unita of restarting the war, saying it wanted 
a showy victory in time for anniversary celebrations of Unita's founding 
on Dec. 25. But U.N. officials say the government began the latest 
wave of fighting. Political analysts say Angola's president, Jose 
Eduardo dos Santos, is having difficulties with his own party and 
wanted to capture Andulo and Bailundo in time to impress the yearly 
party congress convening Dec. 4. Dos Santos has been facing criticism 
because after nearly four years of relative peace, and despite huge 
oil revenues, his government has accomplished very little. Squalid 
hospitals run short of drugs, schools do not function and prisoners 
die of starvation in jails. Angola gained its independence from Portugal 
in 1975 after 14 years of fighting. No sooner had the Portuguese left 
than a civil war began, fueled by the Cold War. On one side was dos 
Santos' party, the Marxist Popular Movement for the Liberation of 
Angola, backed by the Russians and the Cubans. On the other was Unita, 
headed by Jonas Savimbi, part anti-Communist, part personality cult, 
supported by the United States and South Africa. In 1992 a peace treaty 
was brokered and elections held. However, when Savimbi lost, he quickly 
went back to war. On the verge of defeat, he agreed to a new peace 
treaty in 1994. Although the United Nations has a new representative 
in place, Issa Diallo, it is unclear whether the peace effort can 
be put back together again. In September the government cut off all 
negotiations with Savimbi, and it has refused to let Diallo meet with 
him. Diallo says there is hope because neither side has completely 
rejected the Lusaka Protocol. But others say talks have all but collapsed. 
``There really is very little going on,'' said one diplomat close 
to the negotiations. ``The question is whether we can get it going 
again. But right now there is very little talking going on.'' Some 
analysts say that the only real incentive to peace is the understanding 
by both sides that neither can annihilate the other. Unita's guerrillas 
can take ground, but cannot hold it. The government forces are said 
to be underpaid, undertrained and far from enthusiastic. Among the 
refugees in Luena it is hard to find anyone who understands what the 
war is about or cares who wins, as long as it stops. ``I cannot explain 
it,'' said Rita Anita, 26, who was dressed in rags and nursing a rash 
on her face. ``The war was going on when I was born.'' 
</TEXT>
</DOC>