<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981222.0259 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
When state legislators in North Carolina were debating charter schools 
two years ago, some feared a re-emergence of the white-flight academies 
that had sprouted in the South a generation earlier in response to 
school desegregation. So lawmakers threw in a clause requiring the 
schools to ``reasonably reflect'' the demographics of the school districts 
they serve. Today, at least 22 of the state's 60 charter schools appear 
to violate the diversity clause, according to estimates, but for reasons 
no one had expected. All but one are more than 85 percent black, populated 
mostly by children whose parents wanted to flee failing schools and 
enroll them in small academies that have unusual freedom to pick their 
own curriculums and staffs, bypassing local bureaucracies. Now, in 
a debate that reflects the national divisions over charter schools, 
the teachers union and some legislators, including a number of members 
of the black caucus in the North Carolina Legislature, are calling 
for the schools to diversify within a year or be closed, while Republicans 
in the Legislature have strongly backed them as an alternative to 
the school bureaucracies. The heated debate places the ideals of parental 
choice against the quest for diversity in public schools. ``It's going 
to be a real tightrope for us to walk to be true to the charter school 
movement and at the same time not re-segregate the schools,'' said 
Mike Fedewa, chairman of the North Carolina Advisory Commission on 
Charter Schools. Around the nation, nearly two-thirds of the states 
have permitted charter schools, but the laws governing them vary widely. 
Some states give control to local school districts; others, most recently 
New York, allow independent agencies to grant charters, bypassing 
local districts and in some cases, local union rules. The New York 
legislation passed last week and would permit up to 100 charter schools 
to begin opening in fall of 2000. Thirteen of 34 charter schools that 
opened in the state in 1997 were disproportionately black, compared 
with their districts, according to the Office of Charter Schools in 
North Carolina. The state Board of Education has not released figures 
for the current year, but the nonprofit North Carolina Education Reform 
Foundation, which has helped to start charter schools, says at least 
nine of the 26 schools that opened this year violate the diversity 
clause. North Carolina passed legislation permitting charter schools 
two years ago, when Republicans controlled the General Assembly. But 
the last election brought Democrats to power, and this energized calls 
to force schools to comply strictly with the diversity clause. ``I 
don't want my tax dollars to pay for an all-white system or an all-black 
system,'' said Rep. Mickey Michaux, a Democrat. ``My whole belief 
is the only way you are going to have racial harmony in this country 
is for people to know each other, and schools are a means to do that.'' 
In fact, the politically potent state teachers union plans to push 
the Legislature to force the State Board of Education to close schools 
that remain segregated. ``They knew the laws when they opened,'' said 
John Wilson, executive director of the North Carolina Association 
of Educators, which is affiliated with the National Education Association. 
``They let the whole issue of diversity play a minimal role in their 
values. In North Carolina, we have worked very hard to try to have 
integrated schools and they have used charter schools to undermine 
what we have done.'' The national association, which represents more 
than 2 million teachers and other school personnel, has expressed 
reservations about charter schools nationwide. The debate has produced 
unusual alliances. The Healthy Start Academy in Durham, a charter 
school that is 99 percent black, has joined forces with the North 
Carolina Foundation for Individual Rights, a conservative organization 
that has challenged affirmative action in the state's public colleges. 
Any individual or organization in North Carolina can apply for a charter. 
Charter schools, which are now legal in 34 states, receive state financing 
based on enrollment and are self-governed, which makes them free to 
adopt different curriculums or teaching methods. Most pick students 
by lottery. The schools in North Carolina have attracted widespread 
interest among African-Americans, which some politicians and educators 
say reflects the dissatisfaction among many blacks with traditional 
public schools. More than half of all students attending charter schools 
are African-American in a state where blacks make up 30 percent of 
public school enrollment. ``There were always discipline problems 
at the other schools,'' said Quinton Holmes, 51, who lives in Winston-Salem, 
N.C. Holmes is the legal guardian of his grandson, John, 10, a fourth-grader 
who had already been to four different schools before enrolling in 
the Carter G. Woodson Charter School last year. ``This is the first 
school where he has really been able to learn anything,'' Holmes said. 
Jo Anne Woodard, who is now executive director of the Sallie B. Howard 
charter school in Wilson, N.C., had never heard of charter schools 
until two years ago. She associated the term school choice with white 
Republicans. ``I didn't trust it at all,'' said Woodard, a Democrat. 
``I thought anything that came from Republicans couldn't lead to anything 
good for black folks.'' But when the state's charter-school law took 
effect, Woodard received a call from Vernon Robinson, a Republican 
city councilman in Winston-Salem, who directs the North Carolina Education 
Reform Foundation. Robinson, who is black, canvassed the state for 
potential sponsors of charter schools and has ushered 20, including 
Woodard, through the process. ``I'm not for charter schools, private 
schools or public schools, I'm for schools that work,'' said Robinson, 
who has also worked to help black churches start private schools. 
The State Board of Education has begun a study of state's charter 
schools on the diversity issue. ``The state board should take an aggressive 
position in saying to the schools they have a year to develop a proactive 
recruitment plan and to demonstrate their schools are open and diverse,'' 
said Wilson, who accused the state of ``dragging its feet'' on the 
issue. But critics say the state teachers union is using diversity 
as a means to undermine the charter schools, whose teachers have not 
flocked to join the association. ``There's no doubt in my mind that 
NCAE is using diversity to go after charter schools,'' said Kay Daly, 
a spokeswoman for the North Carolina Foundation for Individual Rights. 
But Wilson, the union leader, said the association supported charter 
schools that were diverse, citing the Explorers Middle School. The 
school, in downtown Raleigh, is conveniently near both predominantly 
white and black neighborhoods, and minorities make up 25 percent of 
its students. The school achieves the balance by maintaining two lists 
for its lottery, one for minority students and another for whites. 
``We first pull from our minority list and then we place the minority 
students who are not selected into the general pool,'' said Pam Hartley, 
executive director of the school. Charter schools that are in predominantly 
black neighborhoods are at a disadvantage in achieving diversity since 
few white parents want to send their children to schools in those 
areas, many educators say. ``I have been to white churches,'' Woodard 
said. ``I've been to shopping centers in white neighborhoods and did 
not get any applications.'' Healthy Start Academy has a multiracial 
board, a white principal and 30 white parents initially signed up 
for the lottery in initial stages of the application process last 
year. But when the school announced its location in a black neighborhood, 
all but two white applicants dropped out of the process. Roxane Premont, 
a board member whose daughter is one of two whites at Healthy Start, 
said she was committed, despite some awkward moments. ``I'm not going 
lie to you and say it does not test my comfort zone,'' she said. ``But 
I knew enough about the school to overcome any comfort level issues 
that I had.'' Her daughter, she said, gets more attention now than 
she did at her previous school. ``She's been to preschool in a predominantly 
white, middle-class school,'' Premont said. ``So I know and I have 
some basis to make comparisons. I do know as a matter of fact she's 
getting a better education and that's the bottom line for me right 
now.'' 
</TEXT>
</DOC>