<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981222.0333 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
An errant spacecraft that was to be the first to orbit an asteroid 
will instead fly past its intended target on Wednesday, but scientists 
said Tuesday that they still held hopes of completing the original 
mission in 2000. The robot spacecraft, called NEAR, for Near Earth 
Asteroid Rendezvous, is apparently healthy after a 27-hour blackout 
that began late Sunday after a series of rocket firings to move the 
craft toward an orbit of the asteroid 433 Eros. Engineers at the Johns 
Hopkins University Applied Physics Laboratory in Laurel, Md., which 
built the spacecraft and is managing the mission, said NEAR would 
fly past Eros at 1:43 p.m. ET on Wednesday, coming as close as 2,480 
miles. During the flyby, the craft is to photograph about 500 images 
and search for possible tiny moons orbiting the asteroid. Dr. Andrew 
Cheng, the project scientist, said it might still be possible for 
the spacecraft to enter orbit around Eros in May 2000, when orbits 
of the spacecraft and asteroid again coincide. Before then, engineers 
have to resolve problems associated with firing the craft's rocket 
engine. ``It appears our spacecraft has not yet used up all its lives,'' 
Cheng said. `We still have a good chance of getting into Eros orbit.'' 
The spacecraft was to have gone into orbit around Eros on Jan. 10, 
after a number of rocket burns to slow the craft so it could settle 
in around the asteroid. Eros is a potato-shaped object measuring 25 
miles by 9 miles by 8.8 miles. No spacecraft has ever orbited an object 
so small. Plans called for the spacecraft to survey the asteroid with 
its six instruments, determining things like its mass, chemical composition 
and density. After about a year, the craft was to have descended into 
orbits so low it would hover just a few hundred feet above the surface. 
Dr. Robert Farquhar, a Johns Hopkins University scientist and the 
mission manager, said at a briefing last week that researchers hoped 
to end the mission with a landing, preceded by a series of tricky 
maneuvers in which the craft would graze the surface and then pop 
back up. ``It should be possible to land softly and then go back up 
again,'' Farquhar said. ``We want to sort of test the waters.'' Scientists 
want to learn more about asteroids because they may contain material 
from which the solar system was formed more than 4 billion years ago. 
In addition, they said, some asteroids may be pieces of larger bodies 
or planets that formed early in the solar system's history and later 
collided with other objects and broke apart. Understanding the nature 
of asteroids also is important because they occasionally collide with 
Earth, sometimes with disastrous effects. An asteroid six miles across 
is thought by many to have smashed into Earth 65 million years ago, 
causing the extinction of the dinosaurs and thousands of other species. 
To protect Earth in the future, scientists say people need to know 
the density and composition of asteroids so they can determine how 
to shatter or divert them with explosives or other means. The spacecraft 
was launched in February 1996. Last June, the craft flew within 753 
miles of another asteroid, Mathilde. It took 500 photographs and made 
measurements that determined that Mathilde was a low-density object, 
probably what some astronomers described as a ``pile of rubble,'' 
instead of a solid piece of rock. The spacecraft's problems arose 
on Sunday when its main engine fired for the first time since July 
1997, while it was 220 million miles from Earth. Engineers said the 
engine briefly exceeded its thrust tolerance and shut down. Less than 
a minute later, the spacecraft lost its orientation because of a software 
problem and began tumbling. The craft then went into a ``safe mode,'' 
with most of its instruments shut down, and kept its solar power panels 
directed toward the Sun while it awaited orders. NASA then ordered 
its Deep Space Network of giant radio antennas to sweep the sky for 
the spacecraft's faint signal, and NEAR was finally located on Monday 
night. Weary project engineers, elated that the spacecraft was safe 
and had not blown up, re-established communication and were able to 
download enough data Tuesday to diagnose the problems and look for 
alternative ways to complete the mission. Helen Worth, a program spokeswoman, 
said the craft appeared to be fully functional and that scientists 
and engineers were optimistic about achieving the program's goals. 
NEAR is one of the first NASA interplanetary spacecraft built under 
its new Discovery Program, which emphasizes ``cheaper, faster, better'' 
ways of exploring the universe. The spacecraft cost $129 million to 
build, and the mission has so far stayed within its planned budget 
of $211.5 million. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>