<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981222.0231 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
An ambitious U.S. effort to help train and equip Mexico's armed forces 
to pursue drug smugglers is in a shambles, officials of both countries 
say, souring U.S. relations with an ally that Washington has worked 
intensely to court. Three years after the Pentagon began donating 
dozens of helicopters to the Mexican army and training hundreds of 
Mexican soldiers in the United States, officials have seen only a 
handful of the anti-drug operations intended in the program. The helicopter 
fleet has been grounded by mechanical problems, and angry Mexican 
generals are sharply cutting the number of troops they will send to 
train. According to U.S. intelligence reports, the drug flights that 
the plan was designed to combat have virtually ceased. But that appears 
to be because the traffickers turned to smuggling schemes like containerized 
shipping before the enforcement strategy ever got off the ground. 
The flow of drugs into the United States has continued apace. Tensions 
over the failed strategy, the faltering equipment and continuing reports 
of Mexican military corruption have grown serious enough, U.S. officials 
said, that they have asked Mexico's commanding generals to reassess 
the program altogether. ``The question, basically, is: How do we get 
out of this box?'' a Clinton administration official said. ``We will 
talk about the plan that they come up with, and we will talk about 
whether we want to support that plan.'' The conflict underscores the 
competing agendas that the Pentagon and the CIA have encountered in 
Latin America as they have tried to use the fight against international 
drug traffickers to remake their old alliances with military forces 
in the region. Like its counterparts in Colombia and Peru _ and like 
the Pentagon itself _ the Mexican military seized on the drug fight 
as a mission of growing importance and as a way to protect its budgets 
after the Cold War. But the Mexican commanders have pursued the effort 
with secrecy and independence, raising questions about whether the 
United States is strengthening powerful and sometimes autonomous military 
forces at the expense of civilian institutions like the courts and 
the police. ``The answer here is that there is no silver bullet,'' 
said Jan Lodal, who, until his recent retirement as the principal 
deputy undersecretary of defense for policy, oversaw the Pentagon's 
anti-drug cooperation with Mexico. ``You are going to have to build 
an effective civilian law-enforcement structure, and you're going 
to have to build it from the ground up.'' Administration officials 
contend that despite the tensions, the United States' relationship 
with the Mexican armed forces is better than it was several years 
ago. They say that the CIA's collaboration with a small drug-intelligence 
unit of the Mexican army, while largely secret, has been reasonably 
successful. And they emphasize that they turned to the Mexican military 
only after President Ernesto Zedillo did so himself, giving his generals 
a new public security role because the corrupting influence of the 
drug trade had so paralyzed the federal police. Clinton administration 
officials are still quick to say any long-term solution to Mexico's 
criminal-justice problems must focus on civilian institutions. But 
they also continue to spend considerably more on anti-drug training 
for the military than they have on court officers and the police, 
and they have largely approved as the Mexican armed forces have steadily 
expanded their influence over a range of law-enforcement programs. 
``From the start, all of us have believed that if you don't have a 
judicial system and a police force that are responsive to the elected 
civilian leadership, you're in trouble,'' the White House drug policy 
director, Gen. Barry McCaffrey, said in an interview. But he added, 
``You don't produce the Swiss police in a year.'' U.S. officials said 
that when they first offered to support the Mexican military's drug-enforcement 
efforts in early 1995, they imagined a narrower role. Colombian drug 
traffickers had begun flying huge loads of cocaine into Mexico on 
stripped-down passenger jets, easily outrunning Mexican police aircraft, 
and U.S. officials started by asking Mexican commanders to use their 
small fleet of F-5 fighter jets to intercept the smugglers. The F-5 
plan was unsuccessful, but Pentagon officials soon proposed a more 
elaborate one. That October, when William Perry became the first defense 
secretary to visit Mexico in years, Mexican generals agreed to begin 
U.S. training for special-forces troops that would chase traffickers 
to clandestine air strips and remote safe houses. To transport the 
soldiers on their raids, the Pentagon eventually donated 73 aging 
UH-1H helicopters, part of an equipment transfer worth about $58 million. 
The United States also gave Mexico's air force four C-26 surveillance 
planes and sold the Mexican navy two Knox-class frigates. Finally, 
the two militaries agreed to consider further cooperation in areas 
like disaster relief, education and force modernization. Since late 
1995, however, U.S. officials say they have not detected a single 
jetload of cocaine flying into Mexico. In fact, they say, drug flights 
into Mexico have stopped altogether as the traffickers have shifted 
to maritime shipments through the Gulf of Mexico, into the Yucatan 
peninsula and up the Pacific coast, and to overland transportation, 
mainly by truck. With no planes to chase, Mexican commanders have 
used the helicopters for everything from troop transport to spraying 
herbicides on drug crops. But the Vietnam-era aircraft have been plagued 
by mechanical problems and a lack of spare parts, and Mexico announced 
in March that it would ground the entire fleet after the U.S. Army 
found engine problems in all the UH-1H models. Mexican officials have 
complained privately that they were given scrap. Pentagon officials 
say the problems stem from excessive and improper use of the helicopters 
by the Mexican army. Mexican officials also complain that the frigates 
they bought two years ago for $7 million have been unusable until 
recently because they were delivered without needed equipment. A long-promised 
system set up to share the Pentagon's drug intelligence directly with 
the Mexican military has been kept off-line because of lingering U.S. 
fears that sources of the information might be compromised. For their 
part, Pentagon officials have questioned the Mexican army's use of 
the special-forces troops they helped to design and train. In September, 
the attorney general's office announced the arrest of nine special-forces 
soldiers after an investigation linked them to alien-smuggling and 
other crimes. While their unit was not trained in the United States, 
U.S. officials were nonetheless critical of its mission: they had 
been seconded to the federal drug-enforcement police, to check luggage 
at the Mexico City airport. ``That's certainly not what we're training 
them for,'' a Pentagon official said. Pentagon officials say that 
there is no practical way they can monitor how Mexican troops trained 
by the United States are deployed, although such a plan has been required 
in Colombia to try to keep U.S. aid and training from going to counterinsurgency 
troops or human rights violators. But the greatest frustration for 
U.S. officials may be the way that Mexican commanders have responded 
to the difficulties in the program and the public scrutiny that has 
come with it. Saying they do not need or can no longer afford training 
for many of the helicopter mechanics, sailors and special-forces troops 
they had planned to send to U.S. bases, Mexican military officials 
have said they will cut the flow of troops by about 40 percent over 
the next year. Mexico's only cost for the program is a meal allowance 
for each soldier of $25 a day, U.S. officials said. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>