<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981222.0370 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
If the New York Giants had one more victory today, they would be headed 
to Philadelphia this weekend needing only a victory for a playoff 
berth, and they would not need help from another team to earn it. 
In late December, when you've won four of your last five games, one 
victory somewhere back in September or October seems so simple for 
these Giants, so perfectly reasonable. And the fact is, it could have 
been that simple. The Giants' uneven season, which could still be 
a playoff season, lost its way as a winning season _ which it cannot 
be _ in the second week, at the Oakland-Alameda County Coliseum. Sometimes 
all the words written and spoken about a team during the preseason 
actually turn out to be accurate, and the one thing said repeatedly 
about the 1998 Giants was that they needed to stockpile victories 
early in the season because their late-season schedule was so onerous. 
As it turns out, the Giants defeated Denver and Kansas City at home 
this month, which few would have predicted. But those victories only 
nullified the effects of losses that weren't expected: at Washington 
and at home to Dallas. No, the day the Giants season turned sour was 
Sept. 13 at Oakland. It has taken three months for the team to recover. 
You could even say the season went sour on the first play from scrimmage 
at Oakland when Raiders running back Napoleon Kaufman sliced 80 yards 
through a sleeping Giants defense for a demoralizing touchdown. The 
Giants lost the game, 20-17, and if the Giants don't make the playoffs, 
that's the game and that's the play that kept them out. Sure the Raiders 
turned out to be better than most expected, but on the second weekend 
of the season, the Giants didn't believe that, neither did the Raiders, 
and most of all, neither did their less than enthusiastic following 
in the Bay Area. That day in Oakland should have been a huge mismatch. 
The Giants, a defending division champion, were 1-0 after a rousing 
opening-day victory over the Redskins, whom people feared at the time. 
The Raiders had won four games the year before, and in their season 
opener the week before, they were embarrassed on national television 
by Kansas City. The Raiders were a troubled lot. It's true the Giants 
had to travel to the West Coast to play the Raiders, but there was 
no home-field advantage on game day for the Raiders. Only 40,050 fans 
showed up and most of them seemed disinterested, numbed by three successive 
nonwinning Raiders seasons. A mature team bent on making a return 
to the playoffs takes the Raiders out of that game early, preying 
on the Raiders' self-doubts and sending the few home fans back to 
their tailgate parties in the parking lot. The Giants did the opposite. 
Three Giants missed the chance to tackle Kaufman on the first play. 
Tackling is effort and concentration. The Giants lacked both on that 
vital first play. The Raiders suddenly believed, the crowd got into 
the game. Sure, the Giants rallied in the game and an official's call 
probably cost the Giants three points, but the moment to take over 
that game was lost early. The distracted Giants committed 15 penalties, 
and on the Raiders' game-winning drive in the fourth quarter, the 
Giants defense _ one of the league's best in 1997 _ gave up a first 
down on a third-and-26. In the whim and whimsy of a road game in the 
National Football League, the Giants fell three points short. They 
were 1-1 instead of 2-0. The Giants' slide got much worse from there, 
but that wasn't entirely unexpected. The Giants, as predicted, have 
played one of the toughest schedules in the league this year. The 
cumulative record of their 1998 opponents is 99-81. But the game against 
the Raiders, who have played an easy schedule this year and still 
won only eight games, could easily have been won. The Giants had every 
mental edge that day but lacked the maturity to use it. It's always 
easy to look back and pick out one game that could have turned a season, 
and other people might point to last month's defeat at Washington 
as equally crucial. But there was something about the Giants' play 
in Oakland that day that said something about where they were headed. 
And one can't help but recall a statement from Giants defensive end 
Michael Strahan in the minutes following the Raiders game. Strahan 
is the team's most dependable player and its most perceptive spokesman. 
``Our problem is that we're not as good as we think we are,'' Strahan 
said. ``We better wake up to that fact before it's too late. Today's 
game is a great example of looking at the schedule and thinking about 
the games you think you should win. ``That's the kind of wishful thinking 
that can come back to haunt you.'' 
</TEXT>
</DOC>