<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981222.0263 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Will the pope be on the euro? The question is hardly academic, for 
while the European Central Bank's directors gathered in Frankfurt, 
Germany, on Tuesday to discuss ranges for interest rates, European 
Union officials met in Brussels, Belgium, to figure out how to spread 
the new single currency into Europe's nooks and crannies and to distant 
holdovers from the days of imperial ambition. At issue on Tuesday 
were French-controlled islands _ Mayotte, in the Indian Ocean, with 
a French-speaking population upward of 105,000, and St. Pierre and 
Miquelon, rocky outcroppings off Newfoundland, population 6,900, mainly 
fishermen and their families. Technically, the islands are not part 
of the European Union, but the officials proposed that when France 
adopts the euro in January, they should be allowed to do likewise. 
Trickier was the question discussed on Monday regarding three tiny 
independent lands _ Monaco, the principality on the French Mediterranean 
that is twice the size of Hoboken, N.J.; San Marino, a republic in 
central Italy whose area is half that of Boston, and the Vatican, 
the papal domain whose 108.7 acres on the western outskirts of Rome 
make it an eighth the size of Central Park. European officials dealing 
with the euro have long puzzled about how to treat these ministates. 
Under an agreement with the French central bank, Monaco has long minted 
francs for use on its territory. Similarly, San Marino and the Vatican 
use Italian lire and mint lire coins, though not notes, including 
Vatican coins with the image of the pope. Unlike Monaco's francs, 
which are not legal tender in France, the lire of San Marino and the 
Vatican are good throughout Italy. But in 2002, when euro notes and 
coins are introduced, lire and francs will disappear, and European 
officials in Brussels must decide whether to allow these three states 
to adopt the euro, even though they do not belong to the European 
Union. Moreover, since the lire of San Marino and the Vatican are 
now good throughout Italy, should their euro coinage be allowed to 
circulate in the future in all 11 euro countries? The question got 
sticky in October when French officials suggested that Paris looked 
askance at having coins with the image of the pope as legal tender 
in France. On Monday, European Union officials proposed to freeze 
the status quo. Thus, Monaco, San Marino and the Vatican would use 
the euro, though without the right to issue their own money, which 
would have to be done by France and Italy, albeit with distinct local 
designs. As now, Monacan francs and San Marino and Vatican lire would 
only be accepted in Monaco and Italy, respectively. The 15 European 
finance ministers are expected to confirm the proposal at a meeting 
on Dec. 31. So will the pope show up on the euro? Joaquin Navarro 
Valls, his spokesman, was evasive. Italian newspapers reported that 
perhaps the Vatican would have to make do with neutral themes, like 
images of St. Peter's Basilica, on future coins. ``We will have to 
negotiate all the details of this new reality,'' Navarro Valls said. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>