<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981222.0149 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
For two decades and more, Mats and Dafne Engstrom have been working 
on a project that he compares to making paper by planting a forest. 
Their goal is to produce caviar comparable to that from the Caspian 
Sea _ specifically the variety known as osetra _ from the eggs of 
farm-raised California sturgeon. The process works well, and the need 
is evident given the critical problems with supplies from Russia. 
The difficulty is that it takes the slow-growing sturgeon, the descendants 
of wild fish taken from the Sacramento River, a very long time to 
reach an age when they produce roe. While they watched and waited, 
the Engstroms have for several years been selling small quantities 
of California caviar, which they made from other people's farm-bred 
sturgeon, to restaurants like Charlie Trotter's in Chicago and Aqua 
in San Francisco. The boys in the back room are thrilled. ``The Russian 
osetra has a slightly more pronounced and concentrated flavor,'' said 
Michael Mina, the chef at Aqua. ``The texture may be a tiny bit better, 
too, but the differences are very slight. And there are two huge advantages 
to the California product: it is affordable and consistent, whereas 
Russian caviar is either very unreliable these days or very expensive.'' 
Trotter's verdict: ``Perhaps not quite as opulent, but it has a lovely 
creaminess and headiness, and the reliability is vastly superior.'' 
Now, after endless experiments and adventures, and not a few failures, 
the Engstroms, both Swedish-born American citizens, are on the verge 
of producing the stuff in quantity at a tank farm they have almost 
completed in the wilds of northeastern California. A second company, 
Stolt Sea Farms, part of an international group, is in the same business, 
already selling caviar under the brand name Sterling. It grew out 
of a firm the Engstroms started but lost after a series of economic 
reverses, and in which, maybe for sentimental reasons, they retain 
a tiny holding. ``We keep swimming upstream,'' said Engstrom, whose 
whimsical good humor survived both his years at the Harvard Business 
School and a fire a few years back that nearly wiped him out. ``By 
the start of the caviar harvesting season in February of next year, 
we will be ready to take about one ton of caviar from our female sturgeon.'' 
The timing could hardly be better. The United States is cut off from 
Iranian caviar for political reasons, and quality control has collapsed 
in Russia and the other former Soviet republics bordering the Caspian. 
After indicting a New York company called Gino International last 
week for illicitly importing caviar from Poland, the federal government 
charged that half the caviar brought here is mislabeled, old, previously 
frozen or contaminated. Worse, Caspian sturgeon, many caught by impoverished 
peasants, are being killed for food long before they can produce the 
lucrative roe. The Engstroms' California product, which should be 
on sale to the public sometime next year at prices a bit lower than 
its Russian counterpart, comes from a fish whose biological name, 
Acipenser transmontanus, betrays its close relationship to Caspian 
osetra, which is Acipenser gueldenstaedtii. It will carry the brand 
name Tsar Nicoulai, like their caviar from the Amur River in China 
and from Russia. ``We've lived with these fish for 20 years, a third 
of our lives,'' Mrs. Engstrom said. ``It's been a very long haul. 
If you knew all the hopes and fears and tears ...'' The beluga from 
the Caspian, generally considered the ne plus ultra of the caviar 
world, comes from a fish called Huso huso; the Amur River caviar, 
marketed as giant beluga, comes from a close cousin called Huso dauricus. 
But many prefer osetra for its firmness and a slight nuttiness of 
flavor. America's lakes and rivers, including the Hudson, once teemed 
with sturgeon, whose roe was salted and sold (or in some saloons in 
San Francisco, given away). But by 1910, overfishing had done its 
ruinous work. In California, commercial fishing for the white sturgeon 
in the Sacramento River, which flows into San Francisco Bay, was outlawed 
in 1917. State authorities allow the capture of a few wild fish each 
spring. These are taken into hatcheries where the eggs and milt are 
combined, yielding tens of thousands of fingerlings. To induce spawning, 
the sturgeon are injected with a hormone taken from a carp's pituitary 
gland. A Caesarean section is performed, the eggs are removed and 
the fish is sewn up and released back into the river or kept as a 
part of the brood stock. Sometimes a few fingerlings are returned 
to the wild, but most of them are kept for aquaculture. A Russian 
expert, Serge I. Doroshov, happened to arrive at the University of 
California campus at Davis, near Sacramento, just as the first sturgeon 
born in captivity were reaching maturity. As the director of the Aquaculture 
and Fisheries Program here, he did some of the pioneering work on 
how best to produce caviar from farmed fish. U.C. Davis, already known 
as the fountainhead of winemaking knowledge in the state, added another 
distinction. Engstrom, who is now 61, and his wife, now 60, had begun 
in aquaculture by raising crayfish for sale to Sweden, where they 
are a traditional late-summer delicacy. But it was a seasonal business, 
so the Engstroms hit upon importing caviar instead of exporting crayfish. 
Their company, California Sunshine Fine Foods, started importing from 
Russia. Then, one day, a fisherman in California mentioned to Engstrom 
that he caught sturgeon. He fed the roe to the family cats. Engstrom 
filed that tidbit away. The Engstroms set up a processing plant in 
China, in a site so remote that getting there required a two-day ride 
in an unheated train, a Jeep ride and a ferry crossing. They embarked 
on a Russian joint venture. At almost every turn, they faced double-dealing 
and theft, stonewalling apparatchiks and scheming bureaucrats. Caviar 
is big money. Everyone wants a taste. And overfishing began to deplete 
the fish that lay the golden eggs. ``The Russians are destroying their 
resource, and the Chinese are close to the same thing,'' Engstrom 
said. ``So after a while we decided that farmed fish were the only 
answer.'' Doroshov, a sprightly, gray-haired man with the grace of 
a ballet master, said he doubted whether there were more than a handful 
of beluga sturgeon left in the Caspian, owing to disease and to overfishing. 
Asked whether California caviar would ever measure up to the Russian 
original, he emphasized that sturgeon aquaculture was still in its 
formative stage, that much more time and money would be needed and 
that farmed fish like trout, tilapia and salmon never exactly matched 
wild fish in flavor. But he added: ``I don't see any reason from a 
scientific point of view that California caviar cannot very closely 
replicate Caspian caviar. And who is to say that we will have any 
Russian caviar left in a few years?'' In 1995, the Engstroms cured 
their first batch of 400 pounds of California caviar, adapting the 
techniques they had learned elsewhere. They salted the roe very lightly, 
mimicking the Russian process called malossol, which means ``little 
salt.'' The eggs came from fish raised by a Sacramento-area farmer, 
Ken Beer; by then, the Engstroms had lost their own original farm. 
Like a medieval alchemist intent on preserving his formulas from rivals, 
Engstrom is unwilling to disclose to outsiders the precise location 
of his big new operation, with 60 tanks, each holding 70,000 gallons 
of water, or precisely what techniques he plans to use there. But 
a small experimental tank farm near here, run by the university, gives 
a reasonable idea. The big, dark fish swim constantly in circles around 
tanks 4 feet deep and 20 feet in diameter, each filled with rapidly 
flowing water. It is recycled to nearby farmlands, not back into the 
tanks; when he tried that, Engstrom said, ``the fish hated it, and 
to spite us, refused to grow.'' Now, well-acclimated, the fish are 
fed 24 hours a day by mechanical devices that dispense brown pellets 
that resemble dog chow, physically and nutritionally. In the wild, 
many sturgeon take as much as 25 years before reproducing. But with 
warmer water temperatures _ Engstrom plans to use geothermal energy 
from hot springs _ and with a high-protein diet, the time can be cut 
to seven to nine years, he believes. It is an economically crucial 
point, because every batch of caviar costs the life of a female sturgeon, 
so a fingerling must be raised to maturity to replace it. The shorter 
the cycle, the cheaper. Sturgeon meat is delicious both fresh and 
smoked, and the Engstroms hope to make a dent in that market, too, 
which is now dominated by Atlantic sturgeon. The fish in the tanks 
here, about four to five feet long, weigh about 25 to 30 pounds. With 
barbels like catfish and five long, bony ridges called scutes along 
their backs, bellies and sides, the sturgeon resemble sharks. The 
two fish are not related biologically, but both of them have blunt 
noses, widely spaced eyes and skeletons made mostly of cartilage instead 
of bone. Why, I asked Erik F. Hallen Jr., who runs the experimental 
station, are the sturgeon called white when they are black? ``Sunburn,'' 
he said. They are shielded from the sun in the murky Sacramento River, 
but the tanks are open to the skies, and the sunlight turns their 
skins a much darker color. They are primitive fish; sturgeon fossils 
200 million years old have been uncovered. They are frightening looking; 
it is hard to imagine something as gastronomically aristocratic as 
caviar coming from their innards. But then truffles grow underground, 
on gnarled old tree roots. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>