<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981222.0245 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
The Federal Reserve voted Tuesday to hold interest rates steady, judging 
that three previous rate reductions this fall had given the economy 
a big enough kick to keep it growing at a healthy pace into the new 
year. The central bank's decision to shift monetary policy into neutral 
is the latest sign that the sense of crisis felt by economic policy-makers 
in the United States and around the world over the summer is easing. 
Although analysts still expect the American economy to slow substantially 
in 1999, perhaps enough to require further rate cuts next year, the 
nation's long expansion no longer appears to be in any immediate danger. 
Neither the impeachment of President Clinton nor the military attack 
on Iraq dented the confidence of either investors on Wall Street or 
shoppers in the malls. Growth in the current quarter appears robust. 
Fears of a credit squeeze in the bond market have abated. And while 
manufacturers and farmers continue to suffer from exports lost, as 
a result of the global financial turmoil of the last year and a half, 
the latest trade figures suggested that the worst may be past, even 
for them. ``When they reviewed all the factors _ the domestic economy, 
credit availability and the foreign situation _ it is noteworthy that 
the Fed concluded this time that those factors did not look as worrisome 
as they had looked,'' said Maury Harris, an economist at PaineWebber. 
``It's significant that in such a short period of time the world improved 
enough that they didn't feel the need to ease any further.'' Tuesday's 
decision leaves the federal funds target rate on overnight loans among 
banks at 4.75 percent and the discount rate on loans from the Fed 
system to banks at 4.5 percent. The decision to stand pat, after reducing 
the federal funds rate by three-quarters of a percentage point in 
three autumn rate cuts, had been widely anticipated by economists 
and investors, and it provoked little reaction on Wall Street. As 
usual, the Fed provided no details of its deliberations. The Dow Jones 
industrial average rose 55.61 points to close at 9,044.46. Bond prices 
and the dollar fell. Looking into 1999, the situation abroad remains 
unsettled at best, creating considerable uncertainty as to the outlook 
for the American economy and for monetary policy. Japan in particular 
has proved unable to reverse its long economic decline. Russia's debt 
crisis is intensifying. Emerging markets from Thailand to Brazil are 
still vulnerable to a return of the financial seizures that wounded 
their economies over the last year and a half. As a result, economists 
said, the Fed will be watching closely for any renewed threats to 
stability at home and abroad, and could well begin cutting rates again 
in the first half of 1999. With inflation dormant and oil prices low, 
the Fed will have considerable leeway to cut rates to keep economic 
growth from falling below the level most economists think it can sustain 
over the long run, roughly 2.5 percent. This year the economy is likely 
to grow at nearly 4 percent. ``The feeling of an uncontrolled spiral 
in international capital markets as well as in economies in Asia and 
Latin America has abated a good bit,'' said Stuart Hoffman, an economist 
at PNC Corp. Still, Hoffman said, there is a good chance that the 
Fed could cut rates again by spring. The policy-making Federal Open 
Market Committee is scheduled to meet next on Feb. 2 and Feb. 3, and 
then on March 30. ``The economy will be slowing,'' Hoffman said. ``The 
consumer inflation rate will remain low and be accompanied by continued 
declines in basic commodity prices. And there will still be some mildly 
unsettled conditions in financial markets.'' The Fed cut rates three 
times by a quarter of a percentage point between Sept. 29 and Nov. 
17, citing the potential impact on the United States of the financial 
problems that had battered economies from Thailand to Brazil. After 
its last rate cut, though, the Fed had signaled that it would probably 
take a time out, saying it expected financial conditions ``to be consistent 
with fostering sustained economic expansion.'' Since then most indicators 
have pointed toward faster economic growth than was anticipated a 
few months ago, when the financial markets were in turmoil and economists 
were beginning to predict the demise of a business expansion that 
is now almost eight years old. The strong stock market and solid wage 
gains have bolstered consumer confidence and spending, more than offsetting 
the weakness in manufacturing. Despite a wave of corporate layoff 
announcements, job growth has remained strong. ``Combined with the 
surprising narrowing in the trade deficit, a full accounting of the 
data thus far for the current quarter suggests that GDP is moving 
up in the range of 3 percent to 4 percent,'' economists at Salomon 
Smith Barney said in a recent report. But problems abroad _ including 
signs of economic weakness in Europe _ are likely to leave Fed policy-makers 
wary, the report said. ``Against this backdrop, the U.S. economy remains 
much more vulnerable than the latest consumer and external trade data 
imply,'' the report said. Given the economy's remarkable resilience 
and its recent history of defying predictions of an imminent slowdown, 
a few forecasters are even predicting that the Fed might have to raise 
rates during 1999 to pinch off growing inflationary pressures. But 
that view remains very much in the minority. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>