<DOC>
<DOCNO> PRI19981222.2000.2380 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Turn on the radio, and you'll hear those seasonal songs. Walk down 
the streets, and you'll see those Yuletide decorations. Shop in the 
stores, and you'll be tempted by those Christmas sales. No, we're 
not talking about America. We're talking about Christmas in Japan. 
THE WORLD's Lucy Craft has been sampling the spirit of the season 
in Tokyo. Christmas Eve. Taksudo Ramashda's romantic ballad about 
lovers spending the night together has the English words "Silent Night, 
Holy Night" in it, but, of course, Godliness isn't what he had in 
mind. Most Japanese view Christmas in a similar way, merely a fun 
celebration divorced from any religious underpinnings, an excuse to 
party. I remember one person sharing with me that her father father 
would always have this tree and would put the star on top of the tree. 
Father Donan Murray, Franciscan priest, has been in Japan for 40 years. 
And she says, "I always wondered what does that star mean," and, of 
course, her father didn't know what it meant either. It was just what 
you did. You got a tree, and you put a star on top of it. Christmas 
Eve can be a headache for priests like Father Donan. Midnight mass 
takes on the appearance of opening night at the World Series because 
going to church on December 24th has become a dating ritual for young 
Japanese couples. Some parishes, Father Donan says, have been forced 
to extreme measures. There are churches that beforehand kind of give 
out tickets to the Catholics so -- which would allow them entrance 
into the church. Otherwise, they couldn't get in because, if this 
did not take place, then the ones who belong to that church find themselves 
not able to get in -- into the church. Churches aren't the only mob 
scene this time of year. Kentucky Fried Chicken outlets are so besieged 
in mid-December, customers are urged to call in advance, probably 
the world's first and only fast-food restaurants that require reservations. 
Only a few decades ago, fried chicken was unknown in Japan. In fact, 
when Colonel Sanders launched here back in 1970, his product was a 
resounding dud. Then the company had an inspiration. It started advertising 
drumsticks as a traditional Christmas dish. The timing couldn't have 
been better, recalls spokeswoman Sulio Yukokawa. Cake makers imitated 
the KFC idea with their own special Christmas cakes. Then chocolate 
companies pushed candy, and department stores promoted the idea of 
Christmas gifts. It all came about at just the same time that the 
Japanese economy started to take off. Spokeswoman Yukokawa points 
out that Christmas isn't the only holiday to have slipped its spiritual 
moorings. Native Shinto and Buddhist customs have suffered the same 
fate. Instead of paying respect to God, the holidays have turned into 
a time for fun and merrymaking in Japan. Local religious rituals have 
changed into major commercial extravaganzas that attract tourists 
from around the country. So the old traditions are no longer observed 
in the same way anymore. By the time New Year's arrives, Japanese 
families will be settling down for a few days of rest and contemplation, 
but, for now, the party season is about to go into full swing and 
the rallying cry is "Merry Christmas." For THE WORLD, this is Lucy 
Craft in Tokyo. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>