<DOC>
<DOCNO> PRI19981222.2000.0377 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
This is THE WORLD. I'm Lisa Mullins. If political warfare is your 
game, forget about Washington. The real action these days is in Jerusalem. 
Today, Israel's Prime Minister Binyamin Netanyahu launched his reelection 
campaign, made necessary by yesterday's decision by parliament to 
hold early elections. At least in Washington, we sort of know where 
the Democrats stand and where the Republicans stand. In Israeli party 
politics, as THE WORLD's Richard Myron reports, it's every man for 
himself. Israelis are preparing themselves for up to four or five 
months of bare-knuckles campaigning. On Ben Yehuda Street in downtown 
Jerusalem, people absorb the news of yesterday's parliamentary vote 
for early elections and weigh their preferences among the three leading 
candidates for prime minister: Labor Party chief Ehud Barak, former 
army chief of staff Amnon Lipkin-Shahak, and incumbent Binyamin Bibi 
Netanyahu. I'm very glad about what happened. It shows that you cannot 
say a lie all the people all the time. So Bibi's government came to 
-- to an end, I hope. And, hopefully, we'll follow Britain and Europe 
and have a new leadership here which can speak with the world better 
and represent us better and bring Israeli to peace. I believe Bibi 
will -- will return to power once again. I think that Barak is exactly 
the same as Bibi and, as such, people prefer having someone that is 
bad than having someone that is bad but hasn't made the mistakes yet. 
Amnon Lipkin-Shahak is more reliable than Bibi Netanyahu and more 
communicative than Barak, but, more than that, I can't tell him a 
-- anything about him. He's a mystery to me. And, today, another contender 
entered the race. Dan Meridor, a former finance minister in the Netanyahu 
government, declared himself a candidate for the prime ministership. 
Meridor is considered a longshot but could steal some of Netanyahu's 
support from the right. Today, Netanyahu marked out his political 
territory. Opening a new highway junction to cross Israel's border 
with the West Bank, he spoke in hawkish language, reiterating his 
commitment to peace with security. But Labor's Ehud Barak says Netanyahu's 
ideas are discredited. This is a -- a failure of a government that 
led us into impasse on every possible subject from the peace process 
to the internal social -- uh -- the situation, and we need a new government 
that will put Israel back on track working for the whole people and 
defining goal -- redefining the order of priority of our society. 
The election campaign couldn't come at a worse time for the peace 
process, according to Palestinian legislator Hanan Ashrawi. She says 
Netanyahu's Likud Party is already blocking any progress on implementing 
the Wye peace accords. I believe that, right now, with internal domestic 
haggling, with all sorts of political maneuverings -- uh -- it's going 
to be next to impossible to see any kind of productive move, particularly 
since Likud has already declared that they have five preconditions 
for the implementation of the -- of the agreement and their -- uh 
-- commitments. The main and often the only issue in Israeli elections 
is security and relations with the country's neighborhoods, but Arhud 
Springsack, a political scientist at the Hebrew University in Jerusalem, 
says this election is an exception. Every single elections in the 
last -- I don't know -- 20 years that I can think of was critical 
for the evolution of the Palestinian-Israeli process. Nowadays, the 
big issue is the personality of Netanyahu. There is a growing conviction 
among a large number of the Israeli political class that the government 
has been taken over by an incredible demagogue who cannot do a good 
job and is -- is not fit to rule. This is right now the big issue 
even among Netanyahu colleagues and not just opposition. The Israeli 
political scene is in a state of turmoil, with departures from existing 
parties and the establishment of new parties. Look for things to heat 
up even more as Israeli politicians regroup for the campaign and Israeli 
voters reflect on the future. For THE WORLD, this is Richard Myron 
in Jerusalem. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>