<DOC>
<DOCNO> PRI19981222.2000.0650 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Binyamin Netanyahu became prime minister in 1996 by defeating incumbent 
Shimon Peres by fewer than 30,000 votes. Netanyahu's platform of peace 
with security contrasted with Peres's land-for-peace formula. Peres 
continues to endorse the 1993 Oslo peace accord, which he helped negotiate, 
and the Wye Plantation agreement signed two months ago in Washington. 
He blames Netanyahu for the current impasse. I mean, you cannot add 
additional conditions to the one that were dealt with and agreed upon 
at the Wye Plantation. For example, now thinks that the Palestinians 
should not call for a Palestinian state, et cetera, they should have 
put it on the agenda in Wye Plantation. But since they didn't do that 
and it wasn't agreed, you cannot add new conditions after the agreement, 
for example. After the fact, you're saying. Well, in the past, as 
you know, Binyamin Netanyahu has proved to be a master of escaping 
difficult situations, kind of a comeback kid, which is a little like 
President Clinton here in the United States, although, at this point, 
he seems to be in deep trouble, and I wonder if you think if -- if 
Israel is prepared to oust him at such a critical time. In other words, 
what is more important now -- maintaining the peace process or getting 
rid of Netanyahu? I think he's partly responsible for the critical 
time. He is not the victim of it. He's a master of it. Then -- and 
now about someone possibly such as Ehud Barak? If he were to come 
in at this point, what kind of advice would you be giving him as your 
successor? To return immediately to the peace process, to implement 
the Wye Plantation, to start a permanent -- the negotiations about 
a permanent status of peace with the Palestinians, and to renew our 
negotiations with the Syrians. I would think, at this point, given 
your own involvement in and your own history with the peace process, 
that what's been happening over the past couple of months, particularly 
since the signing of the Wye accord, has been frustrating for you 
personally, to watch the developments. Not really because I know that 
every great change, great -- it's a great deal of difficulties, self-disappointments, 
of setbacks. It's normal, in my eyes. You cannot really change seriously 
a major -- uh -- stream in history without having to pay for it in 
many ways. Could you consider yourself -- I wonder how eager you are 
personally to be a part of the process in the future. I prefer to 
be a soldier in the camp of peace rather than a contender in the domain 
of politics. And -- and, Mr. Peres, in terms of the United States, 
would you like to see President Clinton applying more pressure to 
Binyamin Netanyahu to further the process in the meantime? I think 
that the policies of President Clinton are basically wise on balance, 
and I wouldn't advise him to change it. Shimon Peres, thank you very 
much for speaking with us. Thank you. Former Israeli Prime Minister 
Shimon Peres speaking with us from Jerusalem. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>