<DOC>
<DOCNO> PRI19981222.2000.1188 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
This is THE WORLD. I'm Lisa Mullins. A surge of anti-Semitism in Russia 
has, until this week, received little formal attention, but yesterday 
President Boris Yeltsin's chief of staff gathered Moscow's top security 
and defense officials to talk about the problem. And, in New York, 
the World Jewish Congress announced it's asking the European Union 
to break contact with Russia's Communist Party until it repudiates 
anti-Semitic remarks by some of its members. Still, the fight against 
anti-Semitism will not be won by official discussions and protests. 
It will be won when Russian Jewish families no longer fear their government 
or their neighbors. THE WORLD's Anya Ardiva takes us to the home of 
one Jewish family in Moscow. This has been a tough year for the Kushnir 
family. They have struggled through job losses and daily price hikes. 
To make matters worse, the Jewish family had to put up with constant 
accusations of being responsible for the country's problems. The mother, 
Gabriella Kushnir, says the only place she and her children feel safe 
is at home. Gabriella avoids the television and the newspapers. She 
fears the effect the media messages would have on her kids. It's not 
the future of my children that I'm afraid of. It's the present. The 
feeling in this country is very heavy, and our oldest child is very 
sensitive. If one treats him warmly, he'll do the same. But if there's 
aggression, he accumulates it all like a battery. I'm so scared for 
him. Three months ago, Gabriella Kushnir's husband, Alexander, lost 
his job as a music history teacher at Moscow Gnessen Music College. 
To get another job, Alexander changed his middle name from Solomonovic 
to Samirnovic. The idea was to make it sound less Jewish and more 
Russian. Alexander says he's endured anti-Semitism since childhood. 
I remember very well that, when I was 7, friends and I played on the 
street once, and a very well-dressed woman, a very pretty one, came 
up to us, saying, "Oh, what lovely children," and then she came closer 
-- I'll remember this for the rest of my life -- and she said, "Oh, 
little Jews. I wish I could tear each of you into pieces." Alexander 
Kushnir says things calmed down after former President Mikhail Gorbachev's 
reforms in 1995, but Alexander worries that the battle days might 
return. At two October rallies, Albert Makashov, a Communist Party 
member of the State Duma, or lower house of parliament, promised, 
in his words, to round up all the Jews and send them to the next world. 
The Duma declined to press charges against Makashov. Communist leaders 
say that the news media have exaggerated Makashov's remarks. But, 
just last Tuesday, there was further evidence of how anti-Semitism 
is resurfacing in Russia's Communist Party. Another Communist Party 
member, Viktor Ilyukhin, accused President Boris Yeltsin of the genocide 
of their Russian nation, saying that things would have been better 
if there were no Jews in previous governments. Still, liberal politician 
Gregoria Livksy, who's himself of Jewish origin, downplays the threat 
of anti-Semitism. I don't think the extent of this in Russia is higher 
than anywhere else. The problem which we really have is that the Communist 
Party, the largest party in the country, officially want to protect 
those people who are exploiting those things and those words. The 
fact that some people are saying nasty things is not a big deal. Sometimes 
that happens. But when the largest political party, the largest political 
structure is going to protect them openly, almost officially, that's 
creates a real problem, and this may be dangerous. Rabbi Barra Lazar 
moved to Russia over 10 years ago from New York to help restore the 
Jewish community. His synagogue has been bombed twice and set on fire. 
Members of his temple complain about finding anti-Semitic leaflets 
in their mailboxes. Lazar says the Communists are using the freedom-of-speech 
brought by democracy for the wrong purposes, but the rabbi blames 
the Kremlin for the rise in anti-Semitism. The government is not doing 
enough to stop anti-Semitic demonstrations, publications, speeches, 
and all of -- whatever has been happening in the country is because 
the government isn't strong enough. They don't have the power to show 
strength and to show that and that law has to be followed. This year 
has seen a large growth in attendance at Chanukah services in Russia. 
Many Jewish families, like the Kushnirs, say the synagogue is now 
the only shelter in their everyday life. Their prayers for a miracle 
are especially poignant and increasingly desperate this Chanukah season. 
For THE WORLD, I'm Anya Ardiva in Moscow. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>