<DOC>
<DOCNO> PRI19981222.2000.2903 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
This is THE WORLD. I'm Lisa Mullins. Panic has overcome Sihanoukville. 
During the past few days, nearly 50,000 Cambodians have fled the southern 
province in fear of waste believed to be toxic dumped by a Taiwanese 
firm. The exodus has left four people dead in car crashes, and the 
government has vowed to track down the officials who permitted the 
waste to be dumped in Cambodia. Matthew Granger is the managing editor 
of "The Phnom Penh Post." Would you tell us, first off, Mr. Granger, 
about this area where the dumping apparently happened, and what kind 
of waste it is. I know that you just came back from the region recently. 
Yeah, that's right, Lisa. Sihanoukville is a truly beautiful tourist 
of the -- with gorgeous beaches and fabulous seafood. The waste came 
in on a Taiwanese vessel called the "Kaohsiung ". The "Kaohsiung" 
stayed for three days in the bay just off Sihanoukville. Then it was 
given permission to dock and to unload. Probably about 320 or thereabouts 
Cambodian workers took this industrial waste off, loaded it onto tracks, 
and it was trekked out to a dumping site about 15 kilometers out of 
town. The waste itself looks like rubble and gravel, and this -- one 
of the most plausible explanations is that it's compressed ash from 
a -- from an industrial incinerator. How do we know that it's serious 
at all? Are -- are we talking about deaths that have happened, uh, 
people becoming sick, or what kind of evidence is there? In the -- 
in the last three days, reporters at "The Post" have talked to the 
widow of a port worker who died after working in the -- in the hold 
of the ship. He -- he was wearing no protective clothing, no mask, 
no protective clothes. Within two days, he developed really serious 
stomach pains, he was vomiting and, within two days after that, he 
was dead. So it's only anecdotal linkage, but it's quite strong linkage. 
Yeah. And as you say, it may be anecdotal linkage, but, at this point, 
it has caused something of a panic with just about one-third of the 
population trying to leave Sihanoukville. Coverage of this in Cambodia 
has been so -- so huge. It's just causing people to lapse into hysteria, 
panic. They're leaving in droves. The rich, of course, left, and that's 
-- that's causing resentment from the poor people who can't leave 
but are desperate to. And part of the problem is not simply that it 
was dumped, but people who live in the area, primarily poor people, 
tried to actually use some of these -- this material in their home. 
So they -- they opened up the bags and made off with some of the contents. 
Is that right? The bags ripped open -- seemingly, the bags ripped 
open very quickly anyway, and -- and the hold of the ship was just 
like a cloud -- not a -- a toxic cloud of dust, but -- which is -- 
which is where the first port worker died, and -- where he was working. 
Yeah, sure. The waste is dumped, and -- again, in -- in Cambodia, 
somebody else's rubbish is somebody else's goldmine, and people tried 
to find uses for something that was being dumped on the ground, and 
there's evidence that people using it as bricks for the cooking fires, 
using it as landfill perhaps thinking it was fertilizer, using the 
plastic bags for their -- to store rice and -- and -- and -- and to 
use in their houses, and... And, at this point, we should say that 
Taiwan is saying it is irrational to lay the blame with them without 
scientific evidence about just how hazardous this waste is, and Formosa 
Plastic, where the waste originated, is claiming that it was certified 
in Taiwan as being safe for landfill. That may well be true, and -- 
and we're still waiting for -- for exactly that scientific analysis 
to come back. The ministry of environment had concerns from Hong Kong 
this morning that it did contain heavy missiles, including military. 
Now we're waiting to see exactly how toxic it was, but the Cambodian 
attitude and the attitude of many people, actually, is if it was so 
safe, why didn't Taiwan use it as landfill in Taiwan. Matthew Granger 
is the managing editor of "The Phnom Penh Post." The Cambodian environmental 
minister now says government workers have started removing the hazardous 
waste by sealing it in barrels and shipping it away. It did not say 
whether the waste would be returned to Taiwan. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>