<DOC>
<DOCNO> PRI19981222.2000.0856 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
In their bid to circle the world non-stop by balloon, American millionaire 
Steve Fossett, British tycoon Richard Branson, and Per Lindstrand 
of Sweden will have to battle fear, fatigue, and the elements -- and 
politics. Today, the three men won a mini battle with China when it 
allowed them to continue crossing its territory, rescinding an earlier 
order that they land in the rugged Himalayan terrain. Working with 
the mission from its control center in Oxford, England, is communications 
officer Joe Tadino. Joe, I can only imagine it must have been quite 
a relief for the crew to hear that they didn't have to risk landing 
in the Himalayas and they could, indeed, fly through some of China's 
airspace. Oh, absolutely. There is quite a sense of relief and elation 
amongst everybody on the team. Can you explain why the Chinese are 
so opposed to the balloon flying over its airspace? Actually, I cannot 
because no reason was actually given to the team about the restrictions 
that were placed on airspace. We were told there was a certain area 
of China -- actually the coordinates which pretty much cover most 
of China except for the southern portion -- where we were barred from 
entering into. The reason for that was not given. China just said, 
"Please do not enter that area," and, unfortunately, because of the 
track of the balloon, which had to avoid the Iraq area earlier in 
the week, we were unable to stay outside of that zone. Now that they 
have entered Chinese airspace, are -- are they being pressured to 
get out as soon as they can, and what sort of pressure is behind them? 
Well, obviously, we would like to leave China as fast as we can, as 
the Chinese have asked. We've got about 1,200 miles to go in China, 
and if you're traveling at 50 miles an hour, you could imagine that 
that will not pass quickly. And now that they're over China or at 
least have entered China, how safe are the skies at that point? Do 
you feel as though they might be any kind of danger? Well, uh, they're 
flying at night right now and will be for some time. um... Is that 
good or bad? You can't land in -- in the evening, at nighttime, and 
that was one of the big concerns that we had early on, was that we 
were being asked to land in darkness. Another big concern was that 
we had been asked to land in an area that was very treacherous, the 
mountainous regions, and it was impossible to do that. You know, flying 
at night is not dangerous, and the crew obviously is happy -- they'll 
be able to get some sleep now -- that the project can continue on. 
So now that they seem to have crossed that hurdle, what's -- what's 
the next biggest one? Well, obviously, the Pacific is a big hurdle. 
It's a lot of ocean to cover, and you certainly wouldn't want to land 
a balloon in the Tibetan plateau, and that was a big concern for us 
overnight, and you definitely don't want to have to land a balloon 
in the ocean. How much control do they actually have? When you're 
on a balloon like that and you're basically relying on jet streams, 
do you have a lot of control over which airspace you end up in? No, 
you don't. You have the ability to gain altitude and lose altitude, 
and by doing that at various places, you're able to have the winds 
carry you forward and in fact, the projection is that the crew will 
be riding in the capsule over the United States on Christmas Day. 
Is that right? yes. And we won't be able to see hide nor hair of them, 
I bet. Well, they'll be pretty -- flying pretty high. The average 
altitude is about 29,000 feet. Twenty-nine thousand feet. So they 
might see Santa in the sleigh, but that's about it. And so they're 
likely to touch down, if all goes according to plan, at what point? 
Well, the early indications now are that it will happen in Great Britain 
around New Year's Eve. Ah. Nice way to finish off 1998. Nice way to 
bring in 1999. Joe Tadino is a communications officer for the round-the-world 
Balloon Expedition. He spoke with us from Oxford, England. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>