<DOC>
<DOCNO> PRI19981222.2000.2012 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
There were signs that China was opening up, allowing more discourse 
about political reform and more respect for human rights, but, in 
the past two days, there have been three signs that China is doing 
quite the opposite. Those signs are the 11- to 13-year sentences handed 
down to Xu Wenli, Qin Yongmin, and Wang Youcai. The men were convicted 
of subverting China's Communist Party-led system. What they did was 
try to set up the China Democracy Party. The United States called 
on Chinese authorities to release them immediately, but for many human 
rights activists, that denunciation won't suffice. THE WORLD's Jeb 
Sharp reports on U.S. policy toward China in the wake of the sentencing 
of the dissidents. President Clinton's visit to China last June was 
the ultimate expression of his policy of strategic engagement designed 
to improve relations between the two countries with dividends in trade, 
security, and human rights. In October, China signed the UN Covenant 
on Civil and Political Rights, which includes the rights to freedom 
of expression, peaceful assembly, and participation in the elections. 
Human rights advocates hoped China was on its way to a new era. Now 
that hope has been dashed, says Mike Mike Jendrzejczyk of Human Rights 
Watch/Asia. Clearly, the Chinese government is drawing a line in the 
sand that they are willing to allow some discussion among intellectuals, 
for example, about political reform, corruption, and human rights, 
but when activists step over the line and actually begin organizing, 
the government will do everything it can to crush any peaceful efforts 
to challenge the rule of the Communist Party and the state. The Clinton 
administration has deplored the length and severity of the sentences 
and called for the release of the three men but has no intention of 
changing its overall policy of engagement. A State Department official 
called the action by Chinese authorities disturbing but not surprising. 
Still, Democratic Congresswoman Nancy Pelosi, a critic of President 
Clinton's China policy, says these sentences underscore what she calls 
the bankruptcy of the administration's strategy. For those who say 
-- and President Clinton is one of them -- that economic reform will 
lead to political reform, that has obviously failed. They have absolutely 
no intention of opening up politically. Indeed, all of the U.S. investment 
in China has strengthened the regime at the expense of the -- of pro-democratic 
reformers. So the president's position, I think, is a failure. It's 
disappointing, most of all, because we abandon one of the pillars 
of our foreign policy, which is promoting democratic freedoms throughout 
the world. But others dispute that President Clinton's China policy 
has been a failure. Merle Goldman, who teaches Chinese history at 
Boston University, acknowledges that what appeared to be a spring 
thaw has turned into a deep freeze, but she believes it's important 
to remain engaged with the Chinese. You're not dealing with Saddam 
Hussein here. This is a regime that's in transition. Um. It's not 
clear where it's going to go, and the hope is that, as they become 
more and more intertwined with the rest of the world, they will begin 
to play by the rules, and they are gradually beginning to do that. 
So it's been a very slow process, but it's been a gradual process, 
and it could very well be that there will be enough pressure put upon 
the Chinese government to allow these three people they just sentenced 
to come to the United States. Another China scholar, Ross Terrell 
of Harvard University, agrees with Merle Goldman that the United States 
must continue to engage China on as many fronts as possible but says 
President Clinton should stop kidding himself about the character 
of the regime. You have to be clear eyed about the nature of the political 
system in China. It has not ceased to be a Leninist dictatorship, 
and all our policies should be framed with that consciousness in mind. 
Terrell believes Mr. Clinton has been too cozy with the Chinese leadership 
and should have met with dissidents during his trip to China in June. 
Had the president done so, Terrell believes, Xu Wenli would not be 
in prison today. For now, human rights advocates and some members 
of Congress are calling on the Clinton administration to step up the 
pressure on China. They're urging U.S. officials to cancel a January 
trade delegation to Beijing and to initiate a resolution questioning 
China's human rights record with the Human Rights Commission in Geneva. 
For THE WORLD, I'm Jeb Sharp. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>