<DOC>
<DOCNO> VOA19981222.0500.2090 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
At the United Nations, the Security Council is scheduled to meet again 
today on how to deal with Iraq. Last week's Anglo-American bombing 
of targets in Iraq was designed to diminish Baghdad's weapons making 
capability. But they failed to break Iraq's spirit and Saddam Hussein 
continues to defy U.N. mandated weapons inspections. Meanwhile, the 
general who commanded the recent air attacks on Iraq strongly denies 
Iraqi charges that the raids focused on civilian targets. Marine General 
Anthony Zinni says U.S. and British warplanes hit most of the targets 
they aimed at and all of those targets had Iraqi military purposes. 
VOA's Jim Randall reports from the Pentagon. General Zinni says U.S. 
and British war planes aimed bombs and missiles at about 100 targets 
and hit 85 of them, damaging 74 badly enough to meet U.S. military 
objectives. The commander of Operation Desert Fox says this may have 
been the most accurate bombing campaign in military history, something 
done to design the number of non-combatants hurt. We take every care 
to ensure that civilian casualties are prevented to the best of our 
ability. Every target that we engage we are convinced that we did 
all the planning and all the technical work to ensure to the best 
of our abilities that there would be no collateral or civilian damage. 
General Zinni says bomb damage to Iraq's missile factories and repair 
shops, as well damage to the communications equipment Saddam Hussein 
uses to control his military, lessen Iraq's threat to its neighbors. 
But Defense Secretary William Cohen says U.S. forces remain ready 
to strike Iraq if Baghdad threatens those neighbors or resumes work 
on banned germ or poison gas weapons. Mr. Cohen says thousands of 
U.S. troops are now headed for the Gulf to strengthen the force there. 
But he says they may be ordered to turn back soon. General Zinni says 
U.S. forces have taken precautions against recent bomb threats by 
terrorist groups. I'm very concerned about that. I think as you know 
there have been some very recent and specific terrorist threats -- 
U-Sammon Ben-Ladin and others and we take those extremely serious. 
General Zinni says the biggest surprise of Desert Fox was the lack 
of resistance put up by Iraqi forces. The general says many anti-aircraft 
guns were fired, but few if any Iraqi air defense radars or missiles 
saw action. Jim Randall, VOA News at the Pentagon. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>