<DOC>
<DOCNO> VOA19981222.0500.0893 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
The prospect of an impeachment trial in the U.S. Senate has many of 
Mr. Clinton's long-time supporters trying to pressure the Senate to 
find some punishment short of removal from office. American civil 
rights leader Jesse Jackson says he will help organize a protest march 
on Washington that will coincide with the start of the impeachment 
trial. VOA's Michael O'Sullivan has details from Los Angeles. The 
Reverend Jesse Jackson says he will help organize what he calls a 
national day of resistance in Washington, with concurrent rallies 
around the country on the day the Senate trial against President Clinton 
begins. The trial will take place next month unless Congressional 
Democrats and Republicans can reach a compromise agreement to avoid 
it. Mr. Jackson called the impeachment drive reckless and mean-spirited. 
He said Republican leaders are confusing personal values with issues 
of public policy. He urged them to turn their attention to other social 
concerns, as he says President Clinton is doing. And he urged the 
president not to resign. Resist not resign. Protect our quest for 
a secure Social Security system. Protect our quest for civil rights 
and gender equality and social justice. He must resist and not resign. 
We shall go to Washington in great numbers on the day the Senate trial 
begins. The Reverend Jesse Jackson said that Republican leaders in 
Congress lack the moral authority to remove Mr. Clinton from office. 
And he referred to admissions of sexual improprieties by several of 
them. Saturday the prospective Speaker of the House of Representatives, 
Bob Livingston, announced he will resign from Congress in six months 
and will not serve as Speaker. He made the surprise announcement following 
disclosure of several extra-martial affairs. Congressional Republicans 
argue that the impeachment charges against Mr. Clinton are not about 
sex, but about possible perjury and obstruction of justice; and the 
president lied to conceal a sexual relationship. Mr. Jackson rejects 
that distinction and charges the Republican leaders with hypocrisy. 
Someone said the other day: "But those who lied about martial vows 
didn't do so on an oath." All of them got married in a church -- took 
the oath on the Bible, which predates the Constitution. The fact is 
this is no standard by which we must judge our leaders. Mr. Jackson 
said he hopes the impeachment trial can be avoided through a congressional 
compromise to censure the president. Jesse Jackson said he spoke with 
President Clinton over the weekend, and that the president's mood 
was good following expressions of support by congressional Democrats 
and poll results showing that most Americans want Mr. Clinton to stay 
in office. Mike O'Sullivan, VOA News, Los Angeles. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>