<DOC>
<DOCNO> VOA19981222.0500.1828 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Israel's parliament voted overwhelmingly Monday for early elections 
after rejecting Prime Minister Benjamin Natanyahu's tough polices 
for making peace with the Palestinians. VOA's David Golles reports 
that probably means the peace process will be on hold for a while. 
Mr. Netanyahu agreed to a new election, which will likely be held 
in late April after it became clear that his crumbling right-of-center 
coalition would not survive a confidence vote. In a strongly worded 
address to the Kinnesset interrupted by heckling from both left- and 
right-wing parties, he defended his hardline approach in negotiations 
with the Palestinians. Heard through an interpreter, Mr. Netanyahu 
accused Yasser Arafat's Palestinian Authority of violating commitments 
made in the Wye River agreement, including a pledge to end anti-Israel 
incitement. They say peace in English, but in Arabic they're still 
talking about Jihad, the holy war. And they're educating their children 
in war. There are even war summer camps as we see on Palestinian television, 
where they claim that they're going to take revenge on Israel the 
enemy. Mr. Netanyahu said his policy of demanding reciprocity for 
Israeli territorial concessions is supported by most Israelis and 
said if the Kinnesset does not support the approach then a new Kinnesset 
should be elected. The leader of the opposition Labor Party, Ahood 
Barock, followed Mr. Netanyahu to the podium. In what was likely a 
preview of the campaign, he accused the prime minister of wrecking 
the peace process and, in doing so, putting his own political survival 
ahead of Israel's security interests. The Netanyahu government has 
no vision for a better future for the state of Israel. All it has 
is a survival plan. This is a government whose survival plan is single. 
It's a systematic capitulation to the extremists in order to survive. 
This is a government which cannot and does not wish to work for the 
sake of the whole of the Israeli people. The election picture is complicated 
by the probable entry into the race of a new centrist party headed 
by Amnon Shawnhoke, a soon-to-retire army general who, although a 
newcomer to politics, already leads both Mr. Netanyahu and Mr. Barock 
in the polls. General Shawhoke, considered a moderate and a supporter 
of the peace process, has spurned an overture from Mr. Barock to join 
him on the Labor ticket. This has prompted concern from some politicians 
that the two candidates might split the peace camp and hand the victory 
to Mr. Netanyahu. One of them is Yosi Sareeb, leader of the leftist 
Marist Kinnesset faction. I regret very much the fact that he didn't 
join Ahood Barock. I believe that the best formula in order to defeat 
Mr. Netanyahu is by combining forces and not by splitting them. ` 
So I believe that if it's true that he is going to establish a new 
independent party, it's a very, very grave mistake and he's playing 
directly or indirectly into the hands of the prime minister. Mr. Netanyahu 
has already suspended implementation of the Wye River agreement, including 
a West Bank troop withdrawal Israel was supposed to have made last 
Friday. Political analysts believe the peace process is likely to 
remain frozen for the duration of the election campaign. That has 
prompted bitter complaints from Palestinian officials who are urging 
the Clinton administration to intervene. Chief Palestinian negotiator, 
Sahead Eracot, says a campaign should not override Israel's responsibility 
to fulfill the Wye Accord. In our opinion, this is a flagrant violation 
of the Wye Accord Memorandum. The Wye memorandum spoke of a phased 
parallel approach where both sides implement on the basis of reciprocity 
and not on a condition of sequential approach. And it would be a bad 
message that the only thing that Israel will stop is the peace process 
for the Palestinians. This would be a very, very bad message, because 
we believe that interim governments are responsible as much as any 
other government to carry out their commitments. Support is building 
to hold the Israeli election April 27, one week before the nominal 
expiration of the Oslo Peace process May 4. Palestinian leader Arafat 
has threatened to unilaterally declare statehood on that date, and 
the issue could dominate the campaign. David Golles, VOA News, Jerusalem. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>