<DOC>
<DOCNO> VOA19981222.0500.2373 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
In the aftermath of the impeachment of President Clinton by the House 
of Representatives, former presidents Gerald Ford, a Republican, and 
Jimmy Carter, a Democrat, have jointly called for a strong statement 
of censure rather than a Senate trial for Mr. Clinton. But their plan 
requires Mr. Clinton to admit he lied under oath, which he has repeatedly 
insisted he did not do. Appearing late Monday at the CNN program, 
"Larry King Live," Democratic Senator John Kerry says those advocating 
a conviction will have a hard time convincing the Senate that Mr. 
Clinton should be removed from office. The question here is whether 
or not you overturn an election, where people in this country twice 
elected a man whom they knew when they first elected him had most 
likely been unfaithful to his wife, according to the evidence -- and 
later learned was. I mean -- and then re-elected him. Now, we have 
elected people whose personal behavior previously has found national 
or public opprobrium. I mean, we've had a president elected who had 
an illegitimate child at a time when nobody believed that was appropriate. 
So I mean, I think there are -- there are different standards here. 
The question is not: do you approve of what the president did? The 
question is: do you believe what the president did rises to the level 
of impeachment. And I believe when you examine very closely what the 
founding fathers wanted to do and measure the totality of the circumstances 
in this case, it's a hard threshold to get over. That is U.S. Senator 
John Kerry, a Democrat. However, former education department secretary 
and anti-drug czar in the Reagan and Bush administrations, Bill Bennett 
argues there are larger issues than just sex in the case. It's not 
about infidelity. It's not about illegitimacy. Some of us believe 
that presidents of the United States should not lie to grand juries. 
We just think that's kind of fundamental -- and that his job as president 
of the United States is to ensure the legitimacy of the system -- 
that Article II, Section III says that he will faithfully execute 
the laws. And presidents, more than anyone else, shouldn't lie to 
the grand jury. The president lied under oath; he lied to the grand 
jury. He should be held to a higher standard than ordinary citizens. 
And, therefore, I don't think he should be impeached. To me, that 
just doesn't follow. If the president can't adhere to that basic and 
fundamental law, I don't see how we teach other people that they have 
to, too. I don't think -- I actually have to tell you I don't think 
this is hard. This office -- you know, the president of the United 
States is the greatest office in the greatest country in the history 
of the world. It doesn't belong to Bill Clinton. He trashed it He 
trashed it by -- by, against the advice of his lawyers and his aides, 
who all lined up before the grand jury proceeding and said, "Mr. President, 
you may have done something under oath that was a mistake. You may 
have shaken your finger at the American public and not told the truth, 
but this is the grand jury, Sir. You cannot mess with the grand jury. 
And John Kerry's a prosecutor, a very able prosecutor. Grand juries 
are serious matters. They're serious for all citizens. People have 
been convicted and gone to jail for that. I'm sorry; I think it's 
fundamental. I say this with no joy, but with no apology. It was right 
to impeach. I don't think -- I don't think it's an ambiguous question. 
The White House, meanwhile, is talking about challenging in court 
whether the impeachment vote by the outgoing 105th Congress can be 
legally binding on the incoming 106th Congress. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>