<DOC>
<DOCNO> VOA19981222.1600.2154 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
in the rush to compete in the global economy, many governments around 
the world have resorted to corruption of one sort or another. In some 
cases, it takes the form of "crony capitalism," like that widely attributed 
to the Asian economic collapse. In other cases it may be outright 
bribery of government officials, as in former Communist, or many African 
countries. Increasingly, corruption is also seen as an impediment 
to the country's economic good health. Next on Dateline, a report 
we ran earlier this year on corruption in government. Here's Pamela 
Taylor. International lending institutions, like the World Bank and 
the International Monetary Fund, are not alone in their concern about 
corruption in governments around the world. The United Nations Development 
Program, UNDP, said in a report this year that corruption is believed 
to siphon billions of dollars out of development programs, every year. 
The Paris-based Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development, 
the OECD, has been working to make tax deductions illegal for business 
which pay bribes in other countries. The foreign Corrupt Practices 
Act makes such deductions illegal in the United States. And, now an 
independent Berlin-based group called Transparency International, 
has published its annual Corruption Perception Index. This year's 
index looked at the perceived level of corruption in 85 countries 
around the world. Three Scandinavian countries, Denmark, Sweden, and 
Finland, ranked as the least corrupt. Several African and Latin American 
countries were at the other end of the scale, with Cameroon at the 
very bottom. As Peter Igon, chairman of Transparency International, 
explains the index is designed to measure how corrupt countries are 
perceived to be. It does not pretend to be a judgment about the corruption 
in various countries. It is a compilation of deception of other people, 
business men, media, observers, and others. And, these people have 
been asked to give their opinions to 12 different opinion polls. So, 
our compilation is basically a poll of polls. So, tell me who ranks 
as the top corrupt countries, and who is doing pretty well. Well, 
many of the African countries, the poorest countries, are doing relatively 
badly this year. The one which is doing the worst is Cameroon, this 
year. We have a scoring of from 1-10, with 10 being the best score, 
which has only been achieved by Denmark. And, one being the worst, 
and Cameroon is at 1.4, and is, therefore, on our list of 85 countries 
the last. TAYLOR; And, where do countries like the United States and 
more developed western European countries fall? Well, the United States 
is, at this point, 17, which is slightly surprising. It's quite striking 
that Denmark, Finland, Sweden are the first three. And then New Zealand, 
Iceland, Canada, Singapore, and then comes most of the West European 
countries. Does the fact that you're saying that the perceptions of 
the people that were interviewing these polls, nevertheless, is that 
the United States ranked something like number 17. The Corruption 
Perception Index has asked the question, "Where do you have to pay 
more bribes, in Denmark, or in Bangladesh, or in Pakistan, or in the 
United States?" I noticed that the countries that tend to be at the 
end of the scale on this year's index, are in Africa and Latin America. 
And, I was surprised that there weren't more countries from Asia. 
Well, I mean, there are countries from Asian, like Indonesia, for 
instance. It's very much at the end, and so is Vietnam, so, is China 
and the Philippines. But, in terms of numbers of countries, there 
are indeed a large number of very poor countries with relatively unstable 
governments and weak administrations, which are particularly vulnerable 
to corruption. Apart from poverty, are there other causes that can 
be addressed, or do you see this global recession as, perhaps, driving 
more countries to turn to bribery and corruption? I would say that 
bribery and corruption has been a contributing factor to the global 
recession. And many countries, like Indonesia, Thailand, Korea, but 
also Russia, for instance, and the Ukraine, and some other countries 
in transformation. Peter Igon, a former world bank official who founded 
Transparency International five years ago in Berlin. He spoke to us 
from the U.S. Branch Office in Washington. Mr. Igon isn't alone in 
pointing to corruption and "cronyism" as the source of the collapse 
of the Asian economic miracle in countries like Maylasia, and Indonesia. 
But ridding a country of the close ties between businessmen and government 
officials is easier said than done. As Mr. Igon noted, the United 
States didn't fare all that well on the corruption perception index. 
The financing of political campaigns, by special interest groups, 
is seen as the biggest corrupting influence in the U.S. government 
process. Last month, a group of legal scholars met in Hartford Connecticut, 
to discuss the effect of corruption on market economies throughout 
the world. VOA Correspondent, Larry Freund, has more. Political corruptions, 
say the legal experts, knows no boundaries. They point to it in the 
new market economies of the former Soviet Union, in emerging democracies 
in Latin America, Asia, and Africa, and in the United States where 
donors avoid laws and give millions of dollars to political parties. 
Joel Paul, a professor at the University of Connecticut Law School, 
organized the conference on corruption. We have private actors who 
are trying to buy influence with the government, in a way that really 
defeats democratic accountability. So we're really looking at the 
problem of trying to hold our elected officials accountable in a democracy. 
All market democracies, says Professor Paul, are vulnerable to political 
corruption. The problem, he adds, is that investors do not want to 
put their money in economies if they believe they will have to pay 
substantial amounts of money in bribes to government officials, to 
protect their investments. People, he adds, are not going to participate 
in a government is they feel that the government is not accountable 
to them, but is accountable to a small "moneyed elite." Speakers at 
the two-day conference include legal experts from several leading 
American law schools, including those at Harvard and Yale, and the 
University of Pennsylvania. The audience includes international lawyers 
and graduate law students from the former Soviet Union and Central 
and Eastern Europe. Conference organizer, Joel Paul, says efforts 
to create market democracies, really depend upon finding solutions 
to the problem of corruption. One strategy, for example, are measures 
to try to reinforce the rule of law by guaranteeing the independence 
of a judiciary. Another strategy would be to try to professionalize 
attorneys, and to try to raise the ethical standards of attorneys, 
so they're not used as agents of corruption. A third kind of strategy 
might be to establish more effective institutions to investigate, 
and to prosecute political corruption. Professor Paul suggests as 
another anit-corruption strategy, the strengthening of the free press, 
so it can investigate and expose the corruption of public officials. 
VOA New York Bureau Chief, Larry Freund. Corruption in government 
was the topic of today's edition of Dateline. I'm Pamela Taylor. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>