<DOC>
<DOCNO> VOA19981222.1600.3194 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
The Christmas holiday provides a fine opportunity for pastry chefs 
to show off their skills, and there are few places more prestigious 
than the White House, to display culinary artistry. The first family's 
residence, in Washington, is transformed into a spectacular holiday 
setting, with a huge Christmas tree, homemade ornaments, intricate 
mantle pieces and wreaths. But, the most creative decoration is the 
huge gingerbread house located in the State Dining Room. One of the 
principle designers of the fanciful masterpiece is White House pastry 
chef, Renette Mcculloch. Steve Ember has more. This month, about 180,000 
visitors to the White House will walk through what First Lady, Hillary 
Rodham Clinton calls a "winter wonderland." Mrs. Clinton praised the 
chef's skill in creating this year's gingerbread house and says she 
especially likes the depiction of the family dog, Buddy, and cat, 
Socks. They really do depict their personalities pretty well. If you 
look closely you can see, you know, Buddy just on the brink of exploring 
something, and maybe having an adventure, and Socks, kind of in his 
own world, which is sort of the way they are. But, we are particularly 
happy about this amazing gingerbread castle. And, I want to commend 
them for being so creative. Gingerbread is not easy to work with and 
it is something that does not bend easily. But, they were able to 
bring this about. Pastry chef, Renette Mcculloch, added to the first 
lady's description of the challenge in making this year's gingerbread 
house, noting that there was unseasonable weather in Washington while 
the castle was being made. RENETTE MCCULLOCH, WHITE HOUSE PASTRY CHEF; 
We've had an awful lot of trouble this year, because we've had this 
unusually warm weather. And along with the unusually warm weather, 
has come increased humidity. And this is real gingerbread. It is not 
a fake mixture to look like gingerbread. And, so it cakes, and it 
gets soft with the humidity. And, we've come back, and walls that 
were hard yesterday are now soft. And, so that makes us nervous. WE 
have to keep a close eye on it. Ms. McCulloch says this year's gingerbread 
house was designed more like a castle. She explains that the placement 
of the cake in the State Dining Room was a major factor in the shape 
of the building. The gingerbread house was going to be on the dining 
room table as opposed to the side-table, which gave us very specific 
dimensions we had to work with -- long and narrow. And, long and narrow, 
you think, well, the only place you have to go is up. And, up kind 
of dictates a castle, which also plays into the winter wonderland 
scene, something we've never done before. And, every year we try to 
change, completely, from what we did the year before. So, it's a surprise 
to the people that pass through, it's a surprise to the family. And, 
it's a big treat for them. Pastry chef, McColloch says the Christmas 
creation in the State Dining Room, traditionally is a house or structure 
and not, for example, an elaborate "Busta Noel", the French Christmas 
log. For awhile we were doing the boyhood home of President Clinton, 
and the same for Mrs. Clinton. And, one year we actually did the White 
House, itself. One year we did "Nutcracker Suite", with people dancing 
on the inside to reflect Chelsea's background. It's always something 
very different each year. This year's gingerbread castle weighs about 
75 kilograms, including 40 kilograms of gingerbread, and 20 kilograms 
of chocolate. Sadly, Ms. McColloch's fantastic castle creation meets 
an unglamorous demise at the end of the holiday season. Although fully 
edible, she says, "It's not eaten." Unfortunately, in the end, everything 
we can do is just destroy it and throw it away. There is no space 
for storage. There's no reason to use it again. And so many people 
pass through the house to look at it. There's people, and the dust, 
and people breathing all over it. So, even though it could be eaten, 
we would rather not. You know, it's not like brand new, right out 
of the oven. It's been sitting there for a whole month. It's a shame, 
but we do have to throw it away. Pastry chef Renette McCulloch, one 
of the designers of this year's culinary center piece in the White 
House, "the gingerbread castle." 
</TEXT>
</DOC>