<DOC>
<DOCNO> VOA19981222.1600.1351 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
New York Time's magazine writer, Steven Dubner, spent his early years 
in rural New York State, the youngest of eight children in a devout 
Roman Catholic family. He was only vaguely aware that his parents 
were New York City natives who'd converted to Catholicism from Judaism. 
He describes how he unearthed the secrets of their past, and reclaimed 
the faith they'd rejected in "Turbulent Souls, A Catholic Son's Return 
to His Jewish family." Steven Dubner spoke about his book with VOA's 
Nancy Beardsly. Steven, I know a lot of what happens in your book 
took place before you were born. So, you had to reconstruct the story 
of your parent's conversion. Would you explain what drew them to Catholicism? 
Well, what drew them to Catholicism was a bundle of things, really. 
My mother was a ballerina, raised in a Jewish family. And, her teacher 
was a convert from Russian Orthodoxy to Catholicism. And she was my 
mother's idol. And, that began my mother's thinking and questioning. 
My father, from a very religious Jewish family that was really decimated 
by the death of his mother when he was 15-years old. And, then during 
World War II, he was a soldier stationed in the South Pacific. He 
was very lonely and depressed, and found, in his case, the letters 
of St. Paul. So, my parents, when they met a couple of years later, 
understood what each was going through and had gone through. Then 
when they decided to marry, well, their families cut them off. And, 
my parents had to reinvent their world, because they had no other 
family. Your father died when you were 10 years old. Do you think, 
in a sense, that sort of started the reverse process for you? I think 
so. I think it's not a huge coincidence that my father lost his mother 
when he was a young man, and wound up finding a religion wherein a 
mother figure plays a huge role. Here I am, whose father died when 
I was a young man, or a boy, and end up finding a religion whose patriarchy 
is very much a part of this faith tradition. It would be many years 
after that, that you actually began the search for your family. What 
really sparked that return to your Jewish religion? Well, part of 
it was, I moved to New York, where for the first time in my life, 
I lived among a lot of Jews in a living, breathing religion and tradition. 
Then, I began to interview my mother, really for the sake of making 
literally a family tree. So, as I was digging into the family, and 
I found that I was being tugged toward that tradition, which was in 
my mother's eyes, horrifying, and act of apostasy. And, there was 
a period of a few years there where there was a great amount of tension 
and it became a chief goal of both of ours to try to mediate that 
tension. And I think we've succeeded. You actually describe a moment 
in the book where you'd gone to Synagogue, and the Torah was brought 
out. And, there was this feeling of recognition that this was where 
you belonged. It was a wild moment for me. I kind of tumbled into 
this understanding, which is that here is a tradition that is venerating 
the book, not the deity, not the person. And, for some reason, I felt 
extremely comfortable with that. And, along with talking to your mother, 
how else did you go about trying to reconstruct the story: I began 
to seek out, and find, my father's relatives. And, that's a strange 
and wonderful thing, to, kind of, gain a sudden, new extended family. 
The other secret in the family was that my mother had a first cousin 
by the name Ethel Greenglass, who married a fellow named Julius Rosenburg,. 
So, Ether and Julius Rosenburg, who were of course executed for being 
atomic spies, were my mother's first cousins. I mean, this was not 
known in our family until very few years ago. And, there was also 
a "life style change" for you. You started having Jewish girlfriends, 
Jewish friends... And, now I've got a Jewish wife, yes. In the beginning, 
I was every -- I was telling myself that everything Jewish is good, 
that everything Catholic is bad. And this was, of course, a very shortsighted 
and immature viewpoint, and it took me a while to begin to balance 
my mother's world and my world. In the end, both the traditions say, 
the rules and regulations are there so that you will do this one thing 
-- treat the other guy like you want to be treated. I still feel, 
and believe, essentially the same things as I used to. I found a different 
way of expressing that belief. What do you do about the holidays -- 
still observe both? I don't observe Christmas in my own home, but 
my brothers and sisters do. And, you know, for me it's a family holiday. 
A couple years ago, the last night of Hanukkah was Christmas Eve. 
And I went to visit a brother and sister-in-law and his child. And 
then, there in the living room is the Christmas tree and there on 
the kitchen table are some potato latkes that they had just made for 
Hanukkah. So, my family's been pretty well at adapting, as well. Steven, 
thank you very much. Steven Dubner is the author of "Turbulent Souls, 
A Catholic Son's Return to His Jewish Family." 
</TEXT>
</DOC>