<DOC>
<DOCNO> VOA19981222.1600.0755 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
China has, again, given permission to three balloonists to continue 
their flight across Chinese airspace. Britain's Richard Branson, American 
Steve Fosset, and Sweden's Pare Lindstrom, are attempting to become 
the first balloonists to circle the world, nonstop. British embassy 
officials say the trio was unable to comply with China's order to 
end the flight, because it would have been a life-threatening situation 
to land their huge craft during darkness in the mountainous terrain. 
Russ Woodgates and Barbara Klien talked with Laurie Lavine, spokesman 
for the balloonists about their problem, and asked how much freedom 
Beijing is giving the balloonists in their flight over China. They're 
traveling about 50 miles an hour at about 30,000 feet. It's darkness, 
and basically, we are hoping that we can get them into a faster jet 
and get them out of China as quickly as possible, so we can leave 
their airspace. But, now that we've been granted permission, it gives 
us an opportunity to focus more on the flight again, and not on the 
politics. When you say a faster jet, you mean a jet stream of air. 
The jet stream that they're flying, yes. This whole episode has been 
fraught with danger from the beginning, Friday night, when they launched 
from Morocco, what with the Iraqi air strikes underway. They had to 
skirt around. This is where they got off course. Why didn't they just 
wait a few days? Well, this has been their dream for four years. They've 
had four attempts, now. And, ironically, the most perfect conditions 
ever were at that time frame. And, it was a very -- it was a big decision 
if they should go forward, or if they should stand down. And, I think 
the adventurous spirit in them took charge. And, that was how the 
decision was made. It was based on that this was the best possible 
time for them to succeed. Well, now that this political storm is over, 
how is the weather, or other kinds of storms that they face? Well, 
so far the weather has been perfect. It's really -- the irony is that 
it's been a perfect balloon flight. There's only been a few technical 
glitches, that were rather minor. They're in good health, good spirits, 
and they've just flown over the Himalayas, which is remarkable in 
itself. But, we seem to be caught up more in the politics than in 
the actual flight. And, maybe once we get past China, now, we can 
really just enjoy this wonderful voyage that they're on. And what 
would that voyage take them over to the end? What's the plan from 
here on out? Well, we're going to be hope to be tracking toward the 
fast track over the Pacific, and they could hit the U.S. over Christmas. 
And, the terminus will be where? Past the Moroccan latitude, back 
home to England is what they would hope. Do they expect to encounter 
any other political obstacles along the way? As long as we can steer 
clear of Northern Korea, which is not in our track right now, I think 
we're home free as far as that goes. Because they do not have permission 
there? We do not have permission to fly over Northern Korea, but we 
are not tracking in that direction at this time. We should be well 
south of it. Well, congratulations for the good news. Well, thank 
you. So, they're back on course. They have permission to continue 
and proceed. Yes, and I would just like this time to say that we're 
incredibly grateful to the Chinese authorities and government for 
allowing us to continue. Do you know what changed their minds, by 
the way? Well, basically, from what I've heard, is that they're not 
pleased that we have infringed their airspace, and we did disobey 
their orders. But, I think they're allowing us to fly in respect to 
Ambassador Galsworthy. They've granted us the permission. So, we've 
come to appreciate that more. VOA's Barbara Klein and Russ Woodgates 
talking with round-the-world balloonist's spokeswoman, Laurie Lavine. 
The trio crossed into China from Nepal Lake, Monday, after detouring 
around Mediterranean storms and Iraq. The detours forced them to enter 
China, about 400 kilometers north of an agreed air corridor. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>