<DOC>
<DOCNO> VOA19981222.0500.2680 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
What would Christmas be without a decorated tree? For many farmers 
growing Christmas trees, it's their full-time job. Clark Gerwin is 
on the board of directors at the National Christmas Tree Association. 
It's based in Milwaukee, Wisconsin, in the U.S. Midwest. He talked 
to VOA's Challis McDonna about the production of Christmas trees in 
the United States. The expected harvest this year will range from 
probably 35-37 million trees. And, of course, the bulk of those trees 
are grown in the Pacific Northwest in the states of Washington and 
Oregon. They provide about one-third of all the trees harvested and 
consumed in the United States. The second-biggest production area 
is the state of North Carolina, where they grow primarily frazer fur 
and white pine. What different types of Christmas trees are there? 
Well, there's quite a number. The trees -- most of the trees that 
come out of the Pacific Northwest in Washington and Oregon are typically 
grand furs and noble furs and Douglas furs, which are grown in very 
large quantities there. North Carolina, of course, as I mentioned, 
is frazer fur and white pine. But the Scotch Pine production is largely 
in the north central portion of the country in Michigan, Wisconsin, 
Minnesota -- that general vicinity. But when you come down south, 
because the southern industry is relatively new, we have focused in 
this part of the country tremendously on exotic species. And we're 
growing Leland cypers, for instance, that comes to us from England. 
We're growing King Williams Pine that comes from Japan, Deatoria cedar 
from the Western Himalayas, Eastern Red Cedar, of course, which is 
the old traditional southern tree from many, many decades ago. So 
the list has really gotten to be quite interesting. And what do -- 
what differentiates those trees from each other? What does this Japanese 
King Williams Pine look like when compared to a Douglas Fur? Well, 
the needles on that tree are very, very sharp. They're only about 
two centimeters long. And they lay down the branches like fish scales. 
They're triangular shaped. And it is an incredibly unique tree. It's 
very open, very spacey, which makes it a very easy to decorate. And 
it's a very, very unique and fast-growing tree. So what is the most 
popular kind of Christmas tree? That's a bit hard to say. Certainly, 
the -- in the upper group is Frazer Fur and Scotch Pine -- although 
we've seen in recent years some diminishing of the popularity of the 
Scotch Pine in favor of Frazers and Grands and Nobles. And, of course, 
I'm referring to those cases where the trees are purchased on tree 
lots in the urban areas. On tree farms where the customer can come 
and select and cut his own tree, certainly, in the south the number 
one tree is Leland Cyprus. And that tree, as I said, comes to us from 
England. Clark Gerwing from the National Christmas Tree Association 
talked about Christmas tree production with VOA's Challis McDonna 
(ph0. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>