<DOC>
<DOCNO> VOA19981222.0500.1346 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
You name an interest; there's probably an American museum about it. 
. Popcorn? Yeah. Witchcraft? Rollerblading? Oh, my goodness! All these 
things. Even checkers. Now VOA travel reporter Ted Lanfare has seen 
dozens of these unusual museums -- probably more than he ever wants 
to see again. Including one in the Texas city of Waco devoted to soft 
drinks like Coke, Pepsi, Gingerale -- especially Dr. Pepper. Dr. Pepper. 
Alright. Are you a pepper? Well, if you'd lived in the United States 
in the 1970s, it's a question you would have been asked via television 
commercial -- part of an advertising campaign that ran for many years 
on behalf of a soft drink called Dr. Pepper. CHORUS OF SINGERS SINGING 
ON AN OLD 1970'S TELEVISION COMMERCIAL FOR "DR. PEPPER": I'm a pepper; 
he's a pepper; she's a pepper. If you drink Dr. Pepper, you're a pepper, 
too! The idea was that if you drank this soft drink, Dr. Pepper, you 
were hip, stylish. This bouncy ad campaign helped turn a small southern 
regional beverage into America's third-largest soft drink brand behind 
Coke and Pepsi. Today, there's a museum that tells the whole story. 
In fact, it's called the Dr. Pepper Museum in Waco, Texas. But it's 
really more than that. It's a fascinating collection devoted to the 
entire soft drink industry. It was at a little corner store in Waco 
in 1885, one year before Coca Cola was invented in Georgia, that a 
pharmacist named Charles Curtis Aldergin concocted Dr. Pepper. It's 
a soft drink that tastes a little like a cola with a hint of fruit 
flavor or something. Dr. Pepper drinkers never knew for sure what 
that something was. Pharmacist Aldergin said he wanted to make a drink 
that would taste as good as the drug store smelled. He started blending 
flavors to create that aroma inside a soft drink and ended up combining 
23 ingredients. He called it a Waco, but the name did not stick. The 
owner of the drug store changed the name to Dr. Pepper. The formula 
is a trade secret. A chemist can break down many of the ingredients. 
But imitators who've tried to copy the Dr. Pepper taste have been 
unable to match it. It has berry flavoring like raspberry, phosphoric 
acid that puts a little tingle on the back of your tongue, a little 
almond, vanilla. In fact, someone once spread the rumor that Dr. Pepper 
had prune juice in it and therefore would have laxative qualities 
that should be avoided. It does not. No prunes or prune flavoring 
in Dr. Pepper. There's no pepper in Dr. Pepper either. No pepper, 
no pepper sauce. Dr. Pepper began as a strictly southern drink. In 
fact, some folks in the South were found of tossing peanuts into their 
Dr. Pepper before drinking it. Joe Cavanaugh, the curator of the Dr. 
Pepper Museum, says it's not just a coincidence that Coke, Pepsi, 
and Dr. Pepper were all invented in the South. People in the South 
were always having more problems with heat and humidity and were always 
looking for something refreshing to keep them going through the day. 
Throughout the South, though, people were always working on inventing 
new soft drinks, because there was a large consumer base for it. Dr. 
Pepper is now truly international. The company is owned by the British 
company that makes Cadbury chocolates and Schweppes, mixers and soft 
drinks. Joe Cavanaugh solves one mystery about Dr. Pepper: why the 
numbers ten, two, and four appear in a circle on the Dr. Pepper bottle. 
Dr. Pepper recommended you drink three Dr. Peppers a day -- one at 
ten in the morning, one at two in the afternoon, and one at four in 
the afternoon -- based on a study by a Dr. Eddy from Columbia University 
on human blood sugar. And the advertising company came up with the 
idea, "Drink a bite to eat at, 2:00, and 4:00 in order to boost your 
blood sugar back up and have an even-keel going all day. As we said, 
the Dr. Pepper Museum in Waco is really the nation's soft drink museum. 
You can get information on more than 1,400 different soft drinks, 
new and old -- ginger ales, root beers, orange and grape sodas, other 
unusual drinks like Big Red. And there's one more aspect to the Dr. 
Pepper It's a sort of working laboratory on entrepreneurship and free 
enterprise. Visitors study the whole process of creating a product, 
patenting it, producing it, marketing it, and distributing it. Kids 
can actually create their own flavors of soft drinks from an assortment 
of syrups. Who knows? There may be a new soft drink giant in the making 
right there in Waco. I'm Ted Lanfare. CHORUS OF SINGERS SINGING ON 
AN OLD 1970'S TELEVISION COMMERCIAL FOR "DR. PEPPER": I'm a pepper; 
he's a pepper; she's a pepper. If you drink Dr. Pepper, you're a pepper, 
too! Us peppers are an interesting breed! An original taste is what 
we need! Ask any pepper and he'll say! 
</TEXT>
</DOC>