<DOC>
<DOCNO> VOA19981222.0500.3206 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
You may not know his name, but you may know his music. It's a staple 
on America's jazz radio stations and maybe where you are. Saxophonist 
Everett Harp would be the first to admit that his sound is smooth, 
modeled after one of his musical heroes: fellow saxophonist Grover 
Washington, Jr. Well, Harp has released a new CD, his fourth from 
Blue Note records. And, according to Doug Levine, this one is also 
very smooth. Everett Harp likes to take chances. His previous album 
for Blue Note was a collection of arrangements of songs by singer 
Marvin Gaye. Occasionally, Harp sings backup and plays the ewee, an 
electronic wind instrument or type of saxophone played through a synthesizer... 
And he's not afraid to venture into song writing. He wrote seven of 
the ten tunes on his new CD, including the title track, "Better Days." 
Everett Harp was born the youngest of eight children in Houston, Texas. 
Since the church was a vital part of his life, Harp was surrounded 
by gospel music. He learned to play keyboards and saxophone and later 
became a feature soloist in his high school band. Harp says his life 
changed after hearing jazz performed by Grover Washington, Jr., one 
of several early saxophone influences. I think the first influence 
I had was Stanley Turnteen. I went from that to Dexter Gordon then 
Grover. Early, early on I found a John Coltrane record in my parents' 
library, which was made up of mostly gospel music. And that was "Blue 
Train" -- uh, no "Soul Train." And I found in love with the song. 
And I'm talking I was around 10 years old. I fell in love with a song 
called, "I Want to Talk about You." And I said I'm going to play that 
song just like that. Everett Harp achieved almost instant success 
shortly after his arrival in Los Angeles in 1988. He performed with 
Anita Baker, Kenny Loggins, Patty LaBelle, and even President Clinton 
at his inaugural ball in 1993. The release of his first two solo albums 
confirmed that he was the new kid on the block for smooth jazz. As 
a band leader, Harp admits that life at the top can sometimes get 
a little lonely. You kind of get insecure about not working with as 
many people as you used to. I enjoy playing with other people, playing 
their music as well. It gives me the ability to stretch out and not 
do what I do no my stuff. Harp's new recording features lots of great 
jazz talent, including keyboardist George Duke, trumpeter Rick Borne, 
and guitarist Mark Antwine. Everett Harp recently entered the top 
ten on Billboard's contemporary jazz chart with his new album, "Better 
Days." I'm Doug Levine. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>