<DOC>
<DOCNO> VOA19981222.1600.2691 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
The world has just had its only known surviving set of octuplets. 
That's right -- eight babies born to a woman in Texas. The previous 
multiple birth record, in the United States, was seven babies born 
in Iowa, last year. According to the National Center for Health Statistics, 
the incidents of multiple births here in the U. S. has climbed six-fold 
in the past 25 years. Soysa Hope discussed the increase with Dr. Louis 
Keith, director of the center for the study of multiple births in 
Chicago, Illinois. Dr. Keith, in the past, most multiple births were 
twins. But now triplets are nothing new, and we also have septuplets, 
octuplets. Are twins still the majority of multiple births? DR. LOUIS 
DEITH, DIRECTOR OF CENTER FOR THE STUDY OF MULTIPLE BIRTHS, CHICAGO, 
IL. The majority of all the multiples are twins. In 1993, there were 
100,000 multiples born in the United States. Of that, 95,000 were 
twins, 5,000 were triplets and the higher order. Of the 5,000, 4,100 
were triplets, and about 900 were quadruplets and higher. Is the number 
of multiple births growing? It's a steady upward climb in 20 years. 
The last published statistics are in 1995 and that showed a slight 
increase, maybe five percent, ten percent. Why is there such an increase 
in multiple births? Two factors: Because we have an aging of the mothers 
giving births in the United States, and because of the widespread 
use of assisted reproductive technology. You mean fertility pills? 
Not only the fertility pills, but the fertility injections, and IVF, 
and AKC, and all the stuff that they do to promote fertility. Is it 
good or bad? Well, on the one hand it's good, because people who were 
infertile, get babies. On the other hand it's awful if they have quadruplets 
in which three or four of the die from prematurely or have cerebral 
palsy. So, it's a mixed blessing. Is the health of multiple-birth 
babies more in danger than the health of singleton babies? Definitely, 
the major problem affecting all multiples is the increased probability 
that they be born before 37 weeks, and weigh less than 2500 grams. 
Now, what's even worse is the percentage that are born before 32 weeks 
and weigh less than 1500 grams. Those children, whether they be twins, 
triplets, quadruplets, quintuplets, are dangerously close to serious 
complications. Do they get healthier as they grow older? Well, first 
they have to survive! The mortality is much greater for twins, triplets 
and quadruplets, than it is for singletons. Now, if they survive, 
and if they're not handicapped, then by the age of 15, everything 
sort of normalizes. The increase of multiple births seems to have 
generated a whole industry. We have twin magazines in America, and 
festivals for twins all over the world. Are multiple babies benefiting 
from that? Well, it makes them feel that they're not alone. Now this 
is very important for children, because they may be in a small village 
or a small town, and they may know nothing about other twins. And, 
people may not be terribly kind to them. So that these festivals help 
them realize that there are a lot of people who are the same way they 
are. We have a beautiful web sight called, "multiplebirth.com" And, 
we have hits from all over the world. And, we have it arranged so 
that somebody can find about organizations and meetings and research, 
and all sorts of things you want to know. Thank you very much, Dr. 
Louis Keith. I'm Vladyso Hope. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>