<DOC>
<DOCNO> VOA19981222.0500.0702 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
A delegation of Montenegrin officials recently finished a visit to 
Washington. They worry that the Serbian government will soon end their 
control of local affairs. A report on all of this from VOA's Douglas 
Roberts. Montenegro's Deputy Prime Minister, Dragesha Borzan, says 
the next episode of what he terms the Balkan nightmare is now under 
preparation and the target is Montenegro. Tensions have been rising 
between Belgrade and Pudvaidsera since the election late last year 
of the pro-democracy reformer Milo Joocanavich as Montenegro's new 
president. Mr. Joocanavich defeated the chief Montenegrin ally of 
Serbia's president, Slobodan Milosevich. Belgrade has refused to recognize 
the results of the polling. Serbia's state controlled media described 
Mr. Joocanavich as a trader bent on sabotaging what is left of the 
Yugoslav Federation. Deputy Prime Minister Borzan says Belgrade's 
propaganda campaign against his government continues to escalate along 
with Serbian inspired efforts to sabotage the Montenegrin economy. 
Even more ominous, he says, Serbia's Montenegrin allies are establishing 
para-military groups with the aim of creating chaos in the country, 
a move that could trigger direct Serbian military intervention. Mr. 
Borzan and other Montenegrin officials fear the trouble could begin 
next month, when Montenegrins loyal to the Milosevich government plan 
to hold public rallies to mark the orthodox new year. Speaking at 
the Washington-based U.S. Institute for Peace, Mr. Borzan and other 
Montenegrin officials urged the international community to take steps 
to prevent a Serbian crackdown. Experience has shown that Mr. Milosevich 
always backs down in the face of a credible threat of force, says 
Montenegrin lawmaker Melitsa Pay Yanovitch Yurasitch. So Montenegro's 
democracy, she adds, is in the hands of those capable of increasing 
the pressure on the Serbian leader. Some Washington-based advocacy 
groups are urging the State Department to draw what they term a red 
line around Montenegro, making it clear to President Milosevich that 
the West will not tolerate any move against the country. State Department 
spokesman James Rubin declines to discuss the details of Washington's 
conversations with the Serbian leader, but he said U.S. concerns about 
Montenegro have been communicated to Belgrade. We've said many times 
that we do not want to see the kind of repression that occurred in 
Kosovo occur in Montenegro -- that we do not support cessation of 
Montenegro. On the contrary, we support democracy and Montenegro working 
successfully with Serbia in a parliamentary system. Some Balkan experts 
here say that U.S. policy statement does not go far enough. "We failed 
to deter the violence in Bosnia or in Kosovo," said one Washington 
analyst. "And we cannot afford a similar failure in Montenegro. Douglas 
Roberts, VOA News, Washington. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>