<DOC>
<DOCNO> VOA19981222.0500.0517 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Memorial services were held Monday in both Britain and the United 
States to mark the exact moment 10 years ago when a New York-bound 
U.S. airliner exploded and crashed over Lockerbee, Scotland. A terrorist 
bomb aboard the aircraft caused the tragedy. VOA correspondent Laurie 
Cassman reports from London. Families of victims hope the men suspected 
of planning the bombing will be tried in court soon. Families and 
friends of victims of the airliner bombing, their heads bowed under 
a light Scottish rain, listened to a minister's words of remembrance 
during ceremonies in Lockerbee's Drivesdale Cemetery. Ten years ago, 
for you and for us, a bomb was ticking. Be assured of this: that there's 
another bomb ticking, the to a bomb of justice and truth. Be certain 
that our wreath-laying today is not a symbolic gesture. It is a declaration 
that we will not rest until we have justice and truth -- until all 
responsible for your deaths are held accountable. About 50 foreigners, 
including Americans, joined the people of Lockerbee for the tenth 
anniversary of one of the world's worst air disasters. 270 people 
lost their lives when a bomb exploded as it passed over the Scottish 
town. Prince Philip, Queen Elizabeth's husband, attended the ceremony 
and lingered to chat with relatives of the victims. Ten years later, 
the concern for most of the mourners is bringing the two Libyan suspects 
in the bombing case to trial. They may not have to wait much longer. 
Libya has been under U.N. sanction since 1992 for refusing to hand 
over the two men. Last August, the British and U.S. governments dropped 
their demands for a trial in one of their jurisdictions and agreed 
to Libya's original proposal to hold the trial in a third neutral 
country. Britain's assistant secretary of state for Mideast affairs, 
Dennis Fatchit, says the only obstacle now is Libya's objection to 
the suspect's serving time in a Scottish prison if convicted. It appears 
as if the only outstanding issue is if the two accused are found guilty 
where they will serve their prison sentence. And we have said that 
there is no question that that prison sentence will have to be in 
a Scottish prison because the trial is taking place under Scottish 
law, under a Scottish judge, in a Scottish court -- except the court, 
the judge, and are based in a third country. In an earlier interview 
with British radio, Foreign Secretary Robin Cook said there is no 
compromise on that issue. But he did offer to open up Scottish prisons 
for Libya's inspection. U.N. Secretary General Koffi Annan met with 
Libya's Colonel Mummar Kadaffi earlier this month to clarify certain 
points of concern. Last week, the Libyan General People's Congress 
expressed its satisfaction with a trial in a third country. But it 
is up to Libya's leader to make the final decision. Laura Cassman, 
VOA News, London. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>