<DOC>
<DOCNO> APW19981220.0502 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
An Iraqi opposition group claimed Sunday that a cousin of Saddam Hussein 
who commands the military in the southern region has executed several 
army officers for disobeying orders. Among those executed was the 
commander of the 11th Mechanized Division in the southern city of 
Amarah, the Supreme Council for the Islamic Revolution in Iraq said 
in a statement faxed to The Associated Press in Cairo. The cousin, 
former Defense Minister Ali Hasan Al-Majid, was given the command 
of the predominantly Shiite southern region as part of a reorganization 
by Saddam, who divided the country into four military districts on 
Wednesday. The Supreme Council said the executions took place immediately 
after al-Majid took control. The Supreme Council is based in Iran, 
and there has been no independent confirmation of the report. Iraqi 
authorities do not comment on such claims. Besides al-Majid, Saddam 
gave control of the other three new commands to trusted aides. The 
move was apparently aimed at thwarting possible civilian uprising 
in case U.S. and British airstrikes inflicted heavy military damage. 
The southern Shiite districts have long been trouble spots for Saddam's 
government. After the end of the 1991 Gulf War that routed Saddam's 
forces from Kuwait, 14 provinces in the Shiite south as well as Kurdish 
north rebelled against the government, but were put down brutally. 
The Supreme Council said the executed Mechanized Division's commander, 
who was not identified, objected to some arrangements made by al-Majid 
to counter Shiites in case they rebelled again. It said several other 
officers close to the commander were also executed in front of other 
officers by a firing squad brought by al-Majid from Baghdad. Al-Majid 
has deployed in four key towns members of the Republican Guard, members 
of the ruling Baath Party and soldiers from Saddam's Fedayeen, or 
Saddam's Commandos, an elite military unit. Al-Majid is known for 
brutality. Video footage broadcast by some Western television stations 
after the 1991 uprising showed al-Majid kicking in the face and chest 
several alleged rebels arrested by the Republican Guard. The Supreme 
Council statement said five other officers, in the al-Rasheed military 
camp on the outskirts of Baghdad, were executed on Friday after being 
suspected of trying to move their units outside the camp. It said 
the five officers barricaded themselves inside the camp with other 
soldiers. A unit from the Special Guard stormed the building and arrested 
the officers. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>