<DOC>
<DOCNO> APW19981220.0129 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Exiled Chinese dissident Wei Jingsheng will begin an unprecedented 
visit to Taiwan on Monday that underscores calls for democratic change 
in China and the sensitive relationship between Beijing and Taipei. 
Coming after elections described by Taiwan as a model for reform in 
China, Wei's nine-day sojourn will likely spark comparisons between 
the island's robust democracy and continuing one-party rule on the 
mainland. Wei will be received by top officials, including President 
Lee Teng-hui, becoming the first prominent Chinese dissident to officially 
meet Taiwan's leader. He will also meet with heads of the opposition 
Democratic Progressive Party, which favors Taiwan's formal and permanent 
independence from China, and the New Party, which backs reunification 
with China. In an interview with the United Daily News published Sunday, 
Wei was quoted saying he opposed the independence movement, but reunification 
between the sides should take a backseat to people's welfare. ``At 
present Taiwan independence is impossible. In the future it will not 
be necessary,'' the paper quoted Wei as saying. China says it will 
use force if necessary to gain control over the island, which has 
been politically united with the mainland for just four of the last 
100 years. Taiwan's ruling Nationalist Party says China must democratize 
before any progress can be made on reunification. Taiwan's peaceful 
transition to democracy over the last decade should be a model for 
China, which in size, population, and development challenges, dwarfs 
this newly-affluent island of 21 million people. Wei has received 
numerous invitations from Nationalist and opposition party politicians 
to visit since his release from a Chinese prison and exile to the 
United States late last year. He decided to accept an invitation from 
the private World League for Freedom and Democracy, and waited until 
after Dec. 5 polls for the legislature and mayors of Taiwan's two 
largest cities to avoid appearing to favor any one party, the paper 
said. Despite that, Wei has praised Lee's ``New Taiwanese'' campaign 
to promote solidarity between native-born Taiwanese and those who 
fled to the island from China in 1949. That concept has been credited 
with narrowing the ethnic divide and contributing to Nationalist gains 
in the elections. Taiwan's democracy is a threat to China, which will 
not pass up an opportunity to ``eat up the island,'' the paper quoted 
Wei saying. The best way to ensure the island's security is to aid 
China's democracy movement, it quoted him saying. Wei was quoted by 
the newspaper saying he expected to discuss assistance and funding 
with persons in Taiwan, but wouldn't accept political conditions on 
such help. Offering a poignant moment for dissidents on both sides 
of the Taiwan Straits, Wei, who spent 18 years in prison for advocating 
democracy, may also visit a human rights memorial near a former prison 
on remote Green Island. Hundreds of political prisoners were confined 
and scores executed on Green Island during nearly four decades of 
martial law imposed by the Nationalists after their retreat from advancing 
Communists in 1949. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>