<DOC>
<DOCNO> APW19981220.0774 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Given Iraq's secrecy and the limits of assessing the effect of airstrikes 
from afar, the full damage to Iraq in the four-day U.S-British military 
campaign probably will never be known. Here is a description of the 
damage from the viewpoint of the attackers, reporters and witnesses 
on the ground, and the Iraqi government. Americans and British The 
Pentagon says the 70-hour offensive hit nearly 100 targets and involved 
650 aircraft missions; 425 cruise missiles, each costing dlrs 750,000, 
were fired from U.S. ships in the Gulf or B-52 bombers. U.S. President 
Bill Clinton said the attacks inflicted ``significant damage'' on 
Iraqi weapons programs, command structures and military and security 
infrastructure. Among targets listed as hit by U.S. officials: 20 
command and control facilities, 18 facilities providing security for 
weapons programs, seven or eight of President Saddam Hussein's palaces 
and posts of the elite Republican Guard. The Pentagon showed videotapes 
of laser-guided missiles striking targets and aerial photos of bombed 
sites, one an Iraqi missile repair station that suffered moderate 
to heavy damage. British videotape showed bomb hits on Republican 
Guard facilities in southern Iraq, and officials said the Guard was 
a key target. Another British target was an oil refinery in the southern 
city of Basra, which was allegedly used to skirt the U.N. ban on Iraqi 
oil exports. Army Gen. Henry H. Shelton, chairman of the Joint Chiefs 
of Staff, showed reconnaissance photographs Sunday showing substantial 
damage to three Iraqi targets. At the Taji Missile Repair Facility 
outside of Baghdad, all five targeted buildings were hit and damaged, 
three of them severely. A missile components fabrication facility 
about 13 miles (20 kilometers) southwest of Baghdad was struck. And 
a liquid fuel rocket facility used to build and test rocket engines 
was severely damaged. Reporters and Witnesses Iraq controls access 
to damage sites for reporters, photographers and TV crews, and access 
was limited. After the first round of attacks, journalists were taken 
to a street in the upscale Baghdad neighborhood of Karada where a 
missile left a hole and broke a water main that flooded a street; 
no obvious military targets were nearby. Another site was Baghdad's 
Museum of Natural History, where a missile put a two-foot (2/3 of 
a meter) hole in a wall and shattered glass display cases for stuffed 
lions and hyenas. After the final attack Saturday, reporters were 
taken to the Ministry of Labor and Social Affairs, where two missiles 
left a 40-foot (12-meter) hole and shattered windows. Reporters were 
blocked from seeing where a third missile landed nearby. Journalists 
staying at the downtown Rashid hotel saw missiles hit in areas containing 
headquarters of the Special Security Services and the command center 
of the paramilitary Popular Army. Iraqi witnesses described damage 
as heavy in some parts of Baghdad. They said the headquarters of the 
Military Industrial Corporation, which runs Iraq's factories, was 
gutted. The area around Saddam's biggest palace was hit, but his whereabouts 
were not known at the time. Other targets they listed included security 
offices, headquarters of the ruling Baath Party, and al-Mustansiriya 
University in downtown Baghdad. Iraqi Officials Iraqi officials concentrated 
on reporting damage to what they consider civilian facilities. Among 
targets they listed as hit included a house belonging to Saddam's 
daughter Hala, which is in a Baghdad complex of homes for high-ranking 
officials and Saddam's family. Reports said the house was destroyed, 
but no one was home. Officials said many facilities hit were being 
monitored by U.N. arms inspectors to prevent renewal of weapons production. 
One such target was the Nida heavy machinery factory south of Baghdad. 
Also listed were headquarters of the security police and military 
intelligence, which officials said had been inspected by U.N. experts. 
Officials said missiles caused collateral damage to hospitals near 
the Defense Ministry in Baghdad. Also described as damaged were a 
Trade Ministry warehouse and the building housing state-run radio 
and television. Iraq's satellite station went off the air Thursday, 
and phone lines to the south were cut. Some electrical facilities 
were reported hit, and the official Iraqi News Agency said a missile 
damaged a historic palace, parts of which date to 1180 A.D. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>