<DOC>
<DOCNO> APW19981220.0151 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
With Myanmar's military mustering troops for a major offensive, some 
of its ethnic rebel opponents have formed an alliance and are attempting 
to forge closer ties with Thailand's military. Shan and Karenni rebels 
said this weekend they had joined forces to fight against the imminent 
offensive by the Myanmar army. They also said they would appeal to 
the Thai army to work with them to staunch the flow of narcotics along 
the Thai-Myanmar border. Thailand's Foreign Ministry gave qualified 
support to that proposal on Sunday. ``Thailand is willing to work 
with all concerned parties to combat drug trafficking, but without 
undermining the national integrity of the state of Myanmar,'' said 
Kobsak Chutikul, the Thai ministry spokesman. ``This doesn't mean 
that we will give recognition or assistance to them in their internal 
struggle against the Yangon government,'' Kobsak said. Thai army generals 
confirmed this week that Myanmar's military was mobilizing to attack 
several rebel guerrilla groups based near the Thai border. The groups, 
including ethnic Shan, Karenni, Wa and Karen forces have been fighting 
for autonomy from the government in Yangon for as long as 50 years. 
For decades, Thailand supported the rebels as a buffer between them 
and their traditional enemy Myanmar, also known as Burma. But as relations 
improved with Yangon, Thailand has reduced support for the rebels, 
who have since suffered a series of crippling defeats at the hands 
of Myanmar's army. Some of the rebel groups, particularly the Shan 
and Wa, have funded their insurgencies by trafficking in opium, the 
raw material for heroin. Myanmar is the world's largest producer of 
the deadly drug. The Shan State Army, the rebels who announced the 
alliance this weekend, are remnants of the army once commanded by 
opium warlord Khun Sa, who surrendered to Myanmar's military government 
in 1996 and now lives in Yangon. Their commander, Yord Serk, said 
the alliance will mean they have 20,000 troops in the field. That 
figure could not be independently confirmed, however. Although Myanmar's 
military government is considered a pariah by many Western countries 
because of its rampant human rights violations, support for the rebels 
has been tepid because of their drug trafficking. In attempt to make 
themselves more palatable to the international community, Yord Serk 
said his troops have now shunned drug trafficking and would fight 
against it. ``SSA is employing more than just military means to achieve 
our objective. We are looking at political means as well,'' he said. 
The Karenni National Progressive Party signed a ceasefire agreement 
with Myanmar's military in 1996, but it quickly broke down in disputes 
over controlling revenue from timber exports to Thailand. The Shan 
and Karenni people and their armies live and operate in different 
provinces in Myanmar, so their alliance may prove to be more symbolic 
than practical in terms of battlefield efficiency. Myanmar's ethnic 
groups also have a history of fighting among each other, leading to 
the withering of several alliances in the past. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>