<DOC>
<DOCNO> APW19981220.0210 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
The morning after the United States and Britain ended punishing airstrikes 
on Iraq, Iraqi newspapers declared victory and pledged not to compromise 
on contentious U.N. weapons inspections. ``Victorious again!'' crowed 
the banner headline Sunday in Al-Musawir Al-Arabi weekly. ``Iraq does 
not deserve but victory with God's help,'' said Al-Thawra, which is 
published by Iraqi President Saddam Hussein's ruling Baath Party. 
The papers also suggested that Iraq would stand by its vow to end 
the work of the U.N. Special Commission, which is charged with eliminating 
Iraq's weapons of mass destruction. It was Iraq's failure to cooperate 
with UNSCOM that prompted the United States and Britain to launch 
airstrikes overnight Wednesday-Thursday. U.S. President Bill Clinton 
and British Prime Minister Tony Blair called a halt to the bombardment 
Saturday night. As Al-Jumhuriya put it in a red headline at the top 
of its front page: ``Swear by God, we will never negotiate.'' Iraq 
has long contended that it has complied with U.N. resolutions calling 
for the elimination of its chemical, biological and nuclear weapons 
as well as long-range missiles. But UNSCOM, headed by Richard Butler, 
says Iraq still is concealing weapons and the means to produce them. 
U.N. trade sanctions imposed after Iraq's 1990 invasion of Kuwait 
will not be lifted until UNSCOM certifies that the weapons are eliminated. 
Iraqi Vice President Taha Yassin Ramadan on Saturday night announced 
that the Baghdad regime no longer would work with UNSCOM, declaring 
``its mission is over.'' It was not immediately clear what would happen 
to the U.N. weapons inspectors, who were evacuated last week to Bahrain, 
or the more than 100 U.N. humanitarian workers taken by bus to the 
Jordanian capital Amman. Caroline Cross, spokeswoman for UNSCOM, said 
in Bahrain on Sunday that 50 inspectors there were ``sitting tight 
and waiting for further instructions from New York.'' Other inspections, 
she said, had been sent home for the holidays. U.N. officials in Amman 
refused to say when humanitarian workers would return to Baghdad. 
When they were evacuated last week, U.N. officials said they would 
be brought back as soon as possible to resume oversight of U.N. aid 
programs. The Iraqi government has not released a final casualty toll 
from the airstrikes, but previous reports indicated that at least 
42 people were killed and 96 wounded. Despite the halt to American 
and British airstrikes, air raid sirens sounded in Baghdad at about 
8:15 a.m. (0515 gmt) Sunday. The sirens were not accompanied by any 
anti-aircraft fire, and it appeared they were sounded in error. Clinton, 
in announcing an end to the attacks, said he hoped U.N. arms inspectors 
could return to Baghdad with full Iraqi cooperation. Blair made a 
similar statement and said Sunday that ``we want to see the weapons 
inspectors go back in there.'' Both leaders threatened further military 
action, if necessary, to force Iraqi compliance. The U.N. teams not 
only must eliminate weapons of mass destruction but also are responsible 
for a long-term monitoring program to ensure Saddam doesn't rebuild 
his arsenal. After Clinton's announcement, some Iraqis said the president's 
decision to bomb had only produced more destruction for Iraq and failed 
to change the situation of Iraqis suffering under U.N. sanctions. 
``What has he gained? All these missiles and destruction ... all this 
suffering and it ends as if nothing has happened,'' said Muhend Fawzi, 
an engineer. On Saturday night, two missiles struck near the Labor 
and Social Affairs Ministry, gouging a 40-foot (12-meter) hole into 
the earth. Al-Thawra said Sunday that 15 people were wounded in the 
attack and six cars were destroyed. Iraqi officials had said Saturday 
that three guards were injured. Witnesses also reported missile hits 
near Al-Mustansiriya University in central Baghdad, and smoke could 
be seen rising from the area. The last attack came soon after Baghdad's 
residents broke their fast on the first day of Ramadan, the Muslim 
holiday that marks Prophet Mohammed's receiving the Koran from God 
1,400 years ago. Muslims fast during daylight throughout the month. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>