<DOC>
<DOCNO> CNN19981220.1000.1465 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> CAPTION </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
House speaker-to-be Bob Livingston's announcement not to take the 
top congressional post and leave Capitol Hill was shocking but familiar. 
Bruce Morton reports. It isn't new. Gary Hart was accused of carrying 
on in 1987 with a woman named Donna rice. Have you ever committed 
adultery? I do not have to answer that question. But it doomed Hart's 
presidential campaign. And this Congress has seen a parade of confessions. 
Representative Helen Chenoweth admitted an affair and won re-election. 
Dan Burton, heading a campaign finance investigation, acknowledged 
an illegitimate child. Judiciary chairman Henry Hyde admitted a decades-ago 
affair. And now Bob Livingston, the speaker-elect, has resigned that 
job and will leave Congress. It is a surrender to a developing sexual 
McCarthyism. Are we going to have a new test if someone wants to run 
for public office -- "are you now or have you ever been an adulterer?" 
McCarthy, the red-baiting senator of the 1950s, used to ask that about 
communism. But it's any witch-Hunt, as in Arthur Miller's play about 
Salem. Smear anyone you don't like. I saw goody Osborne with the Devil! 
I saw Bridget Bishop with the Devil! Livingston has friends in both 
parties. His decision shocked many. I believe his decision to retire 
is a terrible capitulation to the Negative forces that are consuming 
our political system and our country. Some of the revelations came 
from this ad, paid for by "hustler" magazine publisher Larry Flynt. 
He got some good leads, he says. If these people are going to sit 
in judgment on the president, they should not have any skeletons in 
their own closet. Maybe. But there is a price to be paid for enforced 
purity. We're going to become a nation where people who have sins 
-- and every one of us is a sinner -- will be afraid to enter the 
ranks of public service. Is that what we want? Is that what we are 
coming to? Perhaps we are. Some Christian conservatives in the house 
were really upset over livingston's confession of past sin. But a 
fidelity test would have barred from office, just in this century, 
presidents Franklin Roosevelt, John Kennedy and Lyndon Johnson at 
a Minimum, and no one knows how many congressmen. Would the capitol 
wear a scarlet "A" for adultery? I think the people who are in public 
life at any level owe the public a Good job. They need to be held 
accountable for their public duties. Their private lives should be 
their own. Infidelity, adultery, is not a public act. It's a private 
act. And the government, the Congress, has no business intruding into 
private acts. But it isn't just the government. Political campaigns 
run Negative personal ads. And what about being convicted for drunk 
driving? News media, now on the net or on the air every hour of every 
day, are increasingly willing to report stories they wouldn't have 
reported a Decade or two ago. We must stop the politics of personal 
destruction. But how? How do you go back to the old way -- to "don't 
ask, don't tell"? Bruce Morton, CNN, Washington. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>