<DOC>
<DOCNO> CNN19981220.1300.0128 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> CAPTION </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
President Clinton's case is now in the hands of the Senate, where 
the outcome may depend on the strategy his lawyers take. Brooks Jackson 
reports. In the Senate trial of William Jefferson Clinton, the president 
is expected to present multiple defenses. One defense, a plea bargain. 
Clinton lawyers are expected to push for the Senate to censure the 
president and then adjourn the impeachment trial, leaving him in office. 
Well, the trial has to start, but it's certainly possible that a majority 
of members could decide they favor some other course. Under Senate 
rules, a vote of 51 senators could end the trial at any time, but 
there are only 45 democratic senators. And the republican leader is 
firmly opposed. We will go to a trial, and there won't be any deal 
making, as we begin our job in the Senate. Another possible Clinton 
defense -- a motion to dismiss the charges and send the impeachment 
articles back for a new vote in the new house. It's based on a constitutional 
argument, the president's defenders raised during house hearings. 
When the 105th house dies on January 3rd, all its unfinished business 
dies with it. There will be five fewer republicans in the house next 
year as a result of november's elections. And one of the impeachment 
articles passed by only nine votes. If procedural maneuvers fail, 
the Clinton defense is likely to argue for the equivalent of a directed 
acquittal, asking the Senate to reject the charges without hearing 
any evidence. Clinton defenders argue that even if the accusations 
against the president are all true, they do not warrant his removal 
from office. They say these articles show high crimes. The record 
of historians who wrote the committee say they are low crimes and 
do not justify the drastic remedy of impeachment. The central charge 
is that the president lied to the federal grand jury August 17th. 
You are free to infer that my testimony is that I did not have sexual 
relations, as I understood that term to be defined. Including touching 
her breast, kissing her breast, touching her genitalia. That's correct. 
Not perjury, according to the defense. In his mind, and that's the 
heart and soul of perjury, he thought he was being evasive, but truthful. 
That argument was rejected soundly by house republicans. What rational 
person can accept such a defense? Such a defense is an insult to our 
intelligence, an insult to judgment and to common sense. And on the 
charge of obstruction of justice, Monica Lewinsky's testimony is key. 
Clinton lawyers need to discredit her testimony where it conflicts 
with that of the president, on matters such as return of gifts, and 
her false affidavit. But that could be tricky -- they don't want to 
discredit her statement that no one asked her to lie or promised her 
a job for silence. A big question, will the president take the stand 
in his own defense? He could, but 130 years ago, President Andrew 
Johnson didn't even attend his impeachment trial. So we'll have to 
see. Brooks Jackson, CNN, Washington. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>