<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981220.0203 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Even before Rep. Rick Lazio, a Republican from Suffolk County, N.Y., 
had a chance to announce last week that he would vote for impeachment, 
the first threats against his political future were already thundering 
out of state Democratic headquarters. ``There is no escaping accountability 
on the impeachment issue,'' Judith Hope, the state Democratic chairwoman, 
said in a statement on Tuesday that singled out Lazio. ``Any representative 
who casts a vote in support of impeaching the president will be forced 
to defend their decision in 2000 and beyond.'' The near party-line 
vote to impeach President Clinton on Saturday may have left a cloud 
over the president, but it has also, in the minds of many Democrats, 
handed their party a powerful political cudgel that could win them 
back the majority in Congress two years from now. They are buoyed 
by public opinion polls showing that the president, or at least his 
policies, remain in favor, particularly in the Northeast. ``We believe 
that this is such an important issue that people will remember in 
two years,'' said Robert Ives, executive director of the Connecticut 
State Democratic Committee. He said the party will hammer Rep. Nancy 
Johnson, a moderate Republican from New Britain, for voting for impeachment. 
``She followed the Newt Gingrich line of, `Let's get the president,' 
'' Ives said. ``She has proven once again that her vote is not her 
own.'' Like many Republicans who supported impeachment, Mrs. Johnson 
predicted that her constituents would not punish her at the polls 
for casting a vote that was based on her moral convictions and legal 
concerns. ``I don't think people are thinking about this as Republican 
and Democrat,'' she said. ``They are thinking about it as citizens 
of this country.'' In 1996, Clinton won handily in New York, New Jersey 
and Connecticut, and Democratic leaders are convinced that the majority 
of the electorate in those states are bitterly opposed to his impeachment. 
The Democrats also contend that anti-impeachment fervor helped bring 
down two Republican incumbents from the region last month: Rep. Michael 
Pappas of New Jersey, who had lavishly praised independent counsel 
Kenneth Starr, and Sen. Alfonse D'Amato of New York, who had spearheaded 
the Senate Republicans' Whitewater investigation. After his defeat, 
D'Amato declared that impeachment would be damaging to the Republican 
Party, a message echoed by two other prominent state Republicans, 
New York Mayor Rudolph Giuliani and Gov. George Pataki. But the central 
question for Democrats is whether voters really care deeply enough 
about the issue to let it color their decisions two years from now. 
Republican leaders and consultants contend that Clinton's popularity 
is wide but thin, and could dissipate quickly if the economy turns 
downward or he is implicated in new scandals. ``Impeachment is almost 
certain to be overtaken by events in the next 22 months,'' said Kieran 
Mahoney, a political adviser to both D'Amato and Pataki. Mahoney acknowledged 
that impeachment could be a serious political problem for Republicans, 
but more likely in a primary election, where conservative voters tend 
to dominate and a candidate's vote against impeachment might prompt 
a challenge from the right. It is not clear whether Republicans from 
New York, New Jersey and Connecticut who voted for impeachment heeded 
the advice of consultants like Mahoney, or bent to pressure from their 
conservative leadership, as Democrats asserted, or simply followed 
their consciences. In the end, only three of the 21 House Republicans 
from the region voted against impeachment: Christopher Shays of Connecticut, 
and Peter King and Amo Houghton of New York. All three said Clinton's 
behavior had not met their definitions of an impeachable offense. 
None of the three seems to be in imminent political danger. King has 
a strongly conservative voting record and would remain difficult to 
beat in a primary. Houghton is a respected figure in his district, 
where his family runs Corning Industries. And Shays comes from a proudly 
centrist Republican district where he generally wins going away every 
two years. Still, Shays rejected the idea that voters would forget 
about impeachment quickly. ``Voters will remember,'' he said. ``That's 
unavoidable. And frankly, it's called the democratic system. Controversy 
is generally thought of as the enemy of the incumbent, and there was 
lots of controversy.'' Rep. Gerald Solomon, a New York Republican 
who voted for impeachment, disagreed. ``I think most all of the members 
win by substantial margins,'' he said. ``That means they have considerable 
trust placed in them by their voters, and the voters are going to 
take their word for what they do, even if they don't agree.'' Indeed, 
a number of Republicans who voted for impeachment come from districts 
that are safely enough Republican to make an electoral backlash in 
2000 seem unlikely. They included Sherwood Boehlert and Vito Fossella 
from New York, and Marge Roukema and Rodney Frelinghuysen from New 
Jersey. But a few come from politically volatile districts. New York's 
1st District on the east end of Long Island, for instance, had a Democratic 
representative for many years before Michael Forbes won in an upset 
in the Republican tide of 1994. Forbes has never been comfortable 
with the conservative Republicans who run Congress and has had a friendly 
relationship with Clinton. But he still voted for impeachment, and 
Democrats say they will make him pay for it. Voting for impeachment 
may cause bigger problems for Republicans who want to run for statewide 
office. Lazio, for instance, is interested in filling Sen. Daniel 
Patrick Moynihan's seat when he retires in 2000. His vote for impeachment 
might help him in a Republican primary, particularly against someone 
like Giuliani, who opposed impeachment. But Lazio's vote is also likely 
to turn at least some Democrats against him in a general election, 
where Democrats outnumber Republicans 3 to 2 in New York. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>