<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981220.0236 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
The New York Times said in an editorial Monday, Dec. 21: After the 
polarizing impeachment proceedings of the House, it is heartening 
to see the Senate already taking a more measured, less partisan approach 
to Bill Clinton's serious misconduct. An early and partial sampling 
of Senate sentiment Sunday suggests there are the makings of a bipartisan 
deal that would bring this matter to a just and speedy resolution 
by severely censuring Clinton while allowing him to complete his term. 
For the first time since impeachment barreled out of control in the 
House, there may actually be some leaders in Congress willing to negotiate 
an endgame agreement with the White House. As the House amply demonstrated, 
bringing the Clinton case to a fair denouement is exceedingly difficult 
in the politically supercharged atmosphere of Washington. The Senate 
should have a better chance of success for several reasons, including 
the wise constitutional arithmetic that requires 67 votes to convict 
Clinton and evict him from office. With that outcome considered highly 
unlikely in the absence of compelling new evidence against Clinton, 
alternative solutions will get the serious consideration they never 
received in the House. Former Presidents Gerald Ford and Jimmy Carter 
outline a plausible blueprint for censuring Clinton on Monday's Op-Ed 
page. It was fairly music to the ears of a pained nation Sunday to 
hear four senators _ Orrin Hatch and Mitch McConnell, both Republicans, 
and Christopher Dodd and Patrick Leahy, Democrats _ talk about the 
Senate's obligations in a judicious, thoughtful way. In a joint appearance 
on NBC's ``Meet the Press,'' the four men spoke of the need to place 
the national interest above party interests, and none of them, including 
the usually partisan McConnell, excluded the possibility of censure. 
Translating that constructive spirit into action will require a number 
of statesmanlike decisions by Clinton and the Senate. As the four 
senators, as well as Ford and Carter, suggest, Clinton must finally 
give up the concoction that he did not lie under oath in his August 
grand-jury appearance. All settlement possibilities flow from that 
confession, and without it Clinton will force the Senate and the country 
to endure an extended trial that will not serve the national interest 
and will further weaken an already shriveled presidency. With it, 
Clinton can unlock the door to a censure package. As Sen. Robert Byrd 
has noted, the Constitution leaves little doubt that the Senate must 
open a trial when presented with articles of impeachment by the House. 
But there is no requirement that a case be carried to conviction or 
acquittal. By a simple majority vote, a trial can be suspended or 
ended at any time. As Ford and Carter properly propose, a censure 
deal would likely require a pledge from Kenneth Starr to refrain from 
prosecuting Clinton once he left the White House. While the White 
House must prepare to defend Clinton in a Senate trial, it should 
initiate early, serious discussions with Senate leaders about the 
potential shape of a censure deal. Clinton would do well to select 
former Sen. George Mitchell to handle this work and to direct his 
defense. The Senate, for its part, must move energetically to engage 
Clinton's representatives. The indispensable element in all this is 
the commodity most lacking in Washington at this troubled time _ seasoned 
leadership at both ends of Pennsylvania Avenue. It is time for Clinton 
to end both his yearlong estrangement from the law and his refusal 
to help settle the mess created by his recklessness, and for Congress 
to bring this case to a close. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>