<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981220.0102 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
While American officials went on television Sunday to assert the military 
achievements of four nights of air attacks against Iraq, there is 
considerably less clarity about American strategy now. There is no 
question that President Saddam Hussein's military capacity has been 
``degraded,'' to use the Clinton administration's word of choice, 
but it is not clear how degraded, or for how long. Saddam retains 
the capacity and the scientists to produce biological and chemical 
weapons, which do not need to be delivered by sophisticated missiles 
and cannot be eliminated by air strikes. And it is abundantly clear 
that Saddam has emerged from the rubble like a jack-in-the-box, alive 
and shouting defiance, his position strengthened in Arab public opinion 
simply by his survival against the high-tech onslaught of the United 
States, Israel's prime ally. If Saddam's government and his grip on 
power have been ``shaken'' by these air strikes, as senior American 
officials privately hoped, there was no immediate indication that 
he is about to fall, and the diplomatic consensus on Iraq in the United 
Nations Security Council has again been shattered. President Jacques 
Chirac of France called Sunday for a ``fundamental review'' of the 
entire U.N. policy toward Iraq, including the replacement of the weapons 
inspection regime. Even Prime Minister Tony Blair of Britain, the 
only ally to join the bombing campaign against Iraq, said, ``We need 
a future strategy.'' The gap between policy goals (getting rid of 
Saddam and eliminating Iraq's weapons of mass destruction) and policy 
tools (with weapons inspection probably finished, air power imperfect 
and the Security Council split) seems wider than ever. Confusion about 
what to do next was evident in new calls by Blair, President Clinton 
and Secretary of State Madeleine Albright for Saddam to let U.N. weapons 
inspectors back into Iraq, under undefined but somehow more enforceable 
rules. Given that neither the Unites States nor Britain believes Saddam 
ever intends to cooperate fully with weapons inspections, those calls 
seemed a bit disingenuous. But officials of both countries know that 
working within the United Nations, and specific Security Council resolutions 
passed during and after the Persian Gulf war in 1991, is the only 
way to justify military action against Iraq. They both say future 
air strikes are possible early next year. They also insist that sanctions 
remain in place. That means they must also support, at least rhetorically, 
the weapons inspections that are Iraq's only way of getting the sanctions 
lifted. The administration has recently begun describing its Iraq 
policy as what Albright terms ``containment plus regime change.'' 
Last week, she defined that policy as having short, medium and long-term 
goals. Military strikes now _ after nearly one year of threatening 
them because of the U.N. inspectors' inability to do their job _ are 
not a sign of the failure of American policy, she insists, but a ``short-term 
goal.'' The assaults can be repeated or applied as necessary to try 
to defang Saddam and buy more time. Such strikes, combined with sanctions 
and warnings to Saddam not to use any terror weapons, constitute ``containment.'' 
But there are considerable doubts, even among America's closest allies 
in NATO countries, that the administration is willing to withstand 
the diplomatic damage of regular unilateral air strikes against Iraq. 
Even last week's long-delayed attacks were held to only four days 
out of concern for Arab, Russian and Chinese reaction. In the medium 
term, Albright said, the goal is to get Iraq to comply with U.N. resolutions, 
including a functioning regime of weapons inspection. Privately, American 
officials not only do not believe that Saddam's Iraq will ever comply, 
but they also do not really want him to try. Because if he does, the 
rest of the world _ and certainly Russia, China and France on the 
Security Council _ will rush to give him the benefit of the doubt. 
And that would make Albright's longer-term goal _ the overthrow of 
Saddam _ even less plausibly attainable than it now seems. For there 
is severe doubt, both within the American government and outside it, 
that Clinton is prepared to pay the price to rid the world of Saddam. 
Most officials regard the new emphasis on ``regime change'' as a way 
to answer those critics who felt that American policy had no long-term 
goal at all. And they note that it was Congress that pushed the $97-million 
Iraq Liberation Act onto the White House, which could not veto it. 
In fact, those officials say, the administration and the CIA had largely 
given up on new efforts to overthrow Saddam, given embarrassing failures 
in the past. While Cabinet bosses assert publicly that there is a 
new seriousness to the effort to bring him down, senior officials 
joke that the money will provide the Iraqi opposition, whose leaders 
live in London, with used American armored personnel carriers in which 
to ride through Mayfair. ``The basic problem is that we don't have 
a larger strategic policy for Iraq,'' said Zbigniew Brzezinski, the 
former national security adviser to President Carter and an Albright 
mentor. ``Our policy is either strike them or starve them, and neither 
accomplishes our objectives.'' 
</TEXT>
</DOC>