<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981220.0238 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
As Troy Masters sat in a hospital exam room the other day _ poked, 
pricked and interrogated by doctors on the most intimate details of 
his life _ his eyes reddened and his voice broke as researchers asked 
if he was sure of what he was doing. Masters is an affable 37-year-old 
with a sly sense of humor and a soft Tennessee drawl. He is also gay, 
HIV-negative and sexually active, a profile that makes him a fitting 
candidate for the world's first full-scale test of a vaccine to prevent 
AIDS. Last week, Masters became one of the first volunteers in New 
York City to qualify for the experiment, which is to be conducted 
by a California company in 50 clinics across the nation, including 
three in Manhattan. The vaccine trial will involve 5,000 volunteers 
in the United States and 2,500 in Thailand. Masters' first shot is 
scheduled for Tuesday morning. ``It's anxiety-producing and exciting 
at the same time, but I'm going to have to live with this crisis one 
way or the other,'' he told doctors from the New York University School 
of Medicine, which runs one clinic at Bellevue Hospital Center. ``I 
don't feel scared away from the study, if that's what you mean. I 
want to do this.'' Masters has agreed to be inoculated seven times 
over the next three years with a genetically engineered vaccine, known 
as Aidsvax, to find out whether it works. Researchers say he cannot 
contract HIV from the vaccine because it contains a fragment that 
is not capable of reproducing. But he may appear to be HIV-positive 
on a standard blood test because of the presence of vaccine-induced 
antibodies. In return, Masters gets only a $3 Metrocard and $10 for 
each visit to the AIDS Clinical Trials Unit at Bellevue. He may also 
get a sore arm, headaches, a rash, a fever and other side effects 
that are not yet known. And if he is discriminated against because 
of a false-positive test result, and wants to seek legal redress, 
he will have to pay for a lawyer himself. Masters, publisher of a 
biweekly newspaper called Lesbian &AMP; Gay New York, took all this 
in on a recent morning. Then, with a flourish, he signed the consent 
forms to be screened for the study and to be tested again for the 
human immunodeficiency virus, the final hurdle. ``The virus needs 
a vaccine,'' he said. ``If there is a front of activism that needs 
to be developed, that's it. To that end, I'm giving my behavior over 
to science. This is like signing for permission to end the AIDS crisis.'' 
Whether the vaccine to be injected into Masters has any promise is 
a matter of heated debate. Some scientists and advocates for people 
with AIDS are skeptical, and fear that the experiment will drain the 
pool of people willing to participate in future trials of AIDS vaccines. 
They also worry that volunteers will get a false sense of security 
about the vaccine, which could expose them to infection. But the vaccine, 
produced by Vaxgen Inc. of San Francisco, has drawn attention to an 
area of AIDS research that until recently has been overshadowed by 
the success of another treatment, drug cocktails that include protease 
inhibitors. In the last few years, HIV vaccines have emerged as a 
major priority of AIDS research efforts. The federal government spends 
$200 million annually in search of a vaccine, and devotes more money 
to vaccine research every year. ``It is now the favored direction 
of endeavor,'' said Dr. Anthony S. Fauci, director of the National 
Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases. A handful of vaccine 
candidates, including a federally supported one involving a weakened 
canary pox virus, are at various stages of development. But none are 
as far along as the Vaxgen vaccine. In June, the Food and Drug Administration 
authorized full-scale testing, which is bankrolled by Vaxgen. ``Up 
until this vaccine was moved forward, no vaccine was tested for efficacy 
anywhere else in the world,'' said Dr. Seth Berkley, president of 
the International AIDS Vaccine Initiative, a nonprofit group based 
in Manhattan. ``We're now moving into trials, which is what we have 
to do. It's the only way to learn.'' The major question the new tests 
aim to answer is how effective the experimental vaccine will be among 
people who are exposed to HIV because of high-risk sexual practices 
in the United States and intravenous-drug use in Thailand. In New 
York City, Vaxgen hopes to recruit 600 healthy, uninfected volunteers. 
Nationwide, the 5,000 participants will include gay men as well as 
women who engage in risky heterosexual behavior. A randomly selected 
two-thirds will receive the vaccine and the rest will receive a placebo. 
The initial recruitment focuses on gay men, but the plan is to branch 
out and aggressively recruit women. Counselors have contacted half 
a dozen community groups concerned with women's health, and are setting 
up meetings with their directors. However, the study's administrative 
coordinator at the Bellevue clinic, Robert Hagerty, acknowledges that 
recruitment is difficult. ``We haven't had huge numbers of people 
calling,'' he said. One of the main obstacles will be to convince 
people that the vaccine is safe. ``Every person who comes in raises 
that fear,'' Hagerty said. ``We answer their questions directly and 
honestly. You can't get HIV from this vaccine.'' Previous studies 
of the vaccine, on animals and humans, have demonstrated its safety, 
researchers say. So far, the Bellevue clinic has seen 11 men who were 
determined to be eligible for the study. Two have received vaccinations. 
Arriving at the clinic for his first visit last week, Masters said 
he had put himself forward after losing nearly all of his friends 
in the last two decades. For hours, Masters answered a blizzard of 
questions. Would his participation in the study cause him subconsciously 
to have unprotected sex? Masters shook his head. What situations might 
tempt him to do so? How many sexual partners has he had in the last 
six months? Did he know that he might not be able to take part in 
future HIV vaccine trials? Did he know that he might not be able to 
serve in the military? ``Oh, as if I could,'' he said. Masters sees 
himself as a crusader. ``People are terrified of vaccines,'' he said. 
``The word that keeps coming up is, `You're going to let yourself 
be a guinea pig.' ``I know we can create a culture where going to 
vaccine trials is something that people want to do. It's OK for people 
to do and it's safe. It's the right thing we should be doing if we 
are HIV-negative.'' nn An experimental AIDS vaccine may be a particularly 
tough sell to some of the hardest-hit populations, including young 
gay men and blacks. Health officials have long contended with the 
belief, popular among some blacks, that HIV is a man-made virus and 
that acquired immune deficiency syndrome is a genocidal plot. In an 
exam room at Bellevue the other day, Masters stared at a needle as 
it was pressed slowly into a vein to draw blood for an HIV test. Also 
in the room was Michael Marmor, one of the principal investigators 
for the NYU trial. Marmor, an epidemiologist, said the Vaxgen trial 
is similar to Jonas Salk's polio vaccine trials. He pointed out that 
the Salk vaccine was not 100 percent effective, but it still saved 
many people before a better vaccine came along. ``It's exactly at 
the same stage of testing, the last stage, when they do efficacy and 
evaluate what percentage of infections are prevented,'' said Marmor, 
who also conducted some of the earliest epidemiological work on Kaposi's 
sarcoma, an AIDS-related cancer, in 1981. The Vaxgen vaccine is an 
updated version of one that an advisory panel of experts rejected 
four years ago for federally financed large-scale testing in the United 
States. The experts had expressed doubts about its effectiveness, 
questioning its benefit to a significant proportion of recipients. 
The original vaccine was developed from only one strain of HIV, the 
one most commonly found in the United States. The new version will 
provide broader coverage to patients because it is derived from two 
strains of HIV that are prevalent in the nation, according to Dr. 
Donald P. Francis, a virologist who is leading the international vaccine 
research effort and is president of Vaxgen. But some scientists doubt 
the vaccine's efficacy, saying earlier tests show that it boosted 
only one part of the immune system involving antibodies, and consequently 
is unlikely to protect large numbers of recipients. Antibodies are 
proteins formed to destroy invading germs in the blood. Many scientists 
believe that an effective HIV vaccine will need to boost another element 
of the immune system, killer T-cells that destroy virus-infected cells. 
``I don't think we will learn anything that we don't already know,'' 
said John Moore, a staff investigator at the Aaron Diamond AIDS Research 
Center in Manhattan. ``I think it's a great shame they are testing 
in New York. It's a travesty they are doing it anywhere.'' More than 
half of the clinics that will participate have been selected. But 
not every clinic that has been approached is rushing to take part. 
In Houston, one community research organization turned Vaxgen down 
a few months ago. An ethics board at the Houston Clinical Research 
Network decided that participating in the study would prevent its 
patients from enrolling in more promising vaccine studies. Masters 
shrugs off the naysayers. Sitting in the exam room, he said the Vaxgen 
experiment is a beginning and a big deal. He also senses a circle 
closing for him. He is memorializing the pain that the epidemic has 
caused him, the dozens of friends who have died of AIDS. ``It is a 
way of trying to shut the door on this whole thing,'' he said. ``It 
is empowering.'' 
</TEXT>
</DOC>