<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981220.0095 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Reports of a drastic falloff in the 18- to 34-year-old television 
audience this season, costing the broadcast networks tens of millions 
of dollars, have touched off an angry debate between the networks 
and the company that provides the measurements they live by. Broadcasters' 
relations with Nielsen Media Research, always tense, have degenerated 
to the point where an NBC executive accused Nielsen of ``something 
approaching fraud'' for reporting that the young-adult viewing audience 
has plunged 6 percent this fall, compared with its level a year earlier. 
Nick Schiavone, senior vice president of research for NBC, made that 
accusation in an interview on Friday in which he described Nielsen's 
measurements as seriously flawed. ``If we don't get an answer soon,'' 
about how Nielsen intends to correct its data, Schiavone said, ``then 
they are in breach of their contract with us.'' With the economics 
of network television already at a crisis point, a reported decline 
in viewing by the young adults highly prized by advertisers has enormous 
financial implications. Schiavone estimated that NBC has lost $66 
million in advertising revenue since September because of Nielsen's 
audience data. That loss comes at a time when NBC's profits are already 
in steep decline because of the departure of ``Seinfeld'' and the 
enormously inflated cost of other shows, like ``E.R'' and ``Mad About 
You.'' Nielsen's reports of a 6 percent decline in television viewing 
throughout the day by adults between the ages of 18 and 34 applies 
to all channels, not just network channels, both in broadcast and 
cable television. The latest data mean that the average young adult 
viewer is watching a little over half an hour less each day, according 
to Barry Cook, senior vice president of research for Nielsen. The 
networks argue that such a drastic change in viewing habits is simply 
not plausible. But Nielsen, without venturing a reason for the shrinking 
audience, argues that a separate study it has conducted not only validates 
its initial findings but suggests that the falloff may be even worse 
_ as much as 10 percent. Cook dismissed the networks' accusations 
of flawed data. ``They are losing focus on what is happening,'' he 
said, citing what he described as a long-term trend line that shows 
diminishing viewing by younger adults that goes back to 1991. But 
Schiavone's contentions at NBC have been backed by research executives 
at the other networks, all of whom dispute Nielsen's findings as outside 
the realm of statistical probability. ``A change in viewing habits 
this radical just doesn't make sense,'' said Alan Wurtzel, senior 
vice president of research for ABC Inc. Wurtzel noted that a similar 
problem in 1990, later corrected by Nielsen, wound up costing ABC 
$30 million. David Poltrack, executive vice president of research 
for CBS, said, ``The problem with this is that even if Nielsen eventually 
corrects the problem, in the interim you're losing money, big money.'' 
One potential outcome of this dispute is renewed hope for a rival 
ratings service, Smart, which has been mounted on an experimental 
basis by Statistical Research Inc., a company based in Westfield, 
N.J., that is best known for measuring radio network audiences. Smart 
_ which stands for Systems for Measuring and Reporting Television 
_ is still seeking a partner with the financial clout to establish 
a full-fledged national rating service to compete with Nielsen, which 
has held a monopoly on television measurement for most of the history 
of the medium. As a bit of evidence contradicting Nielsen's data, 
Poltrack cited results from the Smart experimental system now operating 
in Philadelphia. Smart's ratings there show a slight increase this 
fall among viewers in the 18-to-34 category. He also pointed to the 
fact that viewing levels for other age groups tracked by Nielsen have 
not demonstrated a comparable one-year collapse. Poltrack and other 
network research executives contend that the problem lies in Nielsen's 
methods. They say young viewers are notoriously resistant to the daily 
button-pushing required in the Nielsen ``people meter'' system and 
argue that Nielsen has consistently had trouble keeping the level 
of young adults willing to participate its in survey at acceptable 
levels. The Smart system is designed to streamline the button pushing 
while also using program codes that automatically track each show 
that the television tunes in. But Cook, of Nielsen, said that this 
season's fall-off simply looked excessive when compared with an uptick 
in viewing reported by Nielsen last fall. And he suggested that last 
year may have actually been the the anomaly. He said a ``unified study'' 
that measured the same young viewers known to be in the Nielsen sample 
both last year and this year indicated a full 10 percent drop-off 
in television viewing in the 18-to-34 group. He declined to offer 
any theory for the dropoff. But he dismissed suggestions that it might 
be related to higher use of the Internet because another Nielsen study 
had previously indicated that Internet users were already light viewers 
of television _ and so would not account for such a significant change 
from last fall. The network researchers attacked Cook's unified study, 
saying the sample included viewers who had been participants for as 
little as a single day in the month measured during both years, and 
that it did not include the same number of viewers from one year to 
the next. Cook acknowledged that ``billions of dollars are at stake'' 
for the networks and for every television channel that sells commercial 
time in advance to advertisers. The sales are based on audience forecasts, 
and the networks have to give away free commercials to make up for 
any shortfalls. But Cook suggested that the networks should have made 
their estimates to advertisers on the basis of the longer-term trend, 
not on the uptick recorded last fall. He also noted that it was not 
surprising that NBC was leading the charge against Nielsen, because 
the network's ratings have taken a particularly precipitous fall this 
season _ 25 percent fewer households, compared with last year, he 
said. ``This is most alarming to some people who sold the audience 
ahead of time,'' Cook said. ``They should have hedged their promises.'' 
That suggestion only added fuel to the outrage among some of the network 
executives, who accused Nielsen of trying to glibly explain away a 
serious problem with its measurement methods. Among other things, 
Wurtzel noted that Nielsen's first response to network complaints 
earlier this month about younger men falling out of its survey was 
to suggest, in a letter sent to ABC, that the cause was lower interest 
rates for home buyers. (If more young people were moving, Nielsen 
argued, there was a higher rate of turnover in its sample.) NBC does 
clearly seem the most willing to take the fight with Nielsen to an 
active stage. Schiavone said the network intends to challenge Nielsen's 
credibility. He said the company may decide to file suit for breach 
of the network's $12 million-a-year contract with Nielsen, on grounds 
that the company is not conducting accurate measurements. And he said 
it was not out of the question that NBC might turn to Smart. ``If 
I put the $12 million we pay to them in with the $66 million we've 
lost, then paying $7 million for an alternate service starts to sound 
cheap to me,'' Schiavone said. A lawsuit is certainly more likely 
to come from NBC than from any other network. NBC, according to another 
senior executive, who spoke on condition of anonymity, was very close 
to filing a breach-of-contract suit against the ratings company in 
1996. One thing NBC promises will not happen, Schiavone said, is a 
decision to shrug Nielsen off as a necessary evil. ``Every Nielsen 
client is a hostage assumed by the Nielsen management to be either 
stupid or forgetful,'' Schiavone said. ``Whether Nielsen is demonstrating 
active negligence or passive negligence, their actions are unforgivable.'' 
</TEXT>
</DOC>