<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981220.0144 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Five months ago, the copper mine where Mario Olivares had dug, drilled 
and hammered for the last six years shut down under the pressure of 
collapsing world copper prices. After getting a monthly salary of 
more than $400, he now earns less than a dollar a day selling flavored 
ices from his wooden shack. About 1,000 miners have lost their jobs 
this year in this town of 14,000 people set in the desert badlands 
of northern Chile. The earnings of thousands more have been reduced 
by more than 20 percent. Strapped for money, the local government 
has been forced to cut housing subsidies and hours at the local health 
clinic. Drug and alcohol use are on the rise, local officials say. 
Attendance at the local school on Saturdays to make up for class time 
lost during a teachers strike has been surprisingly high, administrators 
say, because the children want the free lunches. ``My family could 
use more food,'' said Olivares, 36, who has begun looking for seasonal 
agricultural work at a far lower salary than before. ``I see more 
poverty in the future.'' The changes in fortune for Olivares and Tierra 
Amarilla are a direct result of the economic slowdown in Asia, which 
has pummeled the prices of many commodities that are the economic 
lifeblood of developing countries. Chile has been South America's 
economic model for the last 20 years, with growth rates averaging 
more than 8 percent a year over the last decade. The country led the 
way in privatizing inefficient state-owned businesses, and its privatized 
pension system has been adopted by Argentina, Bolivia, Colombia, El 
Salvador, Mexico, Peru and Uruguay. But now Chile's economic miracle 
is stumbling, mostly because nearly 40 percent of its export earnings 
come from copper. From a price of $1.19 per pound in June 1997, the 
price of copper on the world market has declined to 65 cents a pound, 
its lowest level since 1987. That has meant a loss of $1.5 billion 
in export earnings in the first 10 months of this year. The effects 
could have been far worse had oil prices not also tumbled, saving 
Chile more than $200 million over the same period. Nevertheless, the 
signs of a painful adjustment are everywhere in a country that has 
become increasingly middle class over the last generation. Sales of 
cars, televisions, houses and apartments have dropped sharply in the 
last few months. Sixty-five percent of those questioned in a poll 
published last week said they would spend less on presents this Christmas 
than they did last year. Distribucion y Servicio, the country's largest 
supermarket chain and retailer, originally intended to open nine new 
stores next year, but now plans to open only two. The economy, which 
grew by more than 7 percent in 1997, will grow by only 4 percent this 
year. That would not be bad if most of the growth had not come before 
June. A zero-to-negative growth rate for the fourth quarter is expected 
by most economists to remain constant for at least the first half 
of 1999. Unemployment has increased to 6.9 percent from 6.5 percent 
in the last year, and government economists predict a continuing deterioration 
to at least 8.5 percent by June. ``At the end of 1997, we predicted 
an 11 percent increase in construction for this year,'' said Horacio 
Pavez Garcia, president of the Chilean Chamber of Construction. ``We've 
had to change our projections four times, and now we'll be lucky to 
reach a growth rate of 1.5 percent.'' But for all the bad news, a 
consensus has emerged among local businessmen and economists, government 
officials and Wall Street analysts: Chile should rebound in the second 
half of next year, unless a Brazilian financial collapse shakes the 
entire South American economy or if Gen. Augusto Pinochet's extradition 
proceedings in London should set off political turbulence here. The 
analysts note that the Chilean peso has remained stable, the local 
stock market has revived in recent months and the Central Bank has 
lowered interest rates several times over the last two months, after 
several rate increases earlier in the year that stalled the construction 
and retail sectors. While the flow of foreign investment has slowed, 
Exxon and Procter and Gamble have recently announced major new investments. 
And, unlike several Asian economies that have been shaken by the collapses 
of weak banks, strong government regulation and the emergence of many 
foreign banks in recent years have kept the Chilean financial sector 
sound. Chile's percentage of past-due loans to total loans is projected 
to be a modest 2 percent by the end of the year, compared with 13 
percent in Argentina and 5 percent in Brazil, according to a report 
by Santander Investment. ``We have an economy that's decelerating 
very sharply,'' said Jose de Gregorio, an economist at the University 
of Chile. ``But overall, the country is strong. It's an open economy, 
there's low corruption and the financial system remains strong.'' 
Nevertheless, to the desert towns like Tierra Amarilla that depend 
on small copper mines, a recovery looks like a mirage. Four of eight 
local mining companies have closed in the last year here, and a persistent 
drought has slowed a transition to grape farming. Domingo Cortes, 
49, a copper miner, has seen his earnings drop from $250 to $180 a 
month, forcing him to take up seasonal tomato and onion farming to 
supplement his living. ``I'm always in debt,'' he said, while hammering 
rocks looking for blue veins of copper. ``One month I pay the electricity 
bill, another I pay the store. It will be a very different Christmas 
this year. I had to tell my children they won't be getting presents.'' 
</TEXT>
</DOC>