<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981220.0047 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
After a bruising year and a large-scale restructuring, Adobe Systems 
Inc. delivered higher-than-expected earnings and strong revenue for 
its fourth fiscal quarter. But while praising the company's improved 
management and new products, analysts generally retained a cautious 
outlook on Adobe's stock. Most agree that Adobe management has done 
a very job job of turning the company around. They said they expected 
Adobe to return to sustained strong earnings growth, but probably 
not in the next two quarters, so there is no need to chase the stock 
at this point. But a longtime Adobe bull said this is exactly the 
time to buy shares, before the strong growth potential of forthcoming 
products is obvious. A new threat is Photo Draw 2000, a combined photography 
and graphics program from Microsoft, which has long coveted Adobe's 
lead in the publishing and imaging software business. But most analysts 
said the Microsoft product, which will likely be bundled with the 
Office 2000 suite, lacks the power and capability demanded by graphics 
professionals, who are Adobe's core market. Adobe's consumer product, 
Photo Deluxe, benefits from bundling itself, as it is packaged with 
most of the new digital cameras. Adobe had a large presence in Japan 
and suffered early from the recession there. As a result, it reported 
a 33 percent drop in third-quarter earnings on a 3 percent drop in 
revenue, and announced that it was cutting 350 employees, or about 
12 percent of its work force. The weakness attracted a hostile takeover 
offer from its leading rival, Quark, which was later withdrawn. Sales 
to Japan remain depressed, but Adobe received a quick payoff from 
the restructuring combined with unexpectedly strong sales of a new 
version of Illustrator, its core graphics product, to deliver fourth-quarter 
earnings several cents above the consensus of forecasts. Acrobat, 
Adobe's portable document-formatting software, although an older product, 
also had record sales, driven by its widespread use on the Internet. 
Adobe reported late Wednesday that its earnings for the fiscal fourth 
quarter, ending on Nov. 27, totaled $50.3 million, or 78 cents a diluted 
share, up 7.5 percent from the period a year earlier. Revenue rose 
8.6 percent, to $246.7 million. Roughly 2 cents a share came from 
an increase in the value of Adobe's venture capital fund, and about 
6 cents from the repurchase of 6.8 million shares. Without those items, 
Adobe earned 70 cents a share; analysts had expected 64 cents, according 
to First Call. Adobe shares had actually fallen in advance of the 
earnings report, on rumors the earnings would fall below forecasts, 
and then bounced back on Thursday, climbing $5.73, or 15 percent, 
in Nasdaq trading. On Friday, it gained a further 62.5 cents, to $44.50. 
But analysts made only modest changes in their first-quarter 1999 
estimates, and did not change their recommendations on the stock. 
Of 11 polled by First Call, eight rate Adobe a hold, three a buy and 
just one a strong buy. Among the analysts who retained a hold rating 
on Adobe was Jay Vleeschhouwer of Merrill Lynch. ``We do think they 
can do 15 percent revenue growth across fiscal 1999 as a whole,'' 
he said, ``but the bulk of that growth is likely to come at the end 
of the year. At a management level, the move to improve financial 
and operational controls should improve the predictability of the 
business.'' John Warnock, Adobe's chairman and chief executive, said 
he was not surprised that analysts' ratings remained unchanged. ``We 
went through a major restructuring, and they are looking for more 
than one quarter,'' he said. But he said he was confident of the company's 
ability to deliver more strong results in the coming year, adding, 
``We're very focused on operational efficiency, setting goals for 
ourselves and measuring our performance against those goals. I am 
intensely involved at all levels.'' Like any software company, Adobe's 
sales increase with the release of new programs. The release of the 
latest version of Illustrator drove record sales in the fourth quarter, 
aided by Photoshop, Adobe's software for the digital management and 
manipulation of photographs, the latest version of which is roughly 
two quarters old. A major upgrade to Pagemaker, Adobe's page-layout 
program, is expected in March or April. Some analysts are already 
calling it a ``Quark killer.'' But Robert Fagin of CIBC Oppenheimer 
downgraded Adobe from a buy to a hold last week because he thinks 
the new Pagemaker, code-named K-2, is really an enterprise-level product, 
meaning that it will be critical to the operations of the big publishers 
who use it. Approaching the dreaded year 2000, corporations will defer 
deploying any such programs, including K-2, he said. ''This is not 
an Adobe-centric issue,'' Fagin said. ``Fundamentally, the company 
has turned a corner, but there's a macro issue looming in the future 
that will be difficult for any software company that deals with corporations.'' 
He added: ``We think K-2 is a great product. Over a three-year period, 
it could be a half-billion-dollar opportunity. We just think it will 
start six months late.'' Warnock takes issue with that analysis, pointing 
out that many big publishers have substantial year 2000 problems that 
he said could be resolved by deploying K-2. But in any case, he said 
Adobe expects early sales to be driven by existing Pagemaker users, 
not big corporations. ``The Pagemaker market really is the small graphics 
arts houses that have two or three Macintoshes,'' he said. ``They 
can do their Y2K evaluation in a weekend.'' Michael Murphy, editor 
of the California Technology Stock Letter, also said that the year 
2000 worry is misguided, and added that any damage it does to Adobe 
shares presents a buying opportunity. ``They will have a May-quarter 
launch for K-2, and it will be a very fast conversion,'' he said. 
``All of us Pagemaker users are crying out for the change. We expect 
to see a steady increase in estimates for 1999 as management proves 
they can successfully introduce these new products and bump up the 
growth rate while maintaining the recent cost cuts.'' His advice: 
``Buy on a dip to $45 for a target of $75.'' 
</TEXT>
</DOC>