<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981220.0204 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
The Clinton administration warned Sunday that Iraq may quickly try 
to rebuild its programs to develop chemical and biological weapons 
after last week's furious air strikes, and that additional U.S. strikes 
may be needed soon. ``Obviously it is very hard to say that everything 
that he has in weapons of mass destruction has been destroyed,'' Secretary 
of State Madeleine Albright said on the NBC News program ``Meet the 
Press,'' referring to Iraqi president Saddam Hussein. ``We have said 
very clearly that we reserve the right to use force again, and I think 
we've proven our ability to deliver a very tough blow.'' Although 
preliminary damage assessments from the Pentagon showed that fewer 
than a third of the 100 Iraqi targets attacked last week had been 
severely damaged or destroyed, military commanders continued to insist 
that the attack had crippled elements of the Iraqi military and had 
seriously hampered Saddam's ability to communicate with his most loyal 
troops. Senior administration officials said Sunday that if additional 
air strikes were required, they would almost certainly not take place 
until early next year, after the completion of the Islamic holy month 
of Ramadan, which began this weekend. The officials, speaking on condition 
of anonymity, said that with the completion of the attack on Saturday, 
the Pentagon was reconsidering plans announced last week to send thousands 
of additional U.S. troops to the region to prevent a possible Iraqi 
ground strike against Kuwait or Saudi Arabia. Such an attack, they 
said, now seemed unlikely, although they said that U.S. warplanes 
were expected to remain on high alert in the Persian Gulf region for 
several more weeks. As the smoke cleared from the most punishing U.S. 
air strikes against Iraq since the 1991 gulf war, the battle of words 
between Washington and Baghdad continued, and may even have intensified. 
Senior Clinton administration officials took to the Sunday television 
talk shows to declare that the mission of the air strikes was accomplished, 
while Saddam told his people in a televised speech that they wore 
``the crown of victory'' against U.S. and British forces involved 
in the air strikes. Both had a point. The United States could justifiably 
claim that it had met its limited goal of ``degrading'' Iraq's ability 
to make chemical or biological weapons and the ballistic missiles 
needed to deliver them. The Iraqi leader could claim at least a partial 
victory simply by surviving another round of intense U.S.-led bombardment, 
with little sign that his domestic opponents were any closer to ousting 
him, which the Clinton administration openly desires. ``We consider 
this a very successful attack,'' said Gen. Henry Shelton, chairman 
of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, appearing on the CBS News program ``Face 
the Nation.'' ``Looking at the targets, I would tell you that our 
success goes up almost daily as we have a chance to make a more complete 
assessment.'' The Pentagon did not issue an updated assessment Sunday 
of its overall bomb damage from the air strikes, which on Saturday 
revealed that U.S. and British forces had struck 100 targets with 
more than 400 sea- and air-launched cruise missiles and had flown 
650 sorties by fighters, bombers and support aircraft. Based on the 
preliminary assessment of the first three days of the four-day attack, 
the Defense Department was able to confirm that air strikes had done 
some degree of damage to 70 of the 100 targets attacked, although 
only 28 targets were described as having been either destroyed or 
severely damaged. Pentagon officials cautioned that it could often 
take weeks for such assessments to be completed, and that a target 
may have been rendered inoperable even when the damage was assessed 
as light. Damage to 23 of the targets has yet to be assessed. The 
assessment provided little specific detail on the targets or their 
location in Iraq but did break them down by categories. According 
to the report: _ Of the 11 targets that involved production or storage 
of weapons of mass destruction, none was destroyed, one was severely 
damaged, five were moderately damaged and four were lightly damaged. 
_ Of the 18 targets described as facilities involved in ``security'' 
for the Iraqi program to develop chemical and biological weapons, 
two were destroyed, five were severely damaged, six were moderately 
damaged and five were lightly damaged. Among the targets that suffered 
severe or moderate damage were the barracks of soldiers assigned to 
guard the facilities. _ Of the nine targets that were command centers 
or other facilities for the Republican Guard, the elite military unit 
that was singled out for attack in the air strikes, none was destroyed, 
three were severely damaged, five were moderately damaged and one 
was lightly damaged. _ Of the 20 targets described as ``command and 
control'' centers for the Iraqi government, including television and 
radio transmitters, seven were destroyed, four were severely damaged, 
four were moderately damaged and two were lightly damaged. _ Of the 
32 targets that were sites for surface-to-air missiles or air-defense 
systems, one was destroyed, five were severely damaged, four were 
moderately damaged and four were lightly damaged. _ Of the six airfields 
attacked, none was destroyed, none was severely damaged, four were 
moderately damaged and one was lightly damaged. The Pentagon said 
its one ``economic'' target _ a refinery in southern Iraq that has 
been linked to oil exports in violation of U.N. sanctions _ was lightly 
damaged. Shelton said the Defense Department was especially pleased 
with the results of air strikes on nine Iraqi facilities for research 
and development of ballistic missiles that could be used by the Iraqis 
to deliver chemical or biological weapons. ``We don't think he'll 
be doing any more research and development with his missiles for at 
least over a year,'' the general said, referring to Saddam. In London, 
military aides to Prime Minister Tony Blair were even more optimistic 
in describing the results of the American and British air strikes. 
Sir Charles Guthrie, chief of the British defense staff, told reporters 
there that he believed Iraq's capacity to deliver chemical or biological 
weapons by missiles or drone aircraft had been set back ``by several 
years.'' He said the attack strikes on the Republican Guard, which 
was largely kept out of harm's way by Saddam during the gulf war, 
had sent ``a powerful message: They now know that their cozy existence 
has been shattered.'' Defense Secretary William Cohen, also appearing 
on CBS, said the United States believed that Iraq might move quickly 
to rebuild its program for the production of chemical and biological 
weapons and that American and British forces would be ready to strike 
again. ``We understand that he may try to undertake to repair these 
facilities or rebuild then,'' he said. ``We're going to maintain our 
military capability. We're going to continue the sanctions and watch 
to make sure he doesn't pose a threat to his neighbors or try to reconstitute 
these weapons of mass destruction.'' 
</TEXT>
</DOC>