<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981220.0066 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
The job pays only about $165 a year, plus a case of Spanish sherry. 
It is meant to be a great honor, but is often considered faintly embarrassing. 
In the last 15 years it has required an unironic belief in the grave 
national importance of events like the wedding of the duke of York 
and Sarah Ferguson, also known as Fergie. Why on earth would anyone 
want to be Britain's poet laureate? ``That would be my question as 
well,'' said Christopher Reid, the poetry editor at Faber &AMP; Faber, 
which publishes some of Britain's best-known poetry. ``It seems to 
me a pretty pointless kind of job.'' With the death in October of 
Ted Hughes, the poet laureate since 1984, the position and the job 
description are now wide open. While some of Britain's higher-profile 
poets have removed their names from consideration with all the passion 
of teen-agers who think the student council is for nerdy teacher's 
pets, others are gently letting it be known that if appointed, they 
would serve. Perhaps the most frequently mentioned candidate is Andrew 
Motion, a poet, critic and biographer who is the professor of creative 
writing at the University of East Anglia. In the last 18 months he 
has raised his own profile and helped bring poetry to the public's 
attention by publishing poems in national newspapers marking the deaths 
of Diana, princess of Wales, and Hughes, a longtime friend. Other 
poets in the running are Wendy Cope, whose work tends to poke fun 
at pretension, particularly that of other poets; Benjamin Zephaniah, 
who attacks social injustice in often playful tones that draw heavily 
on West Indian speech and culture, and U.A. Fanthorpe, who seemed 
to all but apply for the post when she was moved to publish ``A Brief 
Resume at 50,'' an ode to Prince Charles on his birthday, in The Guardian. 
For reasons of its own, The Guardian has taken up Ms. Fanthorpe's 
candidacy, encouraging her to submit poems for every occasion. (Last 
Monday it published her poem about road rage.) ``She's liked by people 
who don't read any poetry, and she's accessible,'' said the newspaper's 
deputy arts editor, Fiachra Gibbons, who went on, rather confusingly, 
to say that the ``job is about producing embarrassingly bad poetry.'' 
Spurred by Ms. Fanthorpe's new high profile, William Hill, Britain's 
biggest betting agency, has raised her chances of being made laureate 
to 16-1, from 50-1. The agency's favorite candidate is Motion, with 
odds of 6-4, followed closely by Ms. Cope (4-1) and James Fenton (5-1), 
the professor of poetry at Oxford University, who appeared to rule 
himself out when he told The Observer of London, ``I can think of 
people who would want to take the job, other than myself.'' Similarly, 
Craig Raine, another Oxford poet (25-1), exclaimed, ``Oh, God, no,'' 
before hanging up the telephone. Even E.J. Thribb, who is one of Britain's 
best-known poets despite being a fictional teen-ager who specializes 
in terrible civic verse for the satiric magazine Private Eye, is in 
the running, though at odds of 1,000-1. What exactly would the new 
laureate do, at a time when old views of Britain and the monarchy 
that serves as its figurehead are rapidly changing? Some people in 
the poetry world say the time has come to give the post an overhaul, 
perhaps creating an American-style laureate. In the United States, 
the laureate serves for one year at a time, gets an office with a 
stunning view of the Capitol and earns a respectable salary of $35,000. 
(Hughes' job as poet laureate earned him half as much a year as Britain's 
first official laureate, John Dryden _ and 200 pounds went a lot further 
in the 17th century.) Maybe Britain's laureate should serve for a 
fixed term instead of until death, critics say. And maybe he or she 
should be explicitly freed from the job's chief unstated burden: churning 
out quick poetry that, harking back to the days when poets depended 
on the patronage of the monarch, celebrates events like royal birthdays 
and royal weddings. Although the job has been filled over the years 
by some of Britain's poetic heavyweights, including Ben Jonson, who 
held the post unofficially, as well as Dryden, Tennyson, Wordsworth, 
Cecil Day-Lewis and John Betjeman, it has rarely inspired their best 
work. John Masefield, who beat Rudyard Kipling for the job in 1930, 
suffered under the impression that he had to compose an ode to mark 
the monarch's return to Britain after each foreign trip. He also had 
such low regard for his talent that when he submitted his poems to 
The Times of London, the laureate's de facto house organ, he always 
enclosed a stamped, self-addressed envelope. Perhaps the most notorious 
example of laureate poetry came during an illness of the prince of 
Wales, who later became King Edward VII. The laureate, Alfred Austin, 
who took the job in 1896, is said, perhaps apocryphally, to have written: 
``Across the wires the electric message came `He is no better, he 
is much the same.' '' Hughes became laureate after another poet, Philip 
Larkin, turned the job down. Although he was considered a great poet 
whose reputation was immortalized by his last work, ``Birthday Letters'' 
and ``Tales From Ovid,'' Hughes generally confounded his supporters 
with his royal poems. When Prince Andrew, the duke of York, married 
Ms. Ferguson, Hughes wrote, among other things, ``A helicopter snatched 
you up./ The pilot, it was me.'' (The marriage ended in divorce.) 
On the occasion of the 40th anniversary of Queen Elizabeth's coronation, 
he said her corgis were the same color as the Lion of England. And 
when the queen mother turned 95, he compared her to an old oak tree 
whose ``crown of oak leaves amplifies/ A global marketplace.'' Such 
poems were not widely admired. ``At the age of 66 I have a cast-iron 
digestion and have weathered some of the worst storms at sea,'' a 
reader wrote to The Daily Telegraph, having just seen Hughes' nuptial 
poem for Andrew and Ms. Ferguson. ``However, reading the poet laureate's 
so-called royal wedding song over breakfast this morning, I felt very 
sick indeed.'' The writer and critic Blake Morrison, who generally 
admired Hughes, said: ``It did him no good. I think his reputation 
went backward as a result of being laureate. People ridiculed him. 
Even his admirers found his laureate poems impenetrable or disappointing, 
and then, thank God, he produced some wonderful work in the last three 
years.'' Morrison and others argue that many respectable poets would 
consider the post a burden and would turn it down because of its ties 
to the monarchy. ``To me the trivial side is the royal side, and I'd 
like to see the laureate detached from the monarchy,'' he said in 
an interview. ``If people want to produce odes to the queen mother, 
fine. But the expectation that that's what the job is is a mistake. 
Of course, some people hate the idea of changing the rather eccentric 
system that we have, because they think at least it's English, like 
fox hunting.'' Perhaps, said the poet Tom Paulin (33-1), the post 
should be redefined ``as a way of embodying a kind of multicultural 
national spirit'' that would reflect, rather than ignore, contemporary 
Britain. ``One imagines a Virgilian poet in a postmodern era,'' he 
said. Would he consider taking the job? ``Oh, absolutely not, no,'' 
he said. ``I wouldn't, not at all, no.'' One positive side effect 
of the speculation surrounding the next laureate is that it has brought 
poetry into the public eye. This is part of a general trend, said 
Chris Meade, director of the Poetry Society in Britain, who pointed 
out that in recent years there has been a boom in poets in residence 
attached to institutions like the London Zoo, the department-store 
chain Marks &AMP; Spencer and the law firm Mishcon de Reya, home of 
Anthony Julius, the high-profile lawyer who handled the princess of 
Wales' divorce. But, Meade said, regular people have a hard time making 
the leap from appreciating ``poetryness,'' or the idea of poetry, 
to being able to name actual contemporary poets. ``You get an interest 
in single poems, such as those people come across on the Underground, 
but then there's a gap. The next step is slim volumes by lots of people 
you've never heard of and slender magazines full of angry critics 
who love one thing and hate another,'' he said. ``The poet laureate 
could help to consolidate poetry's position and bridge the gap between 
the initial interest and a deeper understanding.'' Michael Holroyd, 
the biographer and chairman of the Royal Society of Literature, said 
the job should evolve when the new laureate takes office. ``Poets 
disagree with practically everything about the job, except that they 
feel they should get more money,'' he said. Meanwhile, Meade, Holroyd 
and representatives of various organizations are compiling lists of 
names to submit to the prime minister's office, which will select 
a new laureate, with the queen's approval, next year. They say they 
are unmoved by the flurry of poems by would-be laureates, which have 
appeared in national newspapers in recent years, and by the efforts 
of amateur poets to put their names forward. ``We've had three general 
members of the public who have written a few poems, and they're very 
keen to do the job,'' Meade said. ``But we won't be mentioning them 
in our letter of recommendation. They were newcomers to poetry, and 
you know, they just weren't very good.'' 
</TEXT>
</DOC>