<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981220.0231 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
As President Clinton stood in the Rose Garden on Saturday afternoon, 
denouncing the ``poisonous venom'' of Washington and declaring that 
``we have a lot to do before we enter the 21st century,'' a few downcast 
members of his staff clustered together just beyond the circle of 
cameras and reporters. ``We may have a lot to do, but that's different 
from saying anything can get done,'' one staff member said in a low 
tone. Immediate crises like Iraq will always get the president's attention, 
he added. But the test of whether Clinton's power is ebbing, he said, 
will come as the president tries to remake Social Security or choke 
off another bout of global economic turmoil of the kind that, only 
three months ago, seemed to be taking the U.S. economy over the edge. 
As the Senate heads into little-charted terrain in which the president 
is expected to stand trial, both the economy and Clinton's powers 
of persuasion at home and abroad also enter new territory. So far, 
the markets have shrugged off Washington's bitter season, rising even 
as the House of Representatives lurched toward the impeachment vote 
on Saturday. And Asian markets showed little reaction in the first 
trading after the vote. Foreign diplomats here have shown similar 
lack of alarm. Several said this weekend that they had cabled their 
capitals advising that Clinton's impeachment is a particular form 
of Washington madness, a nasty partisan battle that is likely to distract 
the United States but not derail its policies. But market confidence, 
much like perceptions of American power, is quirky and subject to 
quick reversal. It was only 19 months ago that investors were still 
pouring money into Asia, convinced that its astounding growth could 
not be stopped by an economic bubble or political weakness. It was 
only a decade ago that Japan was regarded as the world's greatest 
rising power, despite a fractious government that seemed forever incapable 
of decisions or action. Now, all over Washington, there are murmured 
questions about how a prolonged Senate trial might unnerve markets, 
affect the economy and undercut belief in America's ability to lead. 
``Anybody who tells you that they understand how all this is going 
to play out in the next few months is kidding themselves,'' Commerce 
Secretary William M. Daley said the other day. Another Cabinet official, 
who spoke on condition of anonymity, noted that Clinton had been ``wrongly 
written off many times before,'' and then added that a prolonged trial, 
``sooner or later _ whether it's dealing with the budget, or the markets, 
or the Russians _ is going to have a cost. The question is whether 
it's a big cost.'' In some cases, the cost may be fairly evident. 
The common wisdom, which has often been wrong this year, is that the 
president has about six months to forge the outlines of a deal to 
overhaul Social Security. After next summer, the tradeoffs may become 
so politically difficult that neither party will want to touch it. 
A long trial would suck the oxygen out of that debate. ``Very little 
else would go on,'' Sen. Patrick J. Leahy, D-Vt., said on CNN. ``The 
president would be completely consumed.'' Just how much will be accomplished 
depends on the strategies the White House and congressional Republicans 
pursue as they try to weather the impeachment process. In fact, the 
handling of the global financial crisis and its permutations _ dealing 
with a collapsing Russian economy, an increasingly recalcitrant China 
and a new European currency, now only weeks away _ could pose the 
true test of Clinton's credibility in both the markets and the world. 
Even a weakened president has extraordinary powers in a military challenge 
of the kind posed during the Iraq crisis over the last week. Bipartisan 
support is expected, even though several Republican leaders questioned 
whether Clinton was using the cruise-missile attacks for political 
advantage. But in the far more complicated and subtle realm of trying 
to shape international economic strategies to restore growth and prevent 
more social explosions of the kind that rocked Indonesia, there is 
no such expectation of bipartisan cooperation. Such slow-burn crises 
require the president to convince both investors and other leaders 
that his authority is undiminished. ``The sense is that the global 
markets haven't clicked in on this,'' Daniel Yergin, the chairman 
of the consulting group Cambridge Energy Research Associates and author 
of a recent book on national economic power, said this weekend. ``If 
the impeachment had happened in October, when even the most senior 
people in government were talking about the end of modern capitalism 
as we know it,'' he said, ``we might be looking at a very different 
global economic situation today. The requirement at that time was 
to restore confidence _ and the fact that the world is shrugging off 
impeachment is evidence that confidence was restored. But the next 
time, it could be playing with fire.'' For example, Clinton will soon 
face the question of whether to resume economic aid to Russia. Even 
for a president at the peak of his game, it would be a difficult choice: 
Failure to provide aid could lead to charges that he ``lost Russia'' 
politically, while providing aid could open him to contentions that 
he lost billions of dollars propping up a nonfunctioning economy. 
Clinton will also have to decide whether to change tactics with China, 
which is jailing dissidents and closing markets, just at a time when 
he had hoped to say that his management of economic and diplomatic 
relations with the Chinese was his greatest foreign policy achievement. 
None of these problems, of course, were relevant in the last impeachment 
trial, involving the president of a rising power in 1868. ``The Johnson 
impeachment created no real rumblings about the American scene, except 
to confirm the European view that American are barbarous and uncouth,'' 
said David Donald, the Harvard historian, who has spent a lifetime 
studying the Civil War and Reconstruction. ``We didn't have to worry 
about world markets then, or really foreign policy, because there 
wasn't much foreign policy,'' Donald concluded. ``In almost every 
sense, it was exactly the reverse of the Clinton impeachment.'' 
</TEXT>
</DOC>