<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981220.0094 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
The last bomb to fall on Baghdad during the 70-hour campaign that 
ended Saturday night destroyed a wing of the Labor and Social Affairs 
Ministry, and by midday Sunday hundreds of people had come to view 
the damage. Repair crews were already at work. A phalanx of Kawasaki 
bulldozers plowed debris into piles and lifted it onto trucks to be 
carted away. Souvenir-seekers picked through the rubble in search 
of shrapnel. Most laborers and onlookers called the bombing a barbaric 
and criminal act and bitterly condemned President Clinton for ordering 
it. That was no surprise, not only because Iraq has endured years 
of economic sanctions and military attacks, but also because political 
dissent here can be _ and often is _ punished by summary execution. 
A 21-year-old Jordanian who is studying at Baghdad University offered 
a somewhat more balanced assessment. ``Both countries lost,'' the 
student, Hasan al-Atoun, said as he looked over the piles of shattered 
brick and glass. ``Iraq lost because it suffered terrible damage like 
this. America lost because it hurt its relations with Russia, the 
Arab world and many other countries.'' Foreign diplomats who hurried 
to file reports to their governments Sunday argued among themselves 
over why the ministry was hit. Some said it had been used as an intelligence 
center and speculated that sensitive documents might have been stored 
there. Others guessed that the real target was a military academy 
across the street. Such speculation was especially intense because 
in contrast to earlier allied raids, relatively few bombs fell on 
Baghdad in this latest campaign, and there is little damage to see. 
Most of the attacks were on positions elsewhere in the country. Preliminary 
Western assessments of the damage suggested that the bombing was effective. 
Those reports gained some credence when the Iraqi government failed 
to invite foreign journalists to view destroyed targets. In the past 
they have shown off what appeared to be homes and other civilian buildings 
that had been hit. A British military officer, speaking in Kuwait, 
said 600 aircraft missions had been flown in the last week, including 
50 by British planes. Most of the missions were support sorties to 
get bombers to their targets, said the officer, Group Commander Bryan 
Collins. He added that about 400 cruise missiles had struck Iraq, 
fired at some 100 targets. But even if the raids were successful in 
destroying Iraqi military bases and centers where chemical and biological 
weapons may have been developed, there is no sign that they came anywhere 
close to achieving the West's larger political objective of removing 
President Saddam Hussein. Saddam, whose government the United States 
and Britain are determined to crush, emerged at least as powerful 
as he was before the raids. He won the sympathy of France, Russia 
and China, all permanent members of the U.N. Security Council. And 
Palestinians in the West Bank and demonstrators in Yemen, Syria and 
Jordan have poured into the streets to support him. ``As a military 
operation it was perfect, a textbook case,'' said one foreign envoy 
here. ``Important targets were hit, no planes were lost and there 
was little or no collateral damage. ``But this was not just a military 
operation. The real purpose was to weaken the regime, but he's stronger 
than ever now. He's a hero among the so-called Arab masses because 
he defied the Americans. Which despotic leader has survived so long 
in a war situation?'' Life in Baghdad was barely disrupted by the 
bombing. Sunday a grocer named Abdul Gesan stood in his shop and said 
that compared to what he had seen as a soldier in the Iran-Iraq war 
in the 1980s and the invasion of Kuwait in 1990, this had been ``no 
more frightening than rain.'' ``The American people are good, but 
the leaders are bad,'' Gesan said. ``They are cowboys. It is all about 
Monica.'' On one Iraqi television broadcast, an announcer said it 
was no coincidence that the bombing had ended as soon as the congressional 
vote on Clinton's impeachment had been taken. On another, Saddam appeared 
personally to thank his people for helping him win what he called 
his latest confrontation with ``enemies of God and humanity.'' ``You 
were up to the level that your leadership and your brother and comrade 
Saddam Hussein had hoped you would be,'' he said. ``God has rewarded 
you and delighted your hearts with the sweetness of victory.'' During 
his broadcast, Saddam was dressed in military fatigues. It was only 
one of the many personas he assumes. The hundreds of portraits of 
him that are painted on walls here, many of them larger than life, 
show him in almost every imaginable guise. In some he is jowly and 
patriarchal, in others dashing and movie-star handsome. One shows 
him earnest and looking very young, dressed in a blue suit as if posing 
for a high school yearbook picture. Another depicts him as the benevolent 
father, a wedding ring on his finger and an adorable little girl on 
his knee. In one of the oddest, he grins widely and wears a Panama 
hat, sunglasses and a white shirt open to the waist, looking as if 
he should be sipping an exotic drink at a tropical resort. ``They 
bomb us, but our Saddam Hussein is still here,'' said a man selling 
pine saplings along one of Baghdad's main streets. ``Do you understand 
now why we say we love him?'' 
</TEXT>
</DOC>