<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981220.0150 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Rep. Dennis Hastert, R-Ill., has gone suddenly from being an anonymous 
middle-level legislator to the presumptive speaker of the House, less 
because of who he is than because of who he is not. Hastert, a six-term 
conservative from Illinois who is the No. 2 vote counter in the House 
Republican hierarchy, is not a pyrotechnical firebrand like Newt Gingrich 
or a driven conservative like Rep. Tom Delay, R-Texas, the majority 
whip. He has a reputation among his GOP colleagues as a conciliator, 
someone who can reach out to Democrats. But to heal the wounds in 
Congress, he will have to persuade moderates in his own party and 
Democrats that he is not simply an agent of Delay. For it is Delay, 
the Republicans' chief vote-counter, who has been seen in the House 
as the architect of Clinton's impeachment. And it is Delay _ more 
than anyone else _ who is pushing Hastert's name forward as speaker. 
As chief deputy majority whip, Hastert is responsible for taking the 
temperature of lawmakers on key votes and dealing with legislative 
favors. He is viewed as a low-key insider, a lumbering former high-school 
wrestling coach who brokers compromises and smooths out differences 
without threats or rancor, and always away from the spotlight. To 
House Republicans, reeling from the resignation of both a speaker 
and a speaker-to-be in the span of two months, Hastert is a consensus 
candidate who can bridge the feuding conservative and moderate wings 
of the party. ``Who in the House is in the best position to heal the 
partisan rift? It's Coach Hastert,'' said Rep. Gerald Weller, R-Ill. 
But the challenge of being speaker, who is just behind the vice president 
in order of succession to the presidency, will be difficult enough 
in the wake of a bitter, partisan divide that roiled the House for 
months over impeachment. It will be even more difficult in the 106th 
Congress, with Republicans holding a tiny 12-vote majority and Democrats 
in no mood to accommodate. And it could be harder still for Hastert, 
who is untested in the national political battles that have incinerated 
his two predecessors, and is already being painted by some Democrats 
as only a puppet to DeLay. ``I don't envy anyone chosen to be speaker 
right now,'' said Rep. Tom Barrett, D-Wis., who has worked closely 
with Hastert on issues from drug policy to national defense. ``With 
the slim majority and the atmosphere Republicans have created with 
Democrats, it'd be a Herculean task for anyone.'' House Republicans 
do not vote until Jan. 5 to pick a successor to Speaker-elect Robert 
Livingston, R-La., who on Thursday acknowledged a series of extramarital 
affairs and on Saturday, in a speech on the House floor, abruptly 
withdrew his bid for the speaker's post and said he would leave Congress 
in six months. The full House will vote the next day, along party 
lines. But Hastert was already trying out his new title for size Sunday 
in his Capitol office, declining interviews but calling to thank many 
of the 135 Republicans who have committed their support. He needs 
112 votes to win. As the phone calls flooded in, Hastert was also 
mapping out the outlines of an agenda. ``Between the congratulations 
and the thank-yous, he's talking and listening to a lot of members 
right now,'' said Pete Jeffries, Hastert's spokesman. Within hours 
after Livingston delivered his stunning news, Hastert used the Republican 
whip's organization to launch a blitzkrieg campaign that vaulted him 
from obscurity to lock up the race. The main rival, Rep. Christopher 
Cox, R-Calif., was torpedoed before he knew what hit him. But the 
whip's machinery mobilized in support of Hastert only after DeLay 
declined to run for speaker himself. The two are extremely close, 
sharing the same offices and the same staffs. Democrats say if Hastert 
is to have any chance of rising above the partisan cauldron embroiling 
official Washington, he will have to stand up to DeLay and to the 
party's powerful right. ``He has the potential to reach out to Democrats, 
if the right wing in his own party will allow it,'' said Rep. Henry 
Waxman, D-Calif., who has worked closely with Hastert on two committees. 
But other Democrats who say they like Hastert personally, do not give 
him a chance when confronted with picking between his conservative 
base and wary Democrats. Party ideology, these lawmakers say, trumps 
individual personalities in today's poisonous political wars. On Sunday, 
Hastert's aides started to carefully distance their boss from DeLay 
and his hardball politics. When he was first elected to Congress in 
1986, his aides noted, Hastert became a protege of former Rep. Robert 
Michel, the moderate, courtly Illinois Republican who led his party 
in the House before it won control of Congress in 1994. ``There are 
those who may say Denny and Tom are very tight and that's true,'' 
said Jeffries. ``But Denny Hastert is his own person and always has 
been. He is a pragmatist and he's approachable, and that's a clear 
delineation between Hastert and DeLay.'' Unlike DeLay, Hastert has 
achieved the rare prize of climbing to the top of the leadership ladder 
making few if any enemies. Part of this may be because of his relative 
anonymity. Even among many Washington political sophisticates, the 
annointment of Hastert drew blank stares. But for House Republicans 
eager to fill the breach left by Livingston before fleeing the scandal-pocked 
Capitol for the holidays, Hastert was a well-known, comfortable face. 
In the House leadership races last month, a campaign to draft Hastert 
to challenge Rep. Dick Armey, R-Texas, the majority leader, fell short. 
But the seeds were sown. The list of Republicans committed to Hastert, 
released Saturday night by his office, included virtually every member 
of the Republican leadership, as well as moderates from Jim Leach 
of Iowa and Christopher Shays of Connecticut to arch-conservatives 
like David McIntosh of Indiana and Steve Largent of Oklahoma. ``His 
foremost skill is working with members from all backgrounds,'' said 
Cox. Rep. James Greenwood, R-Pa., a moderate, said he asked Hastert 
for assurances that the centrists would have a voice if he were to 
become speaker. ``I wanted to make sure that moderates are not shut 
out of the process,'' said Greenwood. ``Hastert brings a reality, 
a congeniality to the process. He doesn't come to the floor with an 
extreme agenda.'' Looking ahead to the 2000 elections, many Republicans 
say they hope Hastert can move away from the slash-and-burn politics 
Gingrich championed to an emphasis on legislation, an approach that 
was lacking this year and cost House Republicans at the ballot box 
in November. Indeed, Hastert has been a Republican leader in health-care 
issues and in anti-drug policies. He also looks to let other Republicans 
spread the party's gospel. ``It will be a different speakership than 
Newt's,'' said Rep. John Edward Porter, R-Ill., a moderate. ``Under 
Denny, the speakership will be decentralized. There will be a lot 
more spokesmen for the party.'' 
</TEXT>
</DOC>