<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981220.0241 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
The New York Times said in an editorial Monday, Dec. 21: Initial Pentagon 
assessments of the four-day air campaign against Iraq suggest that 
Saddam Hussein suffered heavy but not irretrievable losses. It may 
take Iraq as long as a year to restore its ability to deliver biological 
and chemical weapons against potential targets in the Middle East. 
If that estimate holds up, the time should be used to reinforce diplomatic 
support for sanctions and future military action, if needed. It should 
also be used, if possible, to reconstitute an effective program of 
inspections and monitoring of weapons facilities inside Iraq. Baghdad's 
declaration that United Nations inspections are now ended forever 
may not be the last word on the subject. The United States and Britain 
should maintain sufficient forces in the area to attack Iraq again 
if it threatens its neighbors, expands its arsenal of mass destruction 
weapons or rebuilds the missiles used to carry them. But new air strikes 
should not be launched absent clear justification and careful diplomatic 
preparation. As President Clinton noted Saturday, American strategy 
is built around maintaining U.N. Security Council support for effective 
economic sanctions to retard Iraqi rebuilding efforts. That will require 
demonstrating to countries like Russia and China, which protested 
the latest air strikes, that America continues to rely chiefly on 
diplomatic and economic pressures. Opposition from Arab countries 
was relatively subdued. But that response should not be taken for 
granted. Saddam has largely isolated himself in the Arab world through 
his provocative behavior. But Washington cannot afford to be reckless 
in the use of military power or indifferent to the loss of Arab lives. 
The Clinton administration must press Israel's Prime Minister, Benjamin 
Netanyahu, to honor his commitments to make additional West Bank withdrawals 
and take other steps toward completing a negotiated peace with the 
Palestinians. The air strikes were aimed not just at Iraqi weapons 
programs but also at weakening Saddam's rule. Allied missiles and 
aircraft attacked presidential palaces, the headquarters of the ruling 
Baath Party and the barracks of elite security forces like the Republican 
Guard. These were legitimate targets since they have all been involved 
in Iraqi attempts to conceal biological and chemical weapons or missile 
production. But Washington should not delude itself into thinking 
that such attacks will pave the way for a revolt that topples Saddam. 
His rule is too well entrenched and opposition forces are too weak 
and divided for that to be a realistic possibility anytime soon. Diplomatic 
and economic pressure, backed by the continuing threat of American 
military force, is the most effective way to manage the Iraqi weapons 
threat. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>