<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981220.0151 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
The International Olympic Committee has 102 male members and 12 female 
members. It has princesses, princes and a sheik. It has four generals 
from Africa, two brothers from Mexico and a lot more bona fide businessmen 
and lawyers from all corners of the world than bona fide Olympic heroes 
like the French skier Jean-Claude Killy, the Dutch judo athlete Anton 
Geesink and the Czech gymnast Vera Caslavska. It also has a potentially 
serious problem. It is under internal and external scrutiny because 
of allegations of bribery in the awarding of the Games to host cities, 
and though the IOC has never been eager to allow more than glimpses 
into its workings, curiosity is now rising rapidly. Just what is the 
IOC? How does one become a member? How does one become an influential 
member? And who are the members of this organization that has existed 
since June 1894, when Baron Pierre de Coubertin called a meeting in 
a Paris auditorium appropriately decorated with neo-classical murals? 
The IOC, which calls itself ``the supreme authority of the Olympic 
movement,'' runs the Summer and Winter Olympics; most significant, 
it chooses the host cities, decides which sports will be included 
and negotiates the television contracts and sponsorship deals that 
pay for it all. NBC will pay $3.5 billion to broadcast all the Games 
from 2000 to 2008, money that will finance the nonprofit IOC and also, 
through subsidies handed out by the IOC, go to sports federations 
and commissions around the world. Only two members are Americans: 
Anita DeFrantz, a sports administrator and former Olympic rower, who 
is the highest-ranking woman in an organization that did not elect 
female members until 1981, and James L. Easton, a sporting goods manufacturer 
and president of the international archery federation. Italy, with 
nowhere near the population or commercial clout of the United States, 
has four members. They include Ottavio Cinquanta, president of the 
International Skating Union; Primo Nebiolo, president of the International 
Amateur Athletic Federation, and Mario Pescante, who recently resigned 
as president of the Italian Olympic Committee because of a scandal 
involving a discredited drug-testing laboratory in Rome but remains 
a perquisite-enjoying member of the IOC. And there are perquisites: 
first-class flights to, and first-class treatment in, the cities that 
bid for the Olympics every two years; choice seats and choice lodging 
at the Olympics themselves, and at least one annual meeting, called 
``the session,'' in a major city that rarely represents a hardship 
journey. Though their travel and IOC business expenses are reimbursed, 
members do not receive salaries. They are volunteers, if remarkably 
coddled volunteers, and even Juan Antonio Samaranch, the Spaniard 
who has been president for the last 18 years, does not receive a paycheck 
for his work, although his lifestyle in Lausanne, Switzerland, the 
IOC's base of operations, is undeniably pleasant. De Coubertin moved 
the IOC to neutral Switzerland from France in April 1915 in the midst 
of World War I. It remains in Lausanne because Samaranch decided to 
keep it there after becoming president in 1980, despite offers from 
Paris, Madrid, Samaranch's native Barcelona and another Swiss city, 
Zurich. The IOC has its headquarters in the Chateau de Vidy, which 
is on the shores of Lake Geneva. The Chateau is hardly as grandiose 
as its name suggests: there is a trailer park across the street, and 
a public park surrounding the headquarters is routinely filled with 
joggers, bikers and Olympic tourists hoping to get a glimpse of Samaranch 
as he emerges from his Mercedes. (The German automaker is an official 
sponsor of the IOC.) There is no clear track to becoming a full-fledged 
IOC member. A handful of international federation presidents, like 
Cinquanta and Nebiolo, hold their seats for as long as they remain 
in office in their federations. Some members, like Gerhard Heiberg 
of Norway and Killy of France, have joined the organization after 
running successful Winter Olympic organizing committees. Heiberg headed 
the Lillehammer Games in 1994; Killy was co-chairman of the Albertville 
Games in 1992. Alex Gilady of Israel joined after helping NBC negotiate 
television contracts. Shamil Tarpishev of Russia was once Boris Yeltsin's 
private tennis coach and later became minister of sport in Russia. 
Prince Albert of Monaco is a former Olympic bobsledder and provides 
a bit of glitter for Samaranch, a former diplomat who still has a 
weakness for aristocrats and holds the title of marquis himself. Other 
royal members include Princess Anne of Britain, no Samaranch fan; 
Prince Faisal Fahd Abdul Aziz of Saudi Arabia's ruling family, and 
Prince Henri of Luxembourg and the crown prince of the Netherlands, 
who became members in February. There is no official nomination process 
from outside for new members, although the Soviets did once essentially 
impose a member, Konstantin Andrianov, in 1951. The IOC relishes its 
independence _ it was one of de Coubertin's primary concerns, because 
he believed the ancient games had been destroyed by outside influences 
_ and the Olympic charter states that IOC members are ``its representatives 
in their respective countries and not delegates of their countries 
within the IOC.'' ``It's true that the IOC has always seemed very 
anachronistic,'' said Maurice Herzog of France, an honorary member 
who retired in 1994 after 24 years on the IOC. ``It lives among itself. 
The members are like cardinals in the Vatican. Governments come and 
go, it doesn't matter to us.'' Of the 114 current members, 48 are 
from Europe, 21 from the Americas, 20 from Africa, 20 from Asia and 
5 from Oceania. ``We function as a state,'' Samaranch said. ``We have 
a president, a government in the form of the executive board, a parliament 
in the form of the general membership and an administration which 
is rather youthful and works well.'' The executive board, known within 
the IOC as the EB and created in 1921, is essentially the organization's 
board of directors. Composed of 11 members, including Samaranch and 
four vice presidents, it meets four times a year and manages the IOC's 
affairs, overseeing finances, presenting any proposal for rule or 
bylaw changes at the annual meeting and, perhaps most important, deciding 
which new members to propose to the membership as a whole. These new 
members are generally approved by acclamation and not by a formal 
vote, which is a clear indication of Samaranch's and the executive 
board's influence. Executive board members are elected at the annual 
meeting in a secret ballot. Terms last four years, and the current 
executive board includes long-influential members like Dick Pound 
of Canada; Pal Schmitt of Hungary; Judge Keba Mbaye of Senegal; Kevan 
Gosper of Australia; Kim Un Yong of South Korea, a former embassy 
intelligence officer and head of the world tae kwon do federation, 
and Marc Hodler of Switzerland, who made a series of allegations about 
corruption in the Olympic site-awarding process at an executive board 
meeting in Lausanne this month. DeFrantz is also on the board, as 
are two increasingly prominent Europeans and former Olympians: Thomas 
Bach of Germany and Jacques Rogge of Belgium. The average age of IOC 
members is 61{ years, although members may now serve until they turn 
80, thanks to Samaranch, now 78, who successfully raised the mandatory 
retirement age from 75 so he could run for a fourth term as president. 
Four men are life members, including Hodler and the former FIFA president 
and IOC doyen Joao Havelange of Brazil, because they were elected 
before age limits were instituted in 1966. Despite the continuity 
that characterizes the IOC, Samaranch has reshaped the body dramatically 
in the last five years, adding 42 new members and bringing the total 
membership well above 100. Many of the new members are sports administrators 
or federation presidents, whom Samaranch wanted in the fold to insure 
the IOC's continued relevance. ``The mass of new members has changed 
the family feeling within the IOC quite a bit,'' Herzog said. ``I 
think it's positive because we have to be associated with the international 
federations, but the discreet side, the Vatican side of the IOC, has 
changed a lot. These are sports professionals coming in.'' 
</TEXT>
</DOC>