<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981220.0116 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
It appeared to be the ultimate comeback in a career marked by seemingly 
miraculous political resurrections. The night of Tuesday, Nov. 3, 
was a time of celebration at the White House. Bill Clinton had again 
defied the odds, embarrassed the experts and vanquished his political 
enemies. As election results poured in from across the country, it 
became clear that Clinton, though not on the ballot, had won a smashing 
victory over the Republicans who had bet their chips on his impeachment. 
The president gathered with friends and aides in his chief of staff's 
office to revel in the returns, one of those there recalled, chewing 
on cigars, drinking wine and delighting in the victory until 2:30 
in the morning. The public had spoken. Surely the Republicans must 
finally heed its voice. But the despair in the Republican camp was 
tempered by determination. The next afternoon, Rep. Henry Hyde, R-Ill., 
the chairman of the House Judiciary Committee that would soon conduct 
hearings on impeaching the president, dialed a conference call from 
a meeting room in the O'Hare Airport Hilton in Chicago. After each 
of the 20 other Republicans on the committee clicked onto the line, 
Hyde somberly delivered his marching orders. ``We took a shellacking 
in the elections,'' he told his colleagues, several of them recounted 
last week. ``But we have a constitutional duty to carry out, and we 
always said the election would have no bearing on it. We will move 
forward.'' Clinton and his allies badly misread the resolve of Hyde 
and other Republican leaders to sail into the wind of hostile public 
opinion. To this day, the president's friends say, Clinton, the most 
poll-driven politician ever to rise to the presidency, is mystified 
that Republicans in Congress would defy the poll-tested will of the 
people. But Clinton, through a strategy of denial and attack, had 
long ago given Republicans the weapons they turned against him in 
their campaign for impeachment. In the final days before Saturday's 
vote, many wavering Republicans argued that they could not trust a 
president who had stood in the Roosevelt Room of the White House in 
January and angrily denied having sexual relations with ``that woman, 
Miss Lewinsky.'' That public lie was not among the impeachment charges, 
but it stiffened the resolve of the president's opponents. ``That 
is something a president should never never do,'' one senior adviser 
who also counts himself a friend of Clinton, said of the president's 
defiance that day. ``That's most troubling to me. I am still working 
through forgiving him for it.'' But in the view of many, neither did 
his opponents bring credit upon themselves. Some say Kenneth Starr, 
the independent counsel, sacrificed his reputation for fairness and 
civility in his relentless pursuit of the president. House Republicans, 
by refusing to allow a censure measure to reach the House floor and 
by forcing a partisan vote that succeeded on only two of four impeachment 
counts, have risked further erosion of their falling public support. 
In interviews with the president's closest advisers, who helped formulate 
his strategy for dealing with the mounting legal and political crisis, 
and with his staunchest foes, both in the independent counsel's office 
and within the Republican congressional leadership, it is apparent 
that the impeachment vote was sadly inevitable. The two sides in this 
conflict could not find common ground to resolve the crisis. For example, 
Clinton surprised even some of his own legal advisers by stiffening 
his denials in the face of ever-more tenacious questions from Starr 
and, later, Hyde. And Hyde, whose abilities and determination were 
underestimated in the White House, played a more pivotal role than 
is generally recognized, pushing impeachment forward as his party's 
leadership was plunged into post-election disarray. ``I've always 
believed that impeachment was avoidable,'' Rep. Jim Leach, a thoughtful 
Iowa Republican, said last week before casting his vote to impeach 
Clinton. ``But at each stage, the combination of congressional action 
and executive response worked against bringing closure at an earlier 
moment.'' The Testimony A Concession, and a Threat Moments before 
Clinton swore to tell the truth to a federal grand jury on Aug. 17, 
David Kendall, the president's personal lawyer, asked to speak privately 
with the independent counsel, Starr, in a hallway outside the White 
House Map Room. Kendall told Starr that the president was prepared 
to acknowledge that he had an inappropriate relationship with Monica 
Lewinsky, according to several people with direct knowledge of the 
encounter. ``But,'' Kendall warned Starr, ``if you go into details, 
I will fight you to the knife, both here and publicly.'' And so the 
president offered what he viewed as a profound concession, underlined 
by a threat. Starr withdrew and huddled with his fellow prosecutors 
to map out their strategy. Unanimously, they decided to press the 
president on the details of the relationship; these were critical 
to the definition of ``sexual relations'' allowed by the judge in 
Clinton's deposition in the Paula Jones sexual harassment suit. ``It 
was clear that the president would only make a limited statement, 
refuse to provide any details and try to run out the clock,'' recalled 
Charles Bakaly III, the spokesman for Starr. ``And we saw that as 
an attempt by the president to defy both the prosecutors and the truth.'' 
In the days before the grand jury appearance, one of Clinton's lawyers 
had strongly counseled him to refuse to testify. But the president 
was swayed by polls that showed he would put his 70 percent approval 
ratings at risk by refusing to testify or by exercising his Fifth 
Amendment right against self-incrimination. Clinton's lawyers also 
told the president that it would be suicidal for him to lie to the 
federal grand jury. ``For the president of the United States to lie 
before a grand jury is a big deal,'' a longtime adviser of the president 
said in an interview. ``I don't care if the lie is about a fender-bender 
or about sex. We always knew that perjury before a grand jury was 
a dastardly, very serious act that most people would not tolerate.'' 
In the weekend before his testimony, the president's lawyers decided 
that Clinton should make an opening statement acknowledging an inappropriate 
relationship with Ms. Lewinsky and then not answer any specific questions 
about the nature of the sexual contact. But in the four hours of grand 
jury testimony, the president surprised his lawyers by straying from 
the plan and maintaining that Ms. Lewinsky performed sexual acts on 
him while he never touched her in a sexual manner, several advisers 
said. On several major points, Clinton's testimony and Ms. Lewinsky's 
directly contradicted each other. That night, the president addressed 
the nation and attacked the unfairness of Starr's 4-year-old investigation. 
But for the first time, Clinton directly acknowledged that he had 
an inappropriate relationship with Ms. Lewinsky that was ``wrong,'' 
contradicting seven months of his public denials. While many people 
had assumed he had not told the full truth in January, the admission 
further damaged his credibility. At the conclusion of Clinton's testimony, 
the prosecutors returned to their Pennsylvania Avenue offices and 
gathered in a large, windowless conference room. When Starr repeated 
Kendall's threat, ``there was an audible gasp'' among the 30 lawyers 
present, said Ronald Rotunda, an aide to Starr. On Aug. 18, Starr's 
prosecutors read transcripts of the president's testimony. After a 
somber discussion, Starr and his deputies decided to send to the House 
of Representatives an impeachment referral that would accuse the president 
of lying repeatedly to the grand jury. Not long afterward, Clinton's 
lawyers received a transcript of Ms. Lewinsky's grand jury testimony. 
They were shocked to read her detailed account contradicting the president's 
description of their physical contact. What Clinton's lawyers did 
not know, several of his advisers said in interviews, was whether 
Ms. Lewinsky was exaggerating or whether Clinton had misled his own 
legal team. There was another problem that confronted the president, 
his advisers conceded. Many Republicans and even some Democrats doubted 
his word. One was Rep. W.J. ``Billy'' Tauzin, a Louisiana Republican 
who had switched parties in 1995, in part because he said the president 
had lied to him on an energy-tax issue. ``He lied to me, he lies to 
others, and he uses us like rag dolls,'' Tauzin said. ``And that's 
not helpful in this business.'' On Aug. 19, the House majority whip, 
Rep. Tom DeLay of Texas, had become the first leading lawmaker to 
call for Clinton's resignation. ``Clearly,'' DeLay said, ``the president 
has done irreparable damage to the office of the presidency.'' Clinton 
and his allies dismissed the threat of impeachment as a partisan exercise. 
But the die was cast. A case for impeachment was on its way to the 
most partisan committee on Capitol Hill, the House Judiciary Committee. 
And DeLay, the Republicans' chief vote counter in the House, was determined 
to drive impeachment forward. The Starr Report Miscalculations and 
Repercussions The next miscalculations were made by Starr and the 
Republicans in Congress. Two Starr deputies, Brett Kavanaugh and Stephen 
Bates, had been assigned to write what became the 445-page Starr report. 
On Sept. 9, two government vans disgorged the document, along with 
17 boxes of supporting documents. Kavanaugh, who had worked at Starr's 
Chicago law firm, and Bates, an editor from the scholarly Wilson Quarterly, 
had written a 140-page narrative that chronicled in graphic detail 
each of 10 sexual encounters with the president that Ms. Lewinsky 
had described in her grand jury testimony. The details, the prosecutors 
believed, were necessary to show conclusively that the president had 
lied. ``This was not `Lady Chatterly's Lover,''' said Rotunda, the 
aide to Starr. ``It was necessary to include all those details. The 
details also made it ring true.'' Hyde had spoken reverently of bipartisanship 
and fairness. The hearing process, he promised repeatedly, would be 
slow and cautious. And to a certain extent, it started that way. Two 
days after the Starr report's delivery under lock and key, the full 
House, in a bipartisan vote, chose on Sept. 9 to release its contents, 
without any member having read it. And two days later, Republicans 
decided to publish it for the world on the Internet. Republicans defended 
their decision, saying that the impeachment of Clinton carried such 
import they could not justify withholding even one word of the Starr 
report. The public, they argued, had a right to know. Just as Clinton 
had sometimes overplayed his hand at crucial moments, the Republicans 
badly miscalculated the public's reaction to the 445-page report. 
Parents were soon bombarding congressional offices with complaints 
that their children were reading about oral sex online. Pundits called 
the report ``soft-core pornography.'' ``A penny-ante high school sex 
novel,'' one of Clinton's defenders sneered. The Republicans had also 
refused to provide the president's lawyers with an opportunity to 
review the Starr report before it was made public. Then, despite grand 
jury secrecy rules, they released the videotape of the president's 
testimony. Seething Democrats blasted the Republicans as unfair. Polls 
quickly showed that two-thirds of the public continued to support 
the president while Starr's approval ratings fell to single digits. 
Yet Clinton's advisers saw a clear danger in the independent counsel's 
report. Senior White House aides quietly opened discussions with allies 
on Capitol Hill to seek a censure resolution as an alternative to 
the Republican intention to open impeachment hearings. When the president's 
top two lawyers, Kendall and Charles Ruff, the White House counsel, 
appeared on television on the Sunday after the Starr report's release 
to respond to the charges, they did not provide a factual response 
to the accusations. Instead, they said that even if Clinton had lied 
to Paula Jones' lawyers and to the grand jury, those lies did not 
amount to impeachable offenses. ``Whatever the president did or whatever 
the president said,'' Ruff said, ``whether it was in January or August, 
there simply is no basis for removing the president from office.'' 
That was to be the backbone of the president's defense throughout 
the fall. It echoed in Saturday's impeachment debate on the House 
floor, as Democrats argued that Clinton's wrongs were not impeachable 
and Republicans invoked their duty to protect the rule of law. As 
House members headed home in October to campaign for re-election, 
the Democrats had one worry. The Republicans had announced a $30 million 
advertising blitz for their House candidates called Operation Breakout. 
The Republican election strategy, however, seemed strangely devoid 
of issues. Then the Republicans decided to raise the Lewinsky scandal 
in some of the Operation Breakout ads. As Democrats hammered away 
at a do-nothing Republican leadership obsessed with scandal and the 
politics of division, the Republicans were highlighting the one issue 
that voters were telling pollsters they did not want to hear about. 
Almost no political analysts predicted the outcome: In a midterm election 
when the party not occupying the White House typically gains more 
than 20 House seats, the Republicans lost five. Brief Delusion Election 
Victory and False Hope The election claimed one immediate casualty, 
the speaker and Clinton nemesis Newt Gingrich. Three days after Gingrich 
announced he was resigning, his heir apparent as speaker, Rep. Bob 
Livingston of Louisiana, telephoned the Republican strategist Ralph 
Reed for his advice on an agenda for House Republicans. Reed recalls 
telling Livingston to play down the scandal so the impeachment inquiry 
would not further taint the party: ``I said, `Lay low _ don't let 
this impeachment bomb blow up in your face.''' But Livingston startled 
Reed by replying that the march to impeachment was unstoppable, and 
that it was being orchestrated by Hyde. ``He goes, `I don't know how 
you turn the thing off,''' Reed said. ```Henry's going to hold hearings. 
And I don't know how you stop that.''' At the White House, the administration 
seemed oblivious to the fact that Hyde and his committee were plunging 
ahead. White House aides had all but halted their lobbying campaign 
on Capitol Hill. ``The election happened and the media created this 
delusion that somehow because the Democrats won seats, the Republicans 
somehow grew less interested in impeachment,'' said Rep. Robert Wexler, 
a Florida Democrat on the Judiciary Committee. ``That just was never 
the case. From the start, the Republicans had one goal in mind and 
only one: to impeach Bill Clinton.'' Yet rather than deter Republicans, 
events after the election made Clinton's impeachment more likely. 
Gingrich's resignation as speaker removed an embattled Republican 
leader who might have felt more pressure, with his own weakened status, 
to forge a compromise with the White House for a censure of Clinton 
short of impeachment, Republican officials say. And Livingston kept 
a low profile because he did not want the beginning of his tenure 
to be marked by impeachment. Into the leadership void stepped DeLay, 
the Republican whip and impeachment firebrand. But behind the scenes 
it was the less caustic Hyde who never wavered from his intention 
to move forward with impeachment charges in his committee, the most 
politically polarized in the House. Although Hyde had predicted early 
that any impeachment process would require bipartisan cooperation, 
he soon realized that Republicans would have to go it alone. In his 
view as chairman, the panel's constitutional duty to conduct an inquiry, 
no matter how swift and skeletal, was more important than succumbing 
to public opinion and Democratic outrage. Explaining the altered dynamic, 
Rep. David Skaggs, D-Colo., said, ``There was a much more disciplined, 
single-minded effort on the part of Henry Hyde and the Republican 
members of the Judiciary Committee than perhaps we had understood 
would happen, and a certain taking of ease, prematurely, on the part 
of the White House.'' On Nov. 6, Hyde and the Republican majority 
on his committee made their main move: They submitted 81 questions 
to Clinton for his response. The questions were cast as an opportunity 
for the president to clear the air with the committee and with the 
public. But they asked for one-word answers _ ``admit or deny,'' each 
began _ to often complicated summaries of the Starr report or grand 
jury testimony. In many cases, to admit now would be to admit Clinton 
had lied under oath before. The White House took three weeks _ until 
the Friday after Thanksgiving _ before submitting responses after 
Clinton had reviewed them, following a round of golf. The president 
himself was most responsible for the tone of the answers; one adviser 
said Clinton believed the questions were a trap designed to trick 
him into admitting that he had committed perjury. But he was not alone. 
One White House adviser recalled counseling Clinton and his lawyer: 
``I'd like to take those damn answers, tie them around a rock and 
throw them through Henry Hyde's office window.'' The responses were 
lawyerly and finely drawn. But in carefully avoiding any traps posed 
by the questions, the president again appeared evasive. The first 
question, for example, asked him to ``admit or deny'' that the president 
is the chief law-enforcement officer of the United States. Clinton 
delicately dodged a direct answer: The president is often said to 
be the chief law-enforcement officer, he replied, but that role is 
not among the duties spelled out by the Constitution. Again, the president's 
defiance, or determination to defend himself, infuriated his enemies. 
``Regrettably,'' said Rep. Michael Forbes, R-N.Y., who made up his 
mind on Wednesday to impeach, ``there was an arrogance coming out 
of the White House that this was slam dunk over.'' Even Rep. James 
Moran, a moderate Democrat from Virginia, found himself cringing at 
the 81 responses. ``Most of us know the president well enough that 
he has a bear trap of a memory,'' he said. ``And here he was acting 
like he had Alzheimer's.'' Clinton's accumulated vulnerability to 
assaults on his honesty was evident on Dec. 10, in the final presentation 
to the committee of the Republicans' chief investigative counsel, 
David Schippers. Schippers, a lifelong Democrat from Chicago, used 
the plain-spokenness of a county courthouse prosecutor, with a generous 
dose of sarcasm, to persuade many moderates to vote for impeachment. 
``He lied to the people,'' Schippers said in his summation, dwelling 
on statements by the president that were not included in any of the 
articles of impeachment. ``He lied to his Cabinet, he lied to his 
top aides, and now he's lied under oath to the Congress of the United 
States. There's no one left to lie to.'' One of Clinton's political 
advisers conceded, ``It was very powerful. It was much more damaging 
than the Starr report.'' In defending Clinton before the committee, 
the White House counsel, Ruff, again argued that the president's statements, 
while deceptive, did not constitute impeachable offenses. ``I have 
no doubt that he walked up to a line that he thought he understood,'' 
Ruff said. ``Reasonable people, and you maybe have reached this conclusion, 
could determine that he crossed over that line, and that what for 
him was truthful but misleading or nonresponsive and misleading or 
evasive, was in fact false.'' For Republicans, an admission by Clinton's 
lawyer that the president might have given misleading or nonresponsive 
or even evasive answers under oath was not enough. They had wanted 
the president to acknowledge that he lied under oath before the grand 
jury and in the Jones deposition. ``The White House was given two 
full days to present a defense,'' said Rep. Frank Riggs, R-Calif., 
who is retiring, ``but the defense never questioned the underlying 
facts and circumstances. I was waiting for them to present new and 
different information, and they didn't. That was crucial.'' By now, 
Republicans had succeeded in casting Clinton as unrepentant unless 
he explicitly confessed to lying to the grand jury. But on Dec. 11, 
in a brief Rose Garden speech to the nation, Clinton tried one more 
time to appease his doubters. ``What I want the American people to 
know, what I want the Congress to know, is that I am profoundly sorry 
for all I have done wrong in words and deeds.'' Once more he did not 
specifically address the accusations against him, and Republicans 
pronounced his efforts feeble and far too late. ``He really needed 
to say that he lied under oath, even if he didn't use the term `perjury,''' 
Moran said. After the speech, he said, Republican moderates came up 
to him and said, ``Jim, I just can't accept the reality of this guy's 
ability to lie so bald-facedly and so convincingly. It's scary how 
convincing he is.'' Last week, in a series of letters and statements, 
Hyde made clear that if a censure resolution had left the committee, 
he would oppose bringing it to the floor. The Republicans were not 
going to back down. ``Then it was clear that this thing was wired,'' 
said Steve Elmendorf, chief of staff to Rep. Dick Gephardt of Missouri, 
the minority leader. ``Up until that point, I still thought there 
was some hope that these moderates would band together.'' The Final 
Days Clinton's Mantra, `I'm Fighting' On one level, the answer to 
the question ``How did we get here?'' is easy. ``It's a consequence, 
first and foremost, of the president's appalling behavior,'' said 
Mike McCurry, the president's former press secretary. ``And you can't 
get around it and you can't explain it.'' But equally important was 
the determination of Clinton's political enemies to not see him slip 
off the hook one more time, even if that meant a wrenching and unpopular 
impeachment vote. On Monday, Moran, a Democrat who had harshly criticized 
Clinton's behavior, surprised himself by going to see the president's 
secretary while Clinton was in the Middle East. ``I went and talked 
with Betty Currie,'' Moran said. In the impeachment charges, Clinton 
was accused of taking part in a plan involving Mrs. Currie to conceal 
his gifts to Ms. Lewinsky. Moran needed to know, he told Mrs. Currie, 
whether Clinton had ``used a good, decent, honest, civil servant to 
assist him in covering up evidence.'' ``So I told her all that,'' 
Moran said. ``And she said she does not feel he ever lied to her, 
nor does she feel used, and she feels he is a very good man.'' The 
visit help persuade Moran to vote against impeachment. Riggs, the 
California Republican, said he was so torn that he telephoned former 
Presidents Gerald Ford and Jimmy Carter, former Vice President Dan 
Quayle and the former Senate majority leader Bob Dole. ``Their advice 
has been very helpful,'' said Riggs, who would vote for impeachment. 
After he reached out to local political figures, Forbes got a bit 
of unsolicited advice. Robert DeNiro, the actor, called him to make 
a pitch for the president. ``That doesn't help,'' Forbes said. He 
backed impeachment. As the last remaining undecided Republicans, one 
by one, announced that they would vote to impeach Clinton, the last 
hopes of the White House faded. Aboard Air Force One, as he returned 
home from Israel on Tuesday evening, the president told a close friend 
that he knew that his political fate would soon be before the Senate. 
This alarmed the friend, who admonished the glum-sounding Clinton. 
``You've got to fight this thing,'' the friend recalled telling Clinton 
by telephone. ``I am fighting,'' the president replied. ``I'm fighting, 
I'm fighting, I'm fighting.'' 
</TEXT>
</DOC>