<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981220.0138 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Hasim Rahman and Angel Manfredy both claimed to be victims of crimes 
in the ring here last Saturday night. They both believe they were 
robbed. But they would have a better chance of getting assault charges 
filed against their opponents than theft charges against the referees. 
Rahman, pinned between the second and third ropes, was being pummeled 
by David Tua when the referee, Telis Assemenios, stepped in to stop 
the heavyweight bout at 35 seconds of the 10th round. Manfredy, also 
pinned against the ropes, was being battered by Floyd Mayweather Jr. 
when the referee, Frank Santore, stopped their bout at 2 minutes 47 
seconds of the second round. Rahman (29-1) feels more victimized than 
Manfredy (24-3-1) does because Rahman was leading on all three judges' 
scorecards when the bout was stopped. And he had the presence of mind 
to react angrily when Assemenios called a halt to the fight, although 
Rahman did a zigzag stagger as he walked back to his corner. Manfredy 
seemed dazed as he headed back to his corner. Later he said politics 
and the desire to see Mayweather retain his World Boxing Council super 
featherweight title played heavily in the referee's decision to stop 
the bout. It was not a strong argument, considering that Mayweather 
(19-0), a bronze medalist for the U.S. boxing team in the 1996 Olympics, 
landed 56 of 120 punches he threw in the two rounds and landed 45 
of 86 power punches, according to CompuBox statistics. Manfredy landed 
just 19 of 86 punches thrown and connected with just three jabs. The 
Rahman stoppage caused a greater furor among the fans, who threw ice 
and debris into the ring after the bout was stopped. Rahman was in 
control until a heavy-handed assault by Tua (33-1) in the ninth round. 
``I thought Rahman was a premature stoppage,'' said Ron Scott Stevens, 
a matchmaker for Rahman's promoter, Cedric Kushner. ``The referee 
should have given Rahman a standing 8-count. If Rahman didn't respond 
or couldn't go on, then the referee still would have been in a position 
to stop it. It was a little league call in a major league fight.'' 
Steve Nelson, Rahman's co-manager, said he planned to file a protest 
with the International Boxing Federation, which sanctioned the bout, 
on the grounds that the stoppage was premature and because Tua had 
hit Rahman after the bell in the previous round. That blow hurt Rahman, 
and it carried over into the next round. Had Rahman's corner vehemently 
protested the late blow, it could have got a five-minute rest for 
its fighter. After the punch, Tua's trainer, Lou Duva, made a noisy 
protest in the ring to Assemenios that the punch was not late. If 
the protest succeeds, then the IBF can order a rematch. But if it 
fails, then Tua will become the No. 1 contender for the IBF heavyweight 
championship, awaiting the outcome of the unification bout between 
Evander Holyfield and Lennox Lewis on March 13 at Madison Square Garden. 
With a World Boxing Association defense up first for the Holyfield-Lewis 
winner, it could be early 2000 before Tua gets a title shot. Mayweather 
stopped Manfredy in his tracks and put a crimp in his plans to rule 
the 130-pound division. Mayweather, 21, is trained by his father, 
Floyd Sr., once a promising welterweight, and his uncle Roger Mayweather, 
a former world champion in two weight classes. Bob Arum, the promoter 
of Top Rank Boxing, has laid out an ambitious schedule for Mayweather 
for the early part of 1999. He will defend his title in his hometown 
of Grand Rapids, Mich., in February. In April he will defend it against 
Julio Cesar Chavez, and in June he will go against Goyo Vargas. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>