<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981220.0087 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
It is time to take up childish things. I am toying with an ocarina, 
an oval, hollowed gourd with finger holes, which I gently sound, bending 
the pitches, controlling the vibrato, echoing the wispy phrases I 
recall from Japanese shakuhachi players. When I stop fooling around, 
I play the ``Song of Time.'' That simple melody helps me warp my adult 
self back into childhood, when the world was somewhat less ominous, 
a time when an ocarina player, protected with a Hylian Shield and 
a Kokiri Sword, might have a fighting chance. Yes, my ocarina is a 
screen image in a video game. So, too, is the wise old Deku Tree, 
the Fairy Slingshot, the Kakariko Village and the evil Gonondorf (whom 
I have yet to encounter). And yes, this is childish of me. But it 
is worth putting aside more somber cares when Shigeru Miyamoto is 
involved. Miyamoto is not a screen image, but he has created some 
of the most enduring ones for Nintendo. His invention of Mario and 
Donkey Kong guaranteed Nintendo's success in the early 1980s, providing 
much needed armor as corporate game wars took place, and flocks of 
competing systems were blasted out of the sky. Each time it looked 
as if Nintendo was about to be undermined by piercing laser beams 
from the competition, Miyamoto would invent yet another variation 
on a theme, sending the industry scrambling to produce imitations. 
He would use the latest gaming technology, not to create big-breasted 
heroines or show more vivid spurts of blood from crushed skulls, but 
to create nuanced, witty and dazzling games that had even pretentious 
adults like me staying up late, ignoring glazed eyes and strained 
fingers. Miyamoto, now head of Nintendo's development department in 
Kyoto, Japan, has done it again with The Legend of Zelda: Ocarina 
of Time. It is, Nintendo says, the most successful video game ever 
released for the now-aging medium. By next week the company expects 
to have sold more than 2.5 million copies of the $70 game in just 
over a month. And the reviews from the video-game press have been 
ecstatic. So having spent more time than I should admit toying with 
various aircraft simulations, battling with invading aliens, solving 
interactive detective stories and mastering countless strategies, 
I am again warping into childhood. This time, though, I confess to 
cutting some corners. Normally, a player has to wrestle through the 
game from the beginning, spending months mastering the intricacies 
of different worlds, accumulating weapons and objects, storing the 
progress in the game's memory at the end of each session. Now I cheat. 
Nintendo lent me a game that a game master had already played through 
and saved, so I could sample all of the Zelda universe. I can pretend 
that I earned my stripes, but actually I can barely get my boots on. 
But cheating doesn't make it much easier. I still must slowly learn 
to maneuver in this eerie 3-D universe, swinging swords and hammers, 
changing shields and tunics, exploring the innards of a fish, the 
slippery canyons of an ice world or the mirage-ridden heat of a desert, 
trying to avoid shooting flames and find ways of climbing sheer walls. 
In some ways the genre is the same as the first Mario game I played 
more than 10 years ago: It might be called the video picaresque. An 
innocent hero or heroine sets off on a quest but must first master 
a strange physical world, learning how to leap, run, duck, talk, fight. 
Various traps and dead ends must be explored, along with the powers 
and quirks of sundry creatures. Eventually the player becomes an odd 
kind of virtuoso, weaving gracefully through the screen images, picking 
up a barrel, slashing a suspicious plant, learning how to climb through 
spider webs or shoot arrows at the ceiling, all using the hand-held 
controller. Watching an accomplished player can be even more amusing 
than risking death oneself. These games do require a subtle sense 
of timing, a graceful way with buttons and not a little bit of cleverness. 
But in this new Zelda the video picaresque has become so much more 
complicated. The world is three-dimensional. The angle of vision can 
change. There are baffling puzzles and seemingly unwinnable battles. 
There is also, near the climax of the game, something almost uncanny 
as the child on the screen pulls a sword from a stone and (yes, the 
game is full of such self-conscious mythery), becomes an adult in 
a wrecked and wracked world. He later returns to childhood to solve 
more problems before finally taking on the mantle of maturity. And 
his ocarina, which can really be made to sound like a distant relative 
of the shakuhachi, plays tunes that transport him through time and 
space. Miyamoto's creatures often transform themselves, but in this 
case the character's transformations back and forth across the border 
of adolescence have an unusual resonance. That border is one of the 
central preoccupations of video games. It is where they originated. 
If video games are simulations at all, they are simulations of adult 
mastery. The soldier of fortune, the sumo wrestler, the football coach 
and the secret agent are often given life by a player who has yet 
to finish his homework. The game industry has, of course, been expanding 
its genres and its appeal, which is why the Sony Playstation is being 
wryly advertised this season as a way of keeping husbands from straying. 
But the male adolescent imagery remains strong. Most video games still 
invoke the experience of the arcade: crowded, dark rooms with carnivalesque 
tumult and even at times an ominous sexual anxiety. In arcades, each 
hooded screen offers the thrill of near death, along with the possibility 
of lasting a little bit longer the next time, if the physical demands 
can be met. It is an adolescent domain, testing and teasing its (usually) 
male inhabitants. When Miyamoto invented the video picaresque, he 
didn't reject the arcade. Rather, he absorbed it, inserting its slice-of-death 
action into a larger narrative, treating it as an episode in a long-range 
journey requiring imagination rather than just quick reflexes. When 
Miyamoto's games first appeared they were revolutionary, and they 
transformed home video games, domesticating the arcade. They became 
social games, in which viewers end up coaching, suggesting, correcting 
and annoying players. The arcade enshrines death; the picaresque video 
game enshrines resurrection. But with endlessly available lives and 
no need for quarters, the greatest challenge is to ensure that living 
yet again does not become routine. Hence the hidden levels and treasures, 
the codes and maps, the special maneuvers and easily missed details. 
And when eventually, after many hours of exploration, the picaresque 
hero approaches the final battle, the child-player has indeed mastered 
something, gaining some glimpse of what it must be like for those 
enviable creatures living at the other side of adolescence. Now, if 
only I could attain that childish level of mastery. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>