<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981220.0207 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
So many New England Patriots have spent nearly as much time in the 
training room on ice as on the field this season. Sunday against the 
San Francisco 49ers the Patriots entered with more players ailing 
and out, chief among them quarterback Drew Bledsoe (broken finger), 
receiver Terry Glenn (fractured ankle) and linebacker Willie McGinest 
(pulled groin). That is three starters contributing zilch, two of 
them Pro Bowlers. Glenn, too, is Pro Bowl caliber, the Patriots' best 
deep pass-catching threat. ``With those guys out and all our starters 
basically here, the odds are that you would expect us to win,'' 49ers 
linebacker Lee Woodall said. ``We just played a Monday night game 
at home where we stopped Barry Sanders, and then we come here a let 
a rookie get a lot of yards on us. What's that all about?'' Good question. 
What is it about the 49ers that makes them unbeaten (7-0) at home 
and just average (4-4) on the road? What was it Sunday about their 
offense, which produced 21 first-half points and then nothing in the 
second half? The Patriots think they have the answers after beating 
San Francisco, 24-21, before 59,153 fans at Foxboro Stadium, and joining 
the Buffalo Bills in gaining wild-card playoff spots Sunday. ``Those 
guys have won a lot in the past,'' Patriots cornerback Tebucky Jones 
said of the 49ers, ``but they ran into a team today that knows in 
the NFL that backups have to perform like the starters _ and we did. 
In the fourth quarter our defense, our whole team, was amped up. We 
took the momentum.'' Patriots linebacker Chris Slade, who had nine 
tackles and a sack, said: ``They're the 49ers _ they expect to win. 
But we have goals, too. We went to the Super Bowl two years ago. We 
made the playoffs last year. We've become accustomed to winning, and 
this game meant as much to us as it did to them. And that's how we 
played.'' It meant making the playoffs for the third consecutive season, 
a franchise record. The Patriots are 9-6, with their regular-season 
finale at the Jets next Sunday. San Francisco slipped to 11-4 and 
will finish vs. St. Louis at home. The game was won on Adam Vinatieri's 
35-yard field goal with three seconds remaining. Down by 21-14 at 
halftime, New England scored 10 points in the final quarter to swipe 
the victory. It was a steady second-half showing by the Patriots' 
defense. It was a heroic effort by backup quarterback Scott Zolak 
and rookie running back Robert Edwards. Zolak, an eight-year veteran, 
was making his first pro start in three years. Bledsoe had started 
the last 58 Patriot games, but Zolak was asked to replace the injured 
Bledsoe and guide the Patriots with the best he could produce. ``Early, 
he was struggling some, rushing things,'' Patriots receiver Shawn 
Jefferson said. ``He was saying that the game was a lot faster than 
in practice. But he had confidence in himself. He got the game going 
for us.'' Zolak finished with 205 passing yards, completing 14 of 
30 passes. He threw two touchdowns and two interceptions. He was comparable 
to 49ers mainstay Steve Young, who had a 267-yard passing day with 
two touchdowns and two interceptions. Zolak tossed a 19-yard swing 
pass to Edwards for a touchdown that opened the scoring with 2 minutes 
56 seconds left in the first quarter. After San Francisco tied it 
in the second quarter with a Young-to-Jerry Rice score of 75 yards, 
Zolak showed a strong arm and nice touch with a 61-yard scoring strike 
to Jefferson. The 49ers blitzed, the Patriots provided maximum protection 
and Zolak stood tall in the pocket, throwing the football deep down 
the right sideline and hitting Jefferson in stride. ``Everybody doubts 
this team a lot,'' Zolak said. ``There are injuries all over the place. 
People just keep stepping in, and now we're in it again.'' The 49ers' 
second touchdown of the second quarter was followed by a third, an 
unusual, aborted field-goal attempt that turned into holder Ty Detmer's 
25-yard scoring toss into the end zone to tight end Irv Smith as time 
expired in the half. It looked as if the 49ers would have the edge 
in spirit in the second half. But after gaining 14 first downs in 
the first half, they had only seven in the second. They punted only 
once in the first half but three times in the second. And though Garrison 
Hearst rushed for 107 yards and has 1,549 for the season, eclipsing 
Roger Craig's 49ers single-season rushing mark of 1,502 yards set 
in 1988, Hearst gained only 45 second-half rushing yards. The Patriots 
shut the 49ers down in the final 30 minutes, with Patriots safety 
Willie Clay intercepting Young early in the fourth quarter at the 
San Francisco 49. That set up a drive that Edwards finished with a 
powerful 5-yard scoring run up the middle. The game was tied at 21-21 
with 7:34 remaining. The 49ers' offense sagged to three plays and 
a punt on their next two drives. New England got the ball at the San 
Francisco 41 with 1:48 left and Edwards ran for 10, 3, 1, and 5 yards 
to set up the winning field goal. ``I'm starting to know what to do, 
to see my blocking well,'' Edwards said. ``I'm growing up as a football 
player.'' He rushed for 101 yards and has 1,068 for the season, only 
the third Patriots rookie back to reach the 1,000 mark. Another Patriots 
rookie, receiver Tony Simmons, led the team in catches Sunday with 
five. Rookie Damon Denson started at left guard and was effective. 
Rookies and substitutes mixing with old hats. The Patriots won it 
that way, with pure resolve. ``Seeing people hanging together and 
stay with the coaches and believe in the game plan and put it to work 
and make it come through, I just can't say enough,'' said the elated 
Patriots head coach, Pete Carroll. ``It was a collective effort by 
so many people to get this thing done.'' 
</TEXT>
</DOC>