<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981220.0230 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
President Clinton has adopted a two-track approach to his pending 
impeachment trial in the Senate, preparing to mount a vigorous legal 
defense while seeking to reach a compromise on a resolution of condemnation 
that would allow him to keep his job, White House officials said Sunday. 
But the strategy may founder in the Senate for the same reason it 
failed so spectacularly in the House, which on Saturday passed two 
articles of impeachment accusing Clinton of lying under oath before 
a federal grand jury and obstructing justice. Clinton is not prepared 
to confess to those charges, a senior Clinton legal adviser said Sunday, 
because he does not believe he committed them. Former Presidents Gerald 
Ford and Jimmy Carter on Monday will propose a swift end to the impeachment 
crisis through a bipartisan censure resolution voted by the Senate 
and accepted by Clinton. The proposal, to appear as an Op-Ed article 
in Monday's New York Times, would require Clinton to publicly acknowledge 
that he lied under oath. White House officials welcomed the proposal 
from Ford and Carter, one of several offered by senior figures of 
both parties in recent weeks, as evidence of a bipartisan desire to 
end the impeachment ordeal. But they cautioned that Clinton remains 
adamantly opposed to any admission of perjury. ``The notion that he's 
going to come forward and say he lied is not going to happen,'' said 
Gregory Craig, the White House coordinator of the president's defense. 
``He's not going to concede he lied to the grand jury, because he 
did not.'' The president's legal team is ready for a Senate proceeding 
that will begin shortly after the body convenes on Jan. 6, officials 
said. White House lawyers are preparing a series of motions questioning 
the legitimacy of impeachment articles voted by a lame-duck Congress 
and demanding that the charges against Clinton be spelled out in detail. 
``We're going forward to prepare for trial,'' said Craig. ``We're 
getting ready the legal arguments. We're getting ready the motions 
practice. We're getting ready to present evidence.'' Craig and Charles 
Ruff, the White House counsel, will lead the president's defense in 
the Senate, as they did in the House. They intend to rely on the same 
factual and constitutional arguments that were not persuasive in the 
House, with one important rhetorical difference. They can no longer 
claim that the accusations against Clinton do not warrant impeachment; 
a narrow majority in the House declared on Saturday that they do. 
Now the president's lawyers have begun to put forward the argument 
that they do not form sufficient grounds to warrant Clinton's removal 
from office. ``They have the burden of making the case that even if 
the evidence and all the allegations are true, it rises to the level, 
constitutional level, that this man should be removed from office,'' 
Craig said. But even as they prepare an aggressive legal defense, 
White House officials are openly pleading for senators to find a means 
to punish Clinton with a measure short of removal from office. They 
are hoping that it will be easier to reach an accommodation in the 
Senate, which is less sharply divided on factional lines and which 
by tradition is more attuned to compromise than is the House. ``Where 
there's a will, there's a way,'' John Podesta, the White House chief 
of staff, said in an appearance on the Cable News Network. ``If a 
majority of the Senate wants to do that, they will find a way to do 
it.'' Another White House official, speaking on condition of anonymity, 
said that the president's defenders will continue to call attention 
to the sharply partisan vote in the House to impeach Clinton. They 
are heartened by polls that show a rise in Clinton's popularity after 
the impeachment vote and a continuing decline in public approval of 
the way Congress conducts its business. ``The House showed that a 
partisan majority can do whatever it wants,'' this official said. 
``The Senate, by nature, by custom, by rule, is a different place. 
A partisan majority cannot ramrod something, because of the filibuster 
rule and the two-thirds requirement for impeachment.'' While White 
House aides expressed confidence that the Senate would not vote to 
convict and remove the president, they appeared in no hurry to begin 
the actual trial. One senior presidential adviser said that the more 
time passes, the less popular Congress becomes and the stronger public 
sentiment for an end to the crisis grows. ``The more you delay it, 
the more angry the public becomes,'' this adviser said. The president's 
lawyers will work through the holidays preparing his Senate defense, 
while hoping that it will not be needed. One White House legal adviser 
said he believed that any censure compromise would come only after 
a formal trial has opened. ``A good number of senators believe this 
cannot be resolved without at least beginning a trial,'' the lawyer 
said, on condition of anonymity. ``We have to be ready to do that, 
and we have to be deferential to their view of what is required by 
the Constitution.'' In remarks at the White House after the impeachment 
vote, Clinton pleaded for an end to the partisanship that he described 
as poisoning Washington. He said that meeting the nation's challenges 
required an atmosphere of ``decency and civility, some presumption 
of good faith, some sense of proportionality and balance in bringing 
judgment against those who are in different parties.'' But on Sunday 
morning on television, James Carville, the president's most hard-edged 
adviser, put Republicans on notice that he and other Clinton partisans 
would continue to attack them for the near party-line vote to impeach 
the president. ``There's going to be retribution,'' Carville warned 
darkly on the holiday-decorated set of NBC's ``Meet the Press.'' Most 
senior White House officials took the day off, their first respite 
in weeks of building tension. The president attended church in the 
morning with his daughter, Chelsea, and his stepfather, Dick Kelley. 
The Rev. Walter Shropshire of the Foundry United Methodist Church 
began the service by noting the events of the past turbulent week, 
which included not only the impeachment of the president but a furious 
four-day bombardment of Iraq and the resignation of Rep. Bob Livingston, 
the speaker-elect. He led a silent prayer for the nation and its leaders, 
U.S. forces overseas and the people of Iraq. As Clinton left the church 
hand in hand with Chelsea, he was met by a heckler who demanded his 
resignation, and applause from a handful of supporters. One carried 
a placard reading, ``God Bless our Prez.'' 
</TEXT>
</DOC>