<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981220.0235 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
When a young radio talk-show host in Georgia interviewed me about 
a book I wrote on the history of political gossip, I was befuddled 
by his repeated requests that I compare ``Richard Nixon's sexual indiscretions 
with Bill Clinton's.'' It took me a while to realize that he thought 
Watergate had been about sex. When the anti-impeachment camp said 
that nothing Clinton did compared to the evils of Watergate, he concluded 
it meant that Nixon had been a much more active adulterer. People 
with a shaky sense of history could be forgiven for presuming that 
lust is the only instinct that can lead a politician into trouble, 
as they watched Rep. Henry Hyde (recently outed for a midlife ``youthful 
sexual indiscretion'') lead the drive to impeach Clinton for lying 
about his sex life. When speaker-designate Bob Livingston quit over 
revelations about his past infidelities, House members, who have barely 
been able to muster enough civility to get through the daily prayer, 
joined hands to bemoan what Democrats are now calling ``the politics 
of personal destruction.'' They seemed convinced that the business 
of digging up old stories about sexual misbehavior was a new phenomenon, 
but that is far from true. The election of 1828 was fought over a 
35-year-old affair Andrew Jackson had with the married woman who later 
became his wife. Skip ahead through a century and a half of sporadic 
scandal outbursts, and you get to The Detroit News' revelations about 
a long-dead 7-year-old romance between Rep. Donald Riegle and a woman 
who was not his wife. ``My personal life in the distant past was my 
personal life,'' cried Riegle, who had changed both wives and political 
parties in the intervening years. In 1994, when Sen. Charles Robb 
was running for re-election in Virginia, his constituents were treated 
to a long-running debate about Robb's indiscretions during Virginia 
Beach parties he attended while he was governor. Historians may remember 
that campaign as the first in which a politician offered the now-familiar 
defense that oral sex does not count. Voters do not, in general, punish 
their elected officials for private misconduct. None of the Republican 
House members whose sexual affairs were publicized before last year's 
election seemed to suffer at the polls. Robb is still in the Senate. 
Riegle won a Senate seat shortly after the tapes of his pillow talk 
were made public, even though, as his opponents indignantly pointed 
out, he was quoted as telling his girlfriend that he preferred talking 
to her to attending ``a lousy subcommittee hearing.'' In terms of 
public support, Clinton is the most successful peacetime Democratic 
president since Grover Cleveland, a man who was elected despite a 
national furor over his alleged illegitimate child. This lack of dismay 
over what politicians do behind closed doors (which is not to be confused 
with a lack of interest) goes back to the Founding Fathers. Despite 
the lack of DNA tests, American voters knew plenty about Thomas Jefferson 
and Sally Hemings. But popular impressions notwithstanding, politicians 
have concerns beyond getting re-elected. Livingston was under fire 
by religious conservatives in Congress who no longer wanted him to 
be speaker, and he apparently did not have the stomach for a long 
public debate about his private misbehavior. ``I can't put my wife 
and children through this anymore,'' a friend quoted him as saying. 
Shame and embarrassment have claimed far more American politicians 
caught up in sex scandals than voter rage. It is possible that Bill 
Clinton will go down in history less for his impeachment than as the 
American official who set new standards when it came to the ability 
to continue functioning under public humiliation. The list of images 
that evoke a planetwide response, previously pretty much limited to 
Coke and Muhammad Ali, now includes the presidential cigar. Czech 
reporters questioning President Vaclav Havel during his recent visit 
wanted to know how he felt about the sex scandal. Sudanese protesters 
held up ``Monica Lewinsky'' signs after anti-terrorist strikes by 
American bombers. The frightening thing about the sexualization of 
political discourse is not its effect on public morality but the possibility 
that only a new breed of Clintonesque politicians can swim in these 
turbid waters. Our current president can tough out situations that 
would leave most human beings quivering in the corner. But the characteristics 
that allow him to survive this kind of pounding _ a genius for compartmentalization, 
an ability to forgive himself for inflicting enormous damage on the 
people around him _ might be the same ones that got him into this 
mess in the first place. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>