<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981220.0059 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
The Federal Communications Commission is considering changing its 
regulations to permit the use of a radical and controversial communications 
technology that has the potential to make vastly more efficient use 
of the increasingly precious radio spectrum. Known variously as ultra-wide-band 
radio and digital pulse wireless, the new technology has a broad range 
of possible applications, from wireless voice and high-speed data 
communications to land mine detection and advanced radar systems that 
could permit law officers to see through walls or could aid cars in 
avoiding collisions. Despite its potential, however, the technology 
is not in widespread commercial use today because it would run afoul 
of FCC restrictions that prohibit radio transmissions in certain frequencies 
set aside for civilian aviation and military agencies. That could 
change if the agency agrees to proposals made earlier this month by 
three small companies that are pursuing the technology for a variety 
of commercial products. Unlike communications technologies that send 
information in analog form, ultra-wide band uses a digital transmission 
consisting of small on-off bursts of energy at extremely low power 
but over almost the entire radio spectrum. By precisely timing the 
pulses within accuracies up to a trillionth of a second, the designers 
of ultra-wide-band radio systems are able to create low-power communications 
systems that are almost impossible to jam, tend to penetrate physical 
obstacles easily and are almost invulnerable to eavesdropping. Time 
Domain Corp., based in Huntsville, Ala., has petitioned the FCC for 
a waiver so that by the middle of next year, it can begin selling 
a system that will permit police officers and special weapons and 
tactics teams to see through walls and doors to detect the location 
of people. The company is also planning a covert communications system 
that will both carry voice communications and display locations of 
a counter-terrorism or SWAT team's members. ``We are focusing on the 
safety systems because it has a great public benefit and it's a good 
way to introduce the technology where it can make a difference,'' 
said Ralph Petroff, the company's chairman and chief executive. However, 
Time Domain executives as well as many experts familiar with ultra-broad 
band believe the technology's real commercial potential lies in extremely 
low-cost communications applications. That would entail a fundamental 
shift in FCC regulations, a process that could take years. ``When 
you take its attributes and compare it to the competition, you have 
very interesting technology that could lead to awesome possibilities,'' 
said Paul Turner, executive director of PricewaterhouseCoopers' Global 
Technology Center in Menlo Park, Calif. The most promising application 
for ultra-wide-band radio might eventually be an alternative to today's 
wireless office network technologies that are generally able to transmit 
data at rates of between 1 and 3 million bits a second. Because of 
its design, ultra-wide band advocates say the technology has the potential 
to deliver vastly higher amounts of data because a large number of 
transmitters could broadcast simultaneously in close proximity without 
interfering with each other. ``The most promising applications are 
not so much as an alternative to cellular telephone,'' said Lawrence 
Larson, an electrical engineer at the University of California at 
San Diego. ``It may rather provide a much better way of doing short-range 
data communications because it's very energy efficient.'' The computer 
and communications industries have already settled on a standard known 
as Bluetooth for wireless connectivity in an unlicensed frequency 
band at 2.4 gigahertz. Bluetooth, which can send a million bits a 
second about 30 feet using 100 milliwatts (about a tenth of a watt), 
is intended to interconnect devices like palm computers, laptops and 
cellular phones. In contrast, Time Domain's devices can currently 
transmit 1.25 million bits a second up to 230 feet using just .5 milliwatts, 
or one-thousandth the power used by Bluetooth. These transmissions 
are being achieved with the first working prototype chips the company 
has received from IBM, which fabricated them using the advanced silicon 
germanium semiconductor material developed for communications applications. 
Standard wireless transmissions encode data in a continuous sine wave 
by varying the amplitude (the size of the wave) or the frequency (the 
number of times the wave cycles each second), sometimes both. In contrast, 
Time Domain's technology is similar to a Morse code system that, at 
this point in its development, switches on and off 40 million times 
a second. And unlike traditional radio signals, which are confined 
to a very narrow frequency, each pulse of ultra-wide band is transmitted 
across a wide portion of the radio spectrum, so that only a tiny amount 
of energy is radiated at any single frequency. The company said it 
believes that the bandwidth, or data-carrying capacity, of its technology 
can be expanded to many times its current limit _ perhaps as high 
as billions of bits per second. Moreover, while standard narrowband 
wireless technologies have a limited bandwidth, the digital pulse 
approach has the potential to handle a large number of simultaneous 
users in close proximity, Time Domain officials said. Ultra-wide band 
has the added advantage of being significantly more resistant to ``multipath 
interference,'' a problem that plagues indoor radio systems because 
signals tend to bounce off many surfaces. Industry officials said 
they did not expect an early resolution to the FCC's inquiry, which 
was begun in August. One particular obstacle is that a key official 
at the Federal Aviation Administration has filed an objection with 
the FCC, warning about a potential problem caused by the clustering 
of large numbers of transmitters, even at very low power levels. However, 
industry officials note that current FCC rules permit ``incidental'' 
emitters _ generally, consumer devices like personal computers, hair 
dryers, electric razors, automobiles and arc welders _ and that no 
hazard has been demonstrated from the many millions of these products 
in everyday use. Last month, a group of scientists and engineers met 
at Interval Research Corp., a computer industry research center financed 
by Paul Allen, a co-founder of Microsoft Corp., to coordinate industry 
input into the FCC decision-making process. More recently, an Interval 
physicist, Roberto Aiello, filed an independent comment with the agency, 
reporting that a simulation by his research group indicated that even 
if millions of ultra-wide-band transmitters were allowed to operate, 
they would have a negligible impact on aviation and other communications 
systems. ``The FAA is worried about this, and I think it's a good 
position for them to take,'' Aiello said. ``But I think there's concrete 
evidence that there will not be interference from ultra-wide band.'' 
In addition to Time Domain, companies asking the FCC for exemptions 
from spectrum regulations include Radar Inc., which is developing 
a system for finding buried objects and looking behind walls, and 
Zircon Corp., a maker of high technology tools like devices that find 
joists in walls. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>