<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981220.0100 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Right now is not a good time to be in a rock band. The reason is Seagram's 
$10.4 billion acquisition of Polygram from Philips, which became official 
on Dec. 10. In the process of consolidating Seagram's Universal Music 
Group with Polygram's music holdings (which jointly account for some 
25 percent of the U.S. and European music markets), Seagram executives 
have pledged to unload enough assets to save $300 million a year. 
In the process, buildings will be sold, some 3,000 employees will 
be let go, and record labels will be gutted. As a result, 15,000 Polygram 
and Universal employees and hundreds of bands will have an anxious 
Christmas, wondering whether they will still have a job or a career 
in the New Year. Of the 200 bands estimated to be dropped from their 
labels, most will be rock performers who thought that signing a record 
deal meant they were on their way to stardom. Soon they will find 
themselves right back where they started. The remaining hundred or 
so rock, pop and rap acts, including such well-known musicians as 
Sting, Sheryl Crow, U2, Hole, Beck, Elton John, Melissa Etheridge, 
Bon Jovi, Ice Cube, Hanson, Axl Rose and Amy Grant, will find themselves 
on a record label different from the one they originally signed with. 
In most cases, the record-label personnel they had grown comfortable 
working with _ the company heads, the radio promotions people, the 
artists-and-repertory executives _ will be gone. Though labels routinely 
shed dead-weight bands and undergo structural changes after a new 
owner takes over, a reorganization on the scale of this one is a first 
in the record business. Under Universal's restructuring plan, two 
labels founded as artist-friendly havens but sold by their owners 
over the past decade _ David Geffen's Geffen Records and Herb Alpert's 
and Jerry Moss' A&AMP;M _ will be collapsed into Interscope, the 8-year-old 
label that achieved notoriety through controversial gangsta-rap and 
industrial-rock releases by acts like Tupac Shakur and Nine Inch Nails. 
In addition, Universal executives will merge Island Records (the 40-year-old 
label that got its start in Jamaica with reggae records before going 
on to make its money with U2, Dru Hill and the Cranberries) and Mercury 
Records (founded in Chicago in 1947 and now home to John Mellencamp, 
Hanson, and Kiss) into one label. Making matters more confusing is 
that two of the most lucrative rock and pop acts at these new companies, 
Sting (who is supposed to be on Interscope) and U2 (which is supposed 
to be part of the new Island Mercury), may not go with the program, 
causing some consternation for executives. Spokespeople for both bands 
said they were exploring their options at other labels, with U2 in 
discussions with Interscope and Sting considering Island Mercury as 
a possibility. ``We, like everyone, are concerned with how the whole 
thing comes down,'' said Miles Copeland, who manages Sting. ``A lot 
of it concerns how many releases Interscope has at the same time Sting 
wants to put his record out. Fortunately, Jimmy said that if there 
was another place that was better for us, he'd let us make that decision.'' 
(Jimmy is Jimmy Iovine, chairman at Interscope Records). Copeland 
added that he would wait until Interscope makes final its staff and 
roster next month or in February before making a decision about where 
to place Sting's album, which he expects to be ready for a June release. 
But a Universal executive speaking on condition of anonymity said 
that the label was not just going to let Sting go and open the floodgates 
for other acts to leave. The reorganization is an inconvenience, too, 
for acts like the Cranberries and Melissa Etheridge, who have been 
forced to delay the release of new albums. For less popular acts, 
the situation is even grimmer. New groups that were signed to big 
deals at their old labels may find themselves forced to renegotiate 
their contracts in order to stay on Interscope or Island Mercury. 
And two-thirds of the rosters at each label will be dropped outright. 
For some bands this sudden independence will be a blessing; for others 
it will be a blow that could lead to their breakup. ``It's an odd 
situation,'' said Elliot Roberts, Neil Young's manager since 1968. 
``It's the first time in all my years that this has ever happened 
on this scale. If I had a band that was a borderline band, I'd be 
losing sleep right now.'' For bands on the borderline _ with moderate 
sales but the potential to be more popular _ the waiting period can 
be difficult. Geffen's acts, like the bass-heavy rock group Girls 
Against Boys and the former 'Til Tuesday singer Aimee Mann, are recording 
new records using advance money from Geffen. If they are dropped from 
the label, Interscope would still not only own the music they have 
already released on Geffen but also the new music they are working 
on. (A Universal executive, speaking on condition of anonymity, said 
that in most cases the band would have the option of buying its new 
music back.) Michael Hausman, Ms. Mann's manager, said: ``I think 
this situation is really going to affect her career. We would have 
delivered her record now, and it would have come out in March or April. 
Now, I'm not really sure what's going to happen.'' An even more potent 
source of anxiety is that in some cases Interscope and Island Mercury 
will prolong their decision on whether or not to keep an act until 
after it turns in its next record. ``I think that we're a band that, 
if they broke down the numbers and looked strictly at the sales figures 
as we expect them to do, they'll decide to shed us,'' said Johnny 
Temple, the bassist in Girls Against Boys, a band that turned down 
Interscope to sign with Geffen two years ago. ``On the other hand, 
people in the company could decide that we have a certain underground 
following and artistic integrity.'' ``We stepped into the whole process 
with a very optimistic yet cynical perspective,'' Temple continued, 
``and we understood the corporate nature of the beast that we were 
doing business with. What we don't want to happen is just to end up 
in some limbo land. We want them to keep us or drop us. We don't want 
them to say, `Let's hear some demos.''' Robbie Fulks, a singer-songwriter 
who chose to sign with Geffen last year despite interest from four 
other labels, used to talk to executives at Geffen every day. Now, 
he said, it's gone silent, with ``secretaries over there giving me 
the impression that it's like Dresden after the war.'' With the loss 
of financial, administrative and tactical support from his label, 
Fulks has been promoting the record that Geffen released in September 
on his own. ``I'm not doing as many shows as I'd like to now, just 
what I can afford,'' he said. ``There are some places where I can 
make money, other places where if I play without a band I can make 
some money. It's not nearly as much as I'd like to be performing, 
but I'm not going to just wait around and see.'' Christopher Sabec, 
who manages Hanson, also works with a new band on Mercury called Swirl, 
a pop band led by two brothers that many thought had hit written all 
over it. Perhaps the prophesy would have come true already, Sabec 
said, if not for the sale of Polygram. ``This merger threw a tremendous 
wrench in the whole thing,'' he said. Both Hanson and Swirl, officials 
at Universal said, would make it into the new Island Mercury group. 
Neil Young's manager, Roberts, also works with a rock band on Geffen, 
the Eels, who seem likely to get accepted into the Interscope fold. 
But in the meantime, the ambitious record they released in September, 
``Electro-Shock Blues,'' is suffering. ``Half the people there don't 
know whether they will have jobs come Jan. 15,'' Roberts said, referring 
to the date when many believe a mass Universal firing will take place. 
In actuality, it is the date that the heads of Interscope and Island 
Mercury will meet with Edgar Bronfman Jr., the president of Seagram, 
to present plans for their expanded labels. ``Do you think they'll 
be worried about promoting a single, or how they're going to take 
care of their house payments?'' Roberts continued. ``We were ready 
to go with a second single, but we don't have one because most of 
the people who have to pick it don't know if they'll still be working 
and can't focus.'' The punk band MXPX put its career on hold to wait 
out the transition. It chose to have its label, A&AMP;M, stop promoting 
its single, ``The Downfall of Western Civilization,'' because it felt 
the employees were not motivated, said the band's manager, Creighton 
Burke. Despite the anxiety the changes are causing, there is a reason 
these labels are getting trimmed. A&AMP;M and Geffen have both suffered 
from budget crunches and unproductive band signings over the past 
few years _ neither of them have any records now in the Billboard 
top 40. Many of the acts being transferred say they may be going to 
a better place, one willing to spend more money and time to help them 
grow. Jordan Schur, owner and president of Flip Records, had been 
unhappy from the beginning with the way things were working out for 
two of the new bands he made deals with through A&AMP;M: Big Hate 
and Cold. When the label was shut down, things only got worse, he 
said. He describes Cold's career as ``a car shut off in midgear.'' 
But, like others who work with rock bands in waiting, he knows that 
if Interscope chooses either of his bands, there's no better place 
they could be. ``What Interscope is good at is taking bands that other 
people wouldn't work with and breaking them,'' he said. As he consolidation 
proceeds, rival companies and independent labels seem likely to benefit 
from the fallout. Some have already gotten in touch with the managers 
of bands who seem likely to be dropped. Acts like Fulks said that 
if they did not make the cut, they probably would not subject themselves 
to the major label process again. ``We wouldn't chase anyone while 
they're still signed,'' said Jeff Rougvie, the head of artists and 
repertory at Rykodisc, a leading independent, who has received inquiries 
from worried managers of Polygram and Universal acts. ``But a lot 
of those bands are really talented ones with loyal audiences, so it 
would be crazy for an indie like us not to look into them if they're 
dropped. It could really enhance our artist roster.'' The Polygram 
labels that specialize in country and urban music will not be going 
through major changes. Mercury Nashville, home to Shania Twain, will 
undergo little change. Motown will be made stronger, with Universal 
acts like Erykah Badu being let into the fold. And Def Jam, in which 
Polygram owned a 60 percent stake, will stay more or less untouched. 
It is one of the only Polygram-related labels releasing a major record 
in the interim period, a rap release by DMX to go on sale tomorrow. 
Def Jam had one of its most successful years in 1997, by its own account 
taking in $190 million, and though Universal has offered to buy the 
remaining 40 percent of the label, at present the owners do not intend 
to sell it. The hands-off attitude toward these labels, some in the 
industry say, is not just a sign of the prominence of urban and country 
music on the charts but also of the inadequate understanding the corporate 
structure has of markets other than rock. In fact, executives at Universal 
expressed disappointment at the small number of rap and rhythm-and-blues 
acts at Geffen, A&AMP;M, Mercury and Island, which is one reason why 
it is the rock bands on these labels that will be the hardest hit. 
An executive at Universal said Island Mercury would try to set up 
its own urban music subdivision next year. Executives at Universal 
said that they were relying on a lot more than album sales figures 
to make their decisions, despite claims by bands and managers to the 
contrary. They said they would listen to a group's records multiple 
times, check out current studio recordings, talk to band managers 
and artist-and-repertory executives, meet with group members and even 
try to see a show when possible to make sure no potential hit slips 
through their hands. Bands whose singers recently went through a distressful 
period that could affect their work positively, they said, would be 
more likely to make the grade than singers who have lost interest 
in what they are doing. At present, however, the executives said their 
first priority was a more stressful job: cutting staff, as many as 
three-quarters of the employees of some labels, including well-known 
and respected record company chairmen like Danny Goldberg at Mercury, 
Al Cafaro at A&AMP;M and Ed Rosenblatt at A&AMP;M. Though executives 
at Interscope and Island Mercury have been meeting with the top acts 
coming into their labels, they have only just started scrutinizing 
the less established bands. Their final decision will be made over 
the next two months, they said. ``We're going to take our time,'' 
said one Universal executive. ``At the end of the day, we'll be fair 
to both the acts we let go and the ones we keep. For the ones we keep, 
we'll be able to focus on them. And for the ones we let go, they've 
probably already been dragged over the coals by a record label that 
can't do the best job for them.'' 
</TEXT>
</DOC>