<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981220.0168 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
A solid majority of Americans believe that the impeachment of President 
Clinton was adequate punishment, and want the Senate to resolve the 
case without a trial and without removing him from office, according 
to the latest New York Times/CBS News Poll. The poll, which began 
immediately after the House voted the first article of impeachment 
against Clinton on Saturday afternoon, and continued into Sunday evening, 
found that the more than 12 hours of debate about the perjury and 
obstruction of justice charges had no effect on the public's opinion 
of the president or the case against him. Clinton's popularity remains 
as high as it has been at any point of the six years of his presidency, 
while the public view of the Republican Party continues to plummet. 
Two out of three Americans now oppose Clinton's removal from office, 
as they did in the weeks before the hearings. Nine out of 10 respondents 
said they had heard nothing during the two days of televised hearings 
_ in which Republicans painstakingly offered their case against Clinton 
_ that had shifted their view of the case. The Times/CBS News poll 
suggests that almost a year after the initial reports of Clinton's 
relationship with Monica Lewinsky, the public continues to be almost 
completely at odds with much of Washington's political establishment 
over the import and significance of Clinton's affair, and attempts 
by an independent counsel and Republicans in Congress to prove he 
tried to cover it up. And it provided one more piece of evidence of 
the startling political resilience of Clinton: one day after becoming 
the second president in the nation's history to be impeached, 72 percent 
of respondents said they approved of how he was handling his job. 
Clinton's job approval rating actually increased since last week, 
when it was 66 percent. The telephone poll included 1,215 adults nationwide 
and had a margin of sampling error of plus or minus three percentage 
points. All respondents had been previously interviewed last week, 
as a way of measuring changes in public perception by the House impeachment 
hearings. The Times/CBS News poll comes as the case against Clinton 
moves from the House, which voted two impeachment counts against him 
in a closely partisan vote on Saturday, to the Senate for a trial 
next year. One of the biggest political concerns of Clinton's advisers 
is that the impeachment vote might encourage a round of demands for 
his resignation. But the poll found only limited support for Clinton's 
resignation: 32 percent of respondents said it would be better for 
the nation of the president stepped down, while 65 percent said he 
should finish his term. Those figures mirror the proportion of Americans 
who believe he should be forced from office. Although the Times/CBS 
News poll suggests something approaching a consensus on how the Clinton 
case should be resolved, there has been little evidence to date that 
congressional Republicans were considering polls in deciding how to 
proceed with this case. This poll found again that the Republican 
Party was paying a political price for its pursuit of Clinton. The 
Republican Party is now viewed unfavorably by 58 percent of respondents, 
up from 52 percent last week. That is the worst standing the party 
has posted in the 14 years since The Times and CBS first began asking 
respondents the question. The public view of the party is even more 
negative today than it was after the 1994 shutdown of the government. 
Barely one-third of respondents saw congressional Republicans as being 
in touch with the views of the nation, while nearly two-thirds said 
they believed the Republicans were pursuing the case for purely partisan 
motives: to damage Clinton and the Democratic Party. White House officials 
said their polling has found a similar erosion in the public's view 
of Republicans, and portrayed the result in near-cataclysmic terms. 
``The leadership in the House has potentially done more long-term 
damage to the Republican party than anything Richard Nixon did during 
Watergate,'' a senior White House official said. A CBS News poll on 
Friday found additional evidence of another kind of deterioration 
in the public's view of Congress: Only 41 percent of respondents now 
believe Congress shares the public's moral values, down from 58 percent 
in September. This is one of the few areas in which Clinton fares 
poorly. The same CBS poll found that nearly two-thirds of Americans 
did not believe Clinton shared their moral values. The Times/CBS poll 
suggests slight shifts in public perceptions of the case from Saturday 
to Sunday. For example, 60 percent of respondents on Saturday said 
that impeachment is punishment enough for what Clinton had done; that 
had changed to 53 percent by Sunday. Over two days, 57 percent of 
the respondents said they believe that Clinton has been punished enough. 
There was also a drop over the two days in the number of Americans 
who expect the Senate to actually remove Clinton; down from 35 percent 
on Saturday to 26 percent on Sunday. The poll found that the public 
as a whole _ with the exception being conservative Republicans _ held 
fairly consistent views on Clinton and the impeachment process. Nearly 
two-thirds of respondents disapproved of the House impeachment vote. 
About the same number said the Senate should not put Clinton on trial, 
but should instead work out a compromise that might involve, for example, 
a censure or a fine. More than half of the respondents said they feared 
that a Senate trial would be harmful to the nation. And if there is 
a trial, 68 percent of the respondents said that the Senate should 
not remove Clinton from office. About half of all Americans now expect 
the Senate to hold a trial, but only 31 percent expect the Senate 
to remove Clinton. Clinton's high approval rating might seem surprising, 
but in fact is consistent with the entire polling history of this 
incident. Clinton always seemed to do better following some event 
or disclosure in the nearly year-long Lewinsky case. His previous 
spikes in popularity came in January, after the public first learned 
of the accusations against him, and in August, after he acknowledged 
that he had had an affair with Ms. Lewinsky, his previous denials 
notwithstanding. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>