<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981220.0056 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
In March 1996 after his father's death, Leon Wieseltier found himself 
in synagogue, like generations of Jewish sons before him, reciting 
the Kaddish. Unlike most others in his situation, though, Wieseltier 
_ the product of an Orthodox upbringing (though no longer traditionally 
observant), a former graduate student of medieval Judaism, now the 
literary editor of The New Republic _ was struck by how little he 
knew about the ritual he was performing so faithfully even as he realized 
it was taking over his life. Stirred by his ignorance and his natural 
``bookishness,'' he decided to take upon himself an additional discipline 
of grief, which was to search out the history and meaning of the Kaddish, 
the mourner's prayer. Over the next 11 months, often sitting in a 
teahouse, which conveniently opened next door to the synagogue, he 
spent his mornings poring over dozens of Jewish sources, ancient, 
medieval and modern, in quest of the prayer's meaning. ``Kaddish,'' 
the astonishing book written out of that experience, is a meticulously 
learned yet intensely personal and impassioned record of this quest. 
In short, journal-like entries, Wieseltier copies down, expertly translates 
for the reader and works through large chunks of the obscure and arcane 
texts he studied, scrutinizing each one for the history of the prayer 
and of the Jews who wrote it, but also using the texts for his own 
purposes as ``supports for contemplation.'' In aphoristic reflections 
on their meaning, Wieseltier treats the texts as though they were 
``teardrops'' in which to view the world, and through their prism 
he offers the reader glimpses of his life during that year: his gradual 
acceptance into the synagogue's community, his family's tribulations 
in coming to grips with their loss, and his own frequently conflicted 
though never unexamined feelings about the process and rituals of 
mourning. Still, the texts remain the unwavering focus of Wieseltier's 
attention. The Kaddish, written in Aramaic (the Semitic language that 
was the lingua franca of Jews in the ancient world), is a brief prayer 
in praise of God. (``Magnified and sanctified may His great name be'' 
are its opening words.) It nowhere mentions death and originally had 
nothing to do with mourning. Only in the 12th century, in the aftermath 
of the massacres of Jews in Western Europe by the Crusaders as they 
marched bloodily to the Holy Land, ``leaving many many mourners'' 
in their wake, did the Kaddish become a mourners' prayer. This transformation 
of the Kaddish transpired in the territory then known by Jews as Ashkenaz, 
primarily France and Germany. Most of the texts that Wieseltier studies 
are Ashkenazic. To readers of this book they may appear utterly recondite 
and legalistic as well as reflecting archaic, even superstitious beliefs. 
The original conception behind the Kaddish as a mourners' prayer may 
come as an even greater shock. For most Jews today, the Kaddish is 
understood as a prayer that mourners recite to reaffirm their faith 
in God. Henrietta Szold, the American founder of Hadassah, once described 
it (while insisting upon her right as a woman to recite the Kaddish) 
as a public manifestation of the survivors' ``wish and intention to 
assume the relation to the Jewish community which his parent had.'' 
In this view, the Kaddish is a prayer by and for the living. Not so 
in Ashkenaz or in its origins. The Kaddish as a mourners' prayer took 
root in a soil rich in imaginings about the tribulations of the soul 
after death. Contrary to common belief, ancient and medieval Jewish 
tradition suggested a baroque if unsystematic doctrine of the afterlife. 
Gehenna, the Jewish equivalent of Christianity's hell, was actually 
more like a Purgatory; following death, it was routinely believed, 
most souls spend up to 12 months there purging themselves of sins 
in its fires. Yet even the fires of Gehenna rest on the Sabbath. ``The 
Sabbath in hell must be the sweetest Sabbath in the universe,'' Wieseltier 
remarks. As a consequence the belief arose that at the close of the 
Sabbath when the dead prepare to return once again to the fires of 
suffering, the prayers of a son could work to spare his parents from 
their suffering in the week ahead. In the view of one rabbinic authority, 
each Kaddish freezes the fires of Gehenna for 90 minutes: no more, 
no less. In its origins, then, the Kaddish was a prayer not on behalf 
of the living but literally for the dead, indeed a way for the living 
to intervene in the fates of the dead. The idea of such intervention 
skirts the scandalous, even the outrageous. Wieseltier himself is 
fully alive to the idea's difficulties as well as to its abiding potency. 
``I cannot save you, even if you are my father,'' he writes, addressing 
his deceased father. ``But doesn't the Kaddish claim that I can save 
you because you are my father? When you were alive, I could not save 
you; but now I can save you.'' Yet whatever his modern doubts about 
the prayer, Wieseltier is not deterred from pursuing the countless 
debates and questions the Kaddish provoked in subsequent Jewish thought: 
Can a father ``acquit'' or save a son as the son can save a father? 
(The answer is no.) What if the parent is wicked? Can the Kaddish 
save such a parent from the torments of hell? (Yes, at least partly.) 
Does the prayer extend even to adoptive parents? And in the case of 
martyrs, the absolutely righteous who die precisely because of their 
refusal to sin, or the victims of the Holocaust, who died solely because 
they were Jews, does reciting the Kaddish for them somehow imply that 
they were other than blameless in their deaths? As he pursues these 
questions, Wieseltier's search for the meaning of the Kaddish becomes 
a meditation on tradition itself. The past lives on ``only posthumously,'' 
he writes; and like a ball thrown and caught, tradition ``lives a 
long time in the air.'' In this moving, often profound book, Wieseltier 
has composed a kind of contemporary Talmud on the Kaddish in which 
he manages to create a dialogue at once ancient and modern with the 
sources of Jewish tradition. This book is less about recapturing the 
past than being itself an act of retrieval, a demonstration of the 
power of an ancient tradition to engage a contemporary intellectual 
through the urgency of its concerns even if he or she cannot accept 
all its tenets. ``May my book be my candle,'' Wieseltier writes, in 
a prayer for his father's memory. It is. PUBLICATION NOTES: `KADDISH' 
By Leon Wieseltier 588 pages. Alfred A. Knopf. $27.50 
</TEXT>
</DOC>