<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981220.0133 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
After four days of air strikes against Iraq, the Security Council 
plans on Monday to begin assessing the damage done to all three legs 
on which its relations with Baghdad stand _ economic sanctions, arms 
inspections and a relief program designed to aid Iraqis suffering 
under an economic embargo. With President Clinton under impeachment 
and American attention diverted from the coming days and weeks of 
debate in the council, the British and French are expected to take 
the lead. The difficulty the council faces is that more than eight 
years of painstakingly negotiated resolutions have linked the sanctions, 
inspections and ``oil for food'' plan in a cat's cradle of demands 
and restrictions that will be hard to separate. The first step might 
be a full review of United Nations relations with Iraq, diplomats 
here say, although even that is likely to be put off until the new 
year. Baghdad has long sought such a review, which may now be the 
only route to finding a consensus on how to deal with President Saddam 
Hussein now that he has said, again, that he will no longer work with 
arms inspectors under the existing system. After the latest campaign 
of bombing and missile strikes, a review may create new pitfalls for 
the United States and Britain, which were hoping that such a hearing 
might buttress their case to leave sanctions in place. The sanctions, 
particularly an embargo limiting the sale of Iraqi oil, have been 
the United States' prime tool in keeping Iraq isolated and Saddam 
parted from revenue that could be put toward rebuilding Iraq's weapons 
programs. Already support for the sanctions, long challenged on humane 
grounds, appears to have eroded further. Sunday in Paris, President 
Jacques Chirac of France called for a prompt lifting of the oil embargo. 
His country's major oil companies have for years been eager to return 
to work in Iraq, although record low oil prices make this less attractive 
now. Russia is expected to share the French position on lifting the 
oil embargo, which is directly linked to certification by the U.N. 
Special Commission that there are no more prohibited arms or the means 
to make them. The commission, known as Unscom, has been charged since 
1991 with disarming Iraq. So while Chirac said in a statement that 
it was time for a ``fundamental review'' of relations with Iraq, he 
also underscored that it must proceed from the understanding that 
arms controls will continue, along with some supervision of Iraqi 
expenditures from the sale of oil. ``The international community must 
be able to carry out effective monitoring of Iraqi arms and any development 
of them,'' Chirac said. ``This means fresh organization, fresh methods.'' 
Prime Minister Yevgeny M. Primakov of Russia was also looking ahead. 
Sunday in New Delhi, where he is on an official visit, he said his 
concern was that a political solution be found so that air strikes 
would not be repeated. No member of the Security Council is willing 
to say categorically that Iraq has answered all outstanding questions 
regarding its banned arms programs, but Russia and France, with growing 
support from council members like Brazil and Kenya, have argued that 
all of the missing pieces may never be found. These members are beginning 
to agree that it is time to close the books on active, kick-down-the-doors 
inspections and switch to long-term monitoring. That would trigger 
the lifting of the oil embargo. The International Atomic Energy Agency, 
which monitors nuclear programs around the world and is composed largely 
of career international bureaucrats, has already laid the groundwork 
for closing the nuclear file, which has made it very popular with 
the Iraqis. Baghdad now demands that if inspections of any kind are 
to resume, the UNSCOM must be restructured to be more like the atomic 
agency. If that is done, some diplomats say they believe that Iraq 
can be persuaded to agree to some kind of future monitoring. But independent 
arms control experts say such inspection would be meaningless, and 
in any case Iraqi leaders said again last week that sanctions have 
to end first. While the Clinton administration understands that sanctions 
cannot be sustained forever, it still argues _ in increasing isolation 
here _ that Iraq has to do even more than account for all of its weapons 
before they can be lifted. At the center of the inspection debate 
is Richard Butler, the executive chairman of UNSCOM. Iraq has made 
clear for more than a year that it does not want to work with him. 
Last week Russia formally called for his dismissal. Now, even among 
Butler's supporters, there are those who ask whether inspections can 
ever resume in a hostile Iraq with him in charge and whether pragmatism 
might not dictate that he be replaced. In an interview on Saturday, 
Butler said allowing the Iraqis to emerge from a bombing campaign 
free of international supervision of their weapons programs or with 
a new system tailored to their demands ``just doesn't make sense.'' 
Publicly, the United States supports Butler completely. But Scott 
Ritter, the former concealment expert who quit UNSCOM in August in 
disgust at U.S. policy, said that the Clinton administration had in 
fact weakened Butler time and again. He said the most recent incident 
came last week, when White House officials put pressure on Butler 
to release his latest report on Iraqi noncompliance so that it could 
be used as the trigger for military action. ``They decided to use 
Richard Butler and UNSCOM in this fashion,'' Ritter said, ``and now 
they have to pay the price.'' The problem that Washington and others 
face now is how to continue policing and undermining Saddam's hope 
of a renewed weapons program without sanctions or effective inspections. 
And if sanctions go, the ``oil for food'' program will go with them, 
unless another system is devised to control how Iraq spends its oil 
money. The Iraqis rejected for almost five years the offer of the 
``oil for food'' plan, under which they now pump 1.8 billion barrels 
of oil a day and can buy a wide range of goods and equipment with 
it under U.N. supervision. The program has been severely disrupted 
in the last week because of the military strikes, with more than 100 
relief workers withdrawn from the country and scores of trucks carrying 
food, medicine and spare parts for the oil industry backed up at the 
border. A U.N. official, Prakash Shah, said on Sunday that the workers 
would return to Baghdad by Wednesday. All Security Council members 
acknowledge that Saddam, who has always been permitted to import medicine 
and food, chose not to. And despite the embargo, huge quantities of 
marble found their way to Iraq for dozens of presidential palaces, 
the Baghdad police got new Korean cars, officials of Saddam's party 
bought computers and smugglers stocked stores in fashionable neighborhoods 
with Western consumer goods. Unrestricted new income, many diplomats 
here fear, now more than ever, would be sunk directly into rebuilding 
weapons. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>