<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981220.0205 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
A day after the House impeached President Clinton, senators from both 
parties pledged on Sunday to restore civility to the proceedings even 
as they quickly divided largely along party lines over whether the 
president must face a Senate trial or could be subject to censure. 
Senators on Sunday promised a different tone than in the House. ``Take 
politics out of it completely,'' said Sen. Arlen Specter, R-Pa., in 
a televised appearance on the CBS news program ``Face the Nation.'' 
But some prominent Republicans and Democrats were already staking 
out the same kinds of party-line positions familiar from the House 
proceedings. Sen. Mitch McConnell, R-Ky., who will be the chairman 
of the Rules Committee, which will preside over the impeachment trial, 
insisted that the Senate is obliged to proceed to a trial. On the 
Democratic side, Sen. Christopher Dodd called for a quick agreement 
on censure. Strategists and political power-brokers all across Washington 
struggled to assess the changed landscape. On Saturday, a bitter House 
of Representatives voted closely along partisan lines to impeach Clinton 
for perjury and obstruction of justice in his attempts to conceal 
his affair with Monica Lewinsky. Clinton remained as popular as he 
has ever been, according to the latest New York Times/CBS News poll, 
taken after the House voted on Saturday and continued on Sunday. Less 
than a third of those polled thought it would be better for the nation 
if Clinton resigned, while two-thirds of respondents thought it would 
be better if he completed his term. By contrast, only 36 percent expressed 
a favorable view of the Republican Party, while 58 percent expressed 
an unfavorable view. That put the Republican Party at a lower level 
of popularity than it reached after the government shutdown three 
years ago. Indeed, it was the worst standing recorded for the party 
in the 14 years that the New York Times and CBS News have been asking 
the question. Despite public sentiment, the road ahead is far from 
clear for Clinton, the only elected president ever to be impeached. 
The Senate has conducted an impeachment trial of a president only 
once before, making this a matter with little precedent. The trial 
of Andrew Johnson in 1868 left the Senate with 26 impeachment rules 
_ from an age before television _ which were updated after the Watergate 
scandal. Under the direction of Sen. Trent Lott, the majority leader 
from Mississippi, the Senate legal counsel has been studying those 
rules. McConnell, in an appearance on the NBC' program ``Meet the 
Press,'' said he did not think a trial had to run for very long, and 
he set the stage for blaming the president's lawyers if it becomes 
a drawn-out affair. ``I think if the president's lawyers were cooperative 
this could be a very short trial because it's not a complicated case,'' 
he said. The Kentucky Republican also said that if the Senate does 
end up having to hear from witnesses, it could do so in closed session. 
``This will not be a spectacle,'' he said. ``It will not demean the 
Senate. McConnell was joined in his insistence on a trial by Sen. 
Don Nickles of Oklahoma, the second-ranking Republican in the Senate 
leadership. ``The Constitution does not provide for censure,'' Nickles 
said in an appearance on ``Fox News Sunday.'' ``It also doesn't preclude 
it. But I just don't see circumventing the Constitution with some 
extra-constitutional authority.'' Democrats made clear that just like 
their House counterparts, they would prefer a quick censure deal. 
Dodd, who appeared with McConnell on ``Meet the Press,'' called for 
negotiations to begin immediately, without waiting for the 106th Congress 
to convene on Jan. 6. ``I think it's in everyone's interest here to 
try and find some resolution of this matter,'' he said. In an op-ed 
article in Monday's edition of The New York Times, the one-time political 
opponents said that ``the time has come to put aside political differences 
and plant seeds of justice and reconciliation.'' They called for the 
Senate to craft a bipartisan censure resolution that would require 
Clinton to acknowledge that he did not tell the truth under oath, 
but would also stipulate that his admission could not be used against 
him in any future criminal trial. Some ad hoc behind-the-scene negotiations 
have gone on already on censure. Sen. Joseph Lieberman, D-Conn., and 
one of Clinton's earliest critics, has been quietly holding discussions 
with Sen. Orrin Hatch, R-Utah, who is chairman of the Senate Judiciary 
Committee. But even many senior Democrats say they believe that with 
the Senate scattered for the holidays, serious discussions will only 
begin when the new Congress returns on Jan. 6 _ and only after the 
Senate at least nominally moves into early trial proceedings. The 
conventional wisdom is that the Senate will not be able to muster 
the 67 votes necessary to convict Clinton, but until just a few weeks 
ago the conventional wisdom was that the House would never impeach 
the president. Hatch said on Sunday that Senate leaders should take 
a vote count of members in order to decide how to proceed. If there 
is little support beyond the 55 Republicans in the Senate for convicting 
Clinton, Hatch said, the Senate should weigh what is ``best under 
the circumstances to resolve this matter and in the best interests 
of the country.'' Hatch has already been criticized by fellow Republicans 
for being too willing to make a deal with Clinton. A critical question 
is whether senior conservatives with credibility in their party will 
step forward to lead negotiations. On CBS' ``Face the Nation,'' Sen. 
Robert G. Torricelli, D-N.J.,, named several Republicans to watch 
_ Sens. Ted Stevens of Alaska, John Warner of Virginia and John McCain 
of Arizona. ``There are clearly enough moderate Republicans prepared 
to join in the censure effort and avoid a protracted legal struggle 
in the Senate,'' Torricelli said in an interview after the show. ``What 
is required is a senior conservative Republican who recognizes the 
electoral danger to the Republican Party and will respond to the enormous 
national need to negotiate an end to this process.'' Another conservative 
Republican, Thad Cochran of Mississippi, said on ``CNN Morning News'' 
that there was a ''possibility'' that the Senate would decide on an 
alternative to removing Clinton from office. Aware that their party 
suffered during the prolonged government shutdown of 1995, Republicans 
took pains this weekend to say that a Senate trial would not lead 
to legislative paralysis. McConnell said the Senate could ''double-track'' 
a trial so that it did not consume entire days and the Senate could 
consider legislation at the same time. In a statement on Saturday, 
Lott said the Senate ``will address issues of great concern to the 
American people'' from education to Social Security policy to reducing 
taxes and protecting the long-term solvency of Medicare. But Democrats 
raised the specter of a government that continues to be consumed by 
the scandal. Dodd said he backed censure because a trial would ``tie 
up three branches of government for the next four months.'' 
</TEXT>
</DOC>