<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981220.0104 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
In its celebrated, brainy heyday, Allahabad University was known as 
the Oxford of India. Among its graduates are three former prime ministers, 
one former president and the current minister of education _ an illustrious 
alumni roster that now seems ironic for a college majoring in stagnation 
with a strong minor in chaos. A campus built for 5,000 students now 
has 60,000. The academic calendar has lost its logic, with so many 
postponed sessions that years can go by without required courses being 
offered. The law school is currently selecting its first new class 
since 1993. Buildings are decrepit. The library not only lacks up-to-date 
journals, but there is no librarian. Laboratories are of little aid 
to science. ``I did an experiment with hydrochloric acid, and when 
it didn't work, my teacher told me that's because the chemicals are 
watered down to make them last longer,'' said a chemistry student, 
Manish Kumar Verma. Allahabad's decline, while an extreme case, is 
sadly symptomatic of a university system overstuffed with students 
and undernourished with resources. Higher education was once the pride 
of a newly independent nation that declared learning to be its route 
to greatness. But while the words were inspiring, they have gone unfortified 
by willpower and money. In the past, the university system's problems 
were usually relegated to the dry reports of obscure committees, but 
now one horrific incident has drawn India's attention. Last month, 
a young man at Rajasthan University fatally immolated himself during 
a student protest. He was overwrought because the results of crucial 
exams were three months late, creating a state of limbo that kept 
students from continuing in school or applying for jobs. Long delays 
in grading such exams have become commonplace, and this has much to 
do with the long delays in paying the people who do the grading. ``Where 
there are areas of crisis, the crisis is usually in the finances,'' 
said Armaity S. Desai, chairwoman of the University Grants Commission, 
which disburses federal funds for higher education. India has about 
1,000 universities and colleges, double the number of 20 years ago. 
Some remain first-rate, but a large portion of the rest _ especially 
in the poorest of the nation's 27 states _ are the overwhelmed creations 
of haphazard growth. ``State colleges are often built by local bigwigs 
who use them as a source of political patronage,'' said Kuldeep Mathur, 
the former director of the National Institute of Educational Planning 
and Administration. ``The buildings are built and staff are hired, 
but there is no thought as to how the infrastructure will be kept 
up and the salaries paid.'' India has nearly 1 billion people _ largely-impoverished 
masses who increasingly view a college diploma as the admission ticket 
to the middle class. While only 3 percent of Indians ages 17 to 23 
attend college, that still amounts to 7 million students. High school 
graduates have little to hold them back. Entrance requirements are 
not rigorous. Subsidized tuition amounts to about $10 a year. ``With 
colleges open to anyone who wants to attend, merit becomes the casualty,'' 
said V.R. Mehta, the vice chancellor of highly regarded Delhi University. 
``Universities have become picnic places with students whiling away 
their time.'' Despite government subsidies for tuition _ and habitual 
promises to spend more _ India allocates only 3.7 percent of its gross 
domestic product on education. This exceeds most other nations in 
South Asia, but lags far behind much of the developing world, a fact 
many scholars attribute to the persisting anti-egalitarian impulses 
of a caste-based society. Certainly, caste is mentioned often enough 
among senior members of the Allahabad faculty as they bemoan the decay 
of their beloved citadel, although theirs is a different perspective. 
India's version of affirmative action reserves about 50 percent of 
admissions for traditionally disadvantaged castes. Most of these students 
come from small villages with poor schools. Their fluency is in Hindi, 
though the texts they are required to read are in English. With such 
students present in great numbers, the bottom brings the top down, 
many professors contend. ``A university should exist for the pursuit 
of academic excellence, but this is now an idea that plays second 
fiddle to caste-ism,'' said Professor S.P. Singh, dean of the commerce 
faculty. ``Merit should rule the roost, not what caste you are born 
into.'' Allahabad is in Uttar Pradesh, a state where lower caste politicians 
have come to wield great power. They are often blamed for the university's 
unchecked growth. ``Despite my faith in democracy, I have to ask: 
by giving poor students a bad education, do you improve their lot 
or merely make contagious their disadvantage?'' asked S.C. Bhattacharya, 
a recently retired professor of ancient history. Clearly, an education 
is something hard to come by at Allahabad. Students very often skip 
class, which gives them something in common with their instructors. 
Ignobly, some professors then charge fees to ``coach'' their students 
privately, explaining what their lectures would have said had they 
actually come to campus to deliver them. But is the blame for this 
chaos to be placed on the multitude of unprepared students _ or on 
the lagging priority that India places on education? Miss Desai, of 
the grants commission, believes that all the complaining about merit 
is a luxury for the elite. ``In a country like this, how can you make 
an issue out of merit?'' she said. ``When you say quality is going 
down, well, yes it is, but that is because we are mass-ifying education. 
In a country where the great majority of students are first-generation 
learners, they need to be nurtured. And nurturing will cost money.'' 
At dawn in Allahabad, as a winter chill chews at the bone, students 
line up to get kerosene. Some will wait as long as two hours. The 
fuel is needed to heat the hovels where they live _ and where they 
struggle over their books after the day gives in to darkness. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>