<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981220.0122 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Americans should be saving like crazy. Baby boomers _ the oldest in 
the group of 78 million who were born between 1946 to 1964 are due 
to retire in a decade or so _ are now in their prime earning years. 
The after-tax return on investments has rarely been better and the 
proliferation of 401(k) plans, individual retirement accounts and 
other tax-favored saving plans has made thrift more painless than 
ever. Instead, Americans are saving less than ever. Indeed, according 
to the latest government figures, consumers have recently been spending 
all of their incomes and then some. In September, the personal saving 
rate slipped below zero for the first time since the Great Depression. 
October was more of the same. On the surface the reason seems perverse: 
Economists say the better people feel about their situation these 
days the less likely they are to put aside extra money for the future. 
The seemingly imperturbable stock market, strong confidence in the 
economy and the ease of borrowing all help make consumers feel richer 
and less inclined to postpone gratification. Some experts warn of 
dire consequences, but the situation may not be as bad as it looks. 
Despite the drop in personal savings, the broadest measure of saving 
_ the national saving rate, which includes not just households but 
corporations and the government sector _ has rebounded from its low 
in the early 1990s. ``We have a lot of saving now compared to then,'' 
said Gary Burtless, an economist at the Brookings Institution. Investment 
in the nation's capital base certainly has not suffered. Foreigners 
have been more than happy to send America their extra savings and, 
given the risks abounding in the rest of the world, seem inclined 
to continue to do so. Besides, with Asia and Latin America mired in 
recessions that threaten to spread to Europe and the United States, 
Americans' grasshopper habits may _ at least for now _ be more boon 
than bane. ``This is not the time to tell people to stop spending,'' 
said Gregory Mankiw, an economics professor at Harvard. Finally, the 
fear that consumers will react to the recent orgy of spending by slamming 
on the brakes and suddenly turning thrifty seems overblown. Consumers 
are not as stretched as the saving numbers make it look. Wage and 
salary income is going up faster than spending, and that is what most 
households rely on. One reason the official savings rate is falling 
is that interest income, which goes mainly to the rich, has been shrinking, 
dragging down overall reported income gains. Most forecasters agree, 
however, that each individual's own income, job situation, wealth 
and confidence loom far larger in household spending decisions. Of 
course, many Americans are passing up a chance to get back $2 in eight 
years for every $1 they save today. That seems a trifle irrational, 
even for well-off citizens of a very wealthy country. ``The standard 
neoclassical view that people make rational trade-offs between present 
and future and that we're saving the amount that best suits our purpose 
is obviously wrong,'' said Robert Frank, an economist at Cornell who 
argues in his new book, ``Luxury Fever,'' that Americans ought to 
be saving 20 percent of their incomes. Moreover, what is good (or 
at least acceptable) for the nation is not necessarily what is best 
for the Joneses. Even optimists concede that one- to two-thirds of 
baby-boomer households are not saving enough to maintain in retirement 
the lifestyles to which they have become accustomed. Still, many economists 
say that focusing on the plunge in personal savings is a bit misleading. 
For one thing, the personal saving rate is one of the government's 
least reliable statistics. That is not because the government does 
not count 401(k)s and pensions or subtract loans. It is because saving 
is the difference between two very large quantities, overall personal 
income and overall personal spending. Minuscule changes in either 
reported income or spending can produce huge changes in the savings 
rate. Moreover, revisions based on more complete data sometimes paint 
a different picture than the initial impression left by the published 
statistics. For example, a rigorously researched 1987 paper, written 
with another economist by Lawrence Summers, now deputy Treasury secretary, 
who was then teaching at Harvard, attributed half of the drop in national 
saving at that point to a decline in household savings. But subsequent 
revisions of the national income accounts showed that the decline 
they cited had not actually occurred. It is even harder to interpret 
the data in a period when households, especially wealthy ones, are 
reporting lots of profits from investments in the form of capital 
gains. Last summer, government statisticians started subtracting capital 
gains, which are not part of the nation's gross domestic product, 
from personal income. That change, which reflects a shift in accounting 
practices rather than any real change in household behavior, sliced 
two percentage points off the published saving rate. None of this 
is to deny that there have been real changes in savings as well. As 
stock prices have risen, pushing up the value of assets held by pension 
funds, corporations have cut back contributions to defined benefit 
pension funds, which pay a set amount based on previous salary and 
years of service. With more profit on their investments, corporations 
do not need to set as much aside to meet their obligations. Pensions 
are counted as household saving. John Sabelhouse, an economist at 
the Congressional Budget Office, figures that nearly half the decline 
in the personal saving rate is a result of the slowdown in pension 
contributions. Then, too, consumers have been spending part of their 
capital gains, especially on big-ticket items like houses, furniture, 
appliances and cars (although, interestingly, not as large a part 
as historical experience would suggest). More of them have been borrowing, 
too. Tom Wolfe's down-and-out banker, Ray Peepgas, in his recent best 
seller, ``A Man in Full,'' is maxed out on 18 credit cards and does 
not know how he will make it through the weekend unless another one 
arrives in the morning mail. He is a perfect symbol of the credit 
revolution of the last five years that has allowed borrowers who previously 
might have been forced to stop running up debt to keep on spending. 
And companies that provide credit have been able to discriminate better 
between different credit risks, tailoring interest charges accordingly. 
Worse risks may have to pay higher rates, but they can still usually 
get credit. The big fear is that the majority of baby boomers will 
wind up working a lot longer than they expected because they have 
not saved enough for their retirement. Although experts cannot agree 
on what fraction of baby boomers is headed for trouble, the best estimates 
range from one- to two-thirds. And everyone agrees that middle-class, 
middle-aged Americans ought to be more worried about their futures 
than they appear to be. For all the concerns, however, Americans seem 
better prepared for retirement than the citizens of most other countries. 
Thanks to the high-flying stock market, household wealth has swelled 
by a record $8 trillion in just four years. The net financial worth 
of American households equals nearly four times their income. German 
households, by contrast, have a net financial worth of just twice 
their incomes. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>