<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981220.0079 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Quite dapper in a Victorian frock coat, period chalk-stripe trousers 
and a black top hat, Gerald Charles Dickens, great-great-grandson 
of the great, great novelist, pointed his walking stick at the audience 
gathered here at the local library. ``Bah, humbug,'' he said. Dickens, 
an English actor, is 35, a little young yet, and far too pleasant 
looking, for the initial grave misanthropy of Ebenezer Scrooge, the 
famous character (created by his famous ancestor) that he was busily 
recreating on a makeshift stage. Still, that didn't faze the audience, 
100 or so children and their mothers, all of them either being introduced 
to or revisiting ``A Christmas Carol,'' the sentimental story of a 
bitter man redeemed by stern but benevolent ghosts on Christmas Eve. 
It hasn't escaped Dickens' notice that, English provenance notwithstanding, 
the Carol, as scholars often refer to it, has become perhaps America's 
most significant _ secularly speaking _ holiday legend. He has spent 
the last three Christmas seasons in the United States, doing one-man 
performances of the Carol and other Dickensiana in hotels, theaters 
and libraries, many in towns in the South and Midwest where live theater 
performances of any kind are far from daily fare. Here in Lone Jack, 
a rural community about an hour southeast of Kansas City, his listeners 
gathered afterward for autographs and a brush with literary history. 
``Dickens has total celebrity status over here,'' Gerald Dickens said 
in an interview. ``In England, we are blase about him. It's more like 
`We've got Chaucer, we've got Shakespeare, all those other blokes.' 
Here they show me their copies of the Carol and hold them out reverently, 
as though it were an altar cloth. The first year I did this, I was 
in total shock.'' Shocked? He probably shouldn't even have been surprised, 
for the Carol is such a favorite, such a guaranteed revenue producer, 
that according to the Theater Communications Group, an umbrella organization 
for nonprofit theaters, there are 33 member theaters producing it 
this season; in other words, about 10 percent of the nonprofit professional 
theaters in the United States are staging ``A Christmas Carol'' right 
now. And that, of course, doesn't include the countless amateur productions, 
or the enterprise of the merchants in Skaneateles, N.Y., who five 
years ago created an annual Dickens festival on December weekends, 
featuring actors performing scenes from the Carol on street corners. 
Indeed, Gerald Dickens is a mere extra in the cast of thousands who 
have played Scrooge for U.S. audiences over the years, including well-known 
names from Lionel Barrymore, who performed the Carol on radio almost 
every year between 1934 and 1955, to George C. Scott and Henry Winkler, 
who appeared in television films of the Carol, to Albert Finney and 
Bill Murray, who starred in U.S.-made feature films (the 1951 British 
version, starring Alastair Sim, nonetheless remains incomparable), 
to Mr. Magoo, Fred Flintstone and Donald Duck. Roger Daltrey, the 
former lead singer of the Who, is the latest Scrooge to take the stage 
in Madison Square Garden's annual production in New York, which has 
in the past featured Tony Randall, Hal Linden, Terrence Mann and Roddy 
McDowall in the role. But in some ways _ and for many, many people 
_ it doesn't matter who is in it. ``I love the play,'' said Kathy 
Adamec, a 49-year-old investment counselor from Hinsdale, Ill., who 
has seen the annual production at the Goodman Theater in Chicago a 
dozen times. ``It still thrills me with the spirit of sharing, and 
with receiving the reminder of those less fortunate.'' It used to 
be that Mrs. Adamec and her husband, Bruce, the general auditor for 
Ameritech, would gather several friends and make an evening of it. 
Then their nieces came of age, and the Carol became a family tradition. 
``It ushers in the Christmas season for us,'' she said. ``For the 
kids, there are scary scenes in the play that thrill them, and it's 
our way of talking to them about values, like charity, that we want 
our girls to know about.'' Written in the fall of 1843, in a break 
from the serial composition of ``Martin Chuzzlewit,'' whose popularity 
was flagging, the Carol was meant by the author, somewhat paradoxically, 
both to draw attention to the plight of the London poor and to earn 
money from what he recognized as a holiday market for tale telling. 
Published in mid-December, the story was an immediate sensation, and 
instantly recognized as adaptable for dramatization. After all, it 
had its archetypal hardhearted villain; its frightening specters (Scrooge's 
former partner, Jacob Marley, plus representatives of Christmases 
past, present and future _ is there anyone who doesn't know this?); 
its poor but forgiving victims (the Cratchit family, with the lame 
youngster, Tiny Tim, to tug mercilessly on the heart), and Scrooge's 
unmitigatedly joyous reformation. That it makes only incidental reference 
to the religious occasion of the holiday added to its universal appeal. 
By mid-February there were at least five productions, including a 
musical, on London stages. The United States' first Carol was in New 
York the following Christmas. Since then, the Carol has been set to 
Broadway music, symphonic music, operatic music. The first movie, 
silent of course, appeared in 1901. Adaptations have presented Scrooge 
as, among other things, a gay man, a black man, a woman, a television 
executive and a Muppet. Each year of its existence, the 11-year-old 
Pollard Theater in Guthrie, Okla., has performed ``A Territorial Christmas 
Carol,'' an adaptation that takes place in Guthrie in 1889, during 
the Oklahoma land rush, with Scrooge as an evil land baron. The troupe's 
founding director, Charles Suggs II, said ticket sales for the Carol 
were responsible for sustaining the theater through its first season, 
and the Pollard has sold about 5,000 tickets to the Carol during its 
six-week run every year, twice the total of any of the theater's other 
offerings, in a city with a population of 10,000. At the Guthrie Theater 
in Minneapolis, 60,000 people attend performances of the Carol every 
year, the vast majority of them not subscription holders. At A Contemporary 
Theater in Seattle, the company is doing so many weekly performances 
_ up to 13 _ that it uses two Scrooges, who perform on alternating 
days. This year in Chicago, the Goodman Theater is putting on two: 
its annual, full-scale version, and in its studio theater a one-man 
show, written and performed by Tom Mula, that purports to tell the 
story from the perspective of Marley, Scrooge's deceased and penitent 
partner. ``It is, I would say, largely an American phenomenon, and 
it's something that stuns me,'' said Joe Dowling, an Irishman who 
is now in his third season as artistic director of the Guthrie. ``It 
means this country is more liberal than it sometimes represents itself,'' 
he said. ``After all, in the early part of the play, the market rules. 
People are responsible for their own actions, and those who haven't 
got are at fault. ``By the end, Scrooge has come round to believing 
we must have, if not socialism, then a great deal of social democracy. 
It's fascinating that audiences embrace a notion from a 19th-century 
British writer. If a 20th-century American writer said the same things, 
he'd be viewed as left-wing fringe.'' Carey Perloff, artistic director 
of the Actors Conservatory Theater in San Francisco, called the Carol 
``the most successful piece of propaganda ever written,'' noting particularly 
that for many in her audience in a city where homelessness and affluence 
exist so visibly side by side, the play can't help feeling political. 
``Maybe it's because there's so much wealth here that there's so much 
guilt here,'' Ms. Perloff said. ``But you know, Americans basically 
do have a social conscience, and they really do believe they can redeem 
themselves. They're hopeful that there still is a body politic.'' 
But beyond the political, the Carol, with the transformation of Scrooge 
at its center, also seems to provide personal solace for the American 
soul. In a society as diverse as this, said Jerry Patch, the dramaturge 
at the South Coast Repertory Theater in Costa Mesa, Calif., for which 
he adapted the Carol, it is an apt spiritual vehicle. ``It brings 
out, as much as any play does, the religious nature of the theater,'' 
he said. ``It is an ecumenical experience at a religious time of year, 
and the theater becomes more like church than theater usually is.'' 
And in a society as emotionally self-conscious as today's, the Carol 
may also provide a cautionary tale: Scrooge as mirror. ``You know 
who I think it really gets? Men,'' said Kurt Beattie, who is one of 
the two Scrooges this year at A Contemporary Theater. ``Particularly 
the ones I see dragged to the theater by their wives. But those are 
the guys who fall over like tenpins. One of the the things that's 
powerful is the identification of Scrooge's grief with childhood, 
which always has tremendous resonance with the audience. And particularly 
with men, because I think the story, to a large degree, is about a 
man having walled himself off from society.'' Ms. Perloff, whose 9-year-old 
daughter is performing in the play, was one of many Scrooge aficionados 
who said that the Carol served as a commentary on the commercial nature 
of modern Christmas. ``So many parents are overwhelmed by their children's 
need to own things they've been told are worth owning,'' she said. 
``So in a way they feel like they hate Christmas. It's so dispiriting 
that it comes down to `Did you get the first Cabbage Patch on your 
block?' So when Scrooge humbugs around about how horrible Christmas 
is, there are many people who relate to it. And even though the end 
is so sentimental, it's rejuvenating for people to have that awfulness 
stripped away.'' One peculiarity of the Carol's lingering appeal is 
that though the spirit of the tale is in Scrooge's emerging humanity, 
it is his meanness that people remember. Often fondly. ``We all love 
a villain more than a regenerate soul,'' said Fred Kaplan, a Dickens 
biographer. ``A regenerate soul is wonderful, but he's a bore. I mean, 
who wants to hear Clinton apologize?'' In popular usage, after all, 
a scrooge is, in the words of Gordon Edelstein, artistic director 
of A Contemporary Theater, ``a miser and a misanthrope, two Moliere 
characters.'' ``I tried to encourage our Scrooges to try and find 
their own misanthropy, depression, rage, separation from the world,'' 
said Edelstein, who is Jewish and who has just directed the Carol 
for the first time. Still, he added, that is what supplies the power 
of the tale. ``It's not my tradition,'' he said. ``But you know what? 
I found it moving. And in some ways transformative. It's a story about 
someone who is the worst version of ourselves who becomes the very 
best version of who we might be. We all wish to be better people.'' 
</TEXT>
</DOC>