<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981220.0234 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
As he sat in the House listening to Rep. Robert Livingston say he 
would never be speaker, even ``the Hammer'' cried. Tom DeLay of Texas, 
the House majority whip, who considers his aggressive nickname a compliment, 
had to stop several times and take a breath to keep from weeping again 
during a floor speech on Saturday as he said, ``There is no greater 
American in my mind, at least today, than Bob Livingston,'' the Louisianan 
and the designated House speaker who abruptly bowed out on Saturday 
over a sex scandal. At the end of a week in which Iraq was bombed, 
the president was impeached and the designated speaker sidelined before 
he could even take office, House Republicans were finding their hard-won 
victory even more joyless than they had always promised it would be. 
All over the Capitol _ in the foyer off the House floor, in members' 
private offices and Livingston's office, where members gathered to 
offer their sympathy and support _ Republicans were tearful and overwrought. 
Rep. Tillie Fowler of Florida said she and Livingston both cried as 
she hugged him and ``told him he's one of the finest men I know.'' 
Rep. Richard Baker of Louisiana, who proclaimed himself ``not a boo-hooer'' 
said he was upset, too. Rep. James Greenwood of Pennsylvania became 
emotional in an interview. ``This is an incredible day,'' he said, 
looking down. ``You have tears in your eyes about the process'' of 
impeachment, and then along comes another good reason to cry. It was 
not only Livingston's surprise announcement that was distressing, 
members said. If any Republican was delighting in the desired outcome 
_ the impeachment of President Clinton _ they were not showing it. 
No, they felt only sadness for the country, they said, even if the 
Democrats doubted their sincerity. There was also some anxiety about 
the next Congress, and about the political future. And certainly plain 
exhaustion. Many Republicans had begun the week with a sense of unease 
as they traveled back to Washington for what they thought would be 
a week completely focused on impeachment. Most just seemed to want 
to do their duty and leave for the holidays. Even DeLay, who led the 
impeachment drive and professed to have no qualms about the vote, 
said he felt sick last Tuesday, though it was becoming clear that 
Republicans did have the votes to impeach. ``It's a tragedy,'' he 
said in his office on Tuesday evening, and seemed very sorry indeed, 
though without remorse. Then, one day before the House was set to 
debate impeachment, Clinton announced the bombing of Iraq. As Republicans 
filed into Wednesday's caucus meeting to decide if and when to proceed 
with impeachment, many were beside themselves. A few seemed too angry 
to speak. ``He's manipulated our military and his advisers for his 
own preservation,'' said Rep. Michael Oxley of Ohio. Inside the meeting 
room, some had the sense of being trapped in a horrible, recurring 
dream where Bill Clinton, once again a few inches from the edge of 
a cliff, gets a steadying hand from . . . Saddam Hussein? Some members 
not only suspected the president was trying to buy time, to figure 
some way out _ but worried that it might work. ``It was unanimous 
that we should worry,'' said Rep. Todd Tiahrt of Kansas, about whether 
support for impeachment would erode. And so, even after the group 
cooled off and decided, with near unanimity, to allow Livingston to 
postpone the impeachment debate, the majority decided they could wait 
no more than a day or two. Rep. George Gekas of Pennsylvania said 
the options discussed on Wednesday ranged only from ``full speed ahead 
to wait till Monday.'' Rep. Steve Largent of Oklahoma rose in the 
meeting to pray, calming some and apparently annoying others. Rep. 
Wayne Gilchrest of Maryland, a Vietnam veteran, said they should wait 
to show respect for military families. And Rep. Herbert Bateman of 
Virginia suggested that moving too fast could have political consequences. 
Finally, members said, they wanted to spare Livingston the embarrassment 
of a runaway conference. They wanted to help him weather his first 
crisis, so they waited a day. But by then, Livingston had other problems, 
and so did they. Late Thursday, Livingston issued a statement, saying, 
``During my 33-year marriage to my wife, Bonnie, I have on occasion 
strayed from my marriage.'' The words ``on occasion'' struck fear 
in some colleagues. He was using the plural in referring to the affairs, 
and after all they had been through with the careful language used 
to describe improper behavior, that could not be a good sign. Still, 
most members absorbed this new shock pretty quickly. They wanted to 
support their friend _ and what is more, felt they had to. And yet, 
after the Monica Lewinsky scandal _ and revelations about affairs 
involving several other congressional Republicans, some conservative 
members thought Livingston had been arrogant and plain wrong not to 
have told them about his infidelities before they chose him to replace 
Newt Gingrich. ``It probably would have changed the outcome'' of the 
leadership race, said Rep. Zach Wamp of Tennessee. ``Bob should have 
told us.'' When the impeachment debate began on Friday, Republicans 
again dared to hope that surely the worst was over. But by the time 
Wamp told Livingston on Saturday morning that he might no longer have 
the votes to be elected speaker, Livingston had already decided not 
to stand for the post. Friends described Livingston's wife as devastated. 
And so were House Republicans. After Livingston's announcement, they 
gasped. Some buried their heads in their hands. A few followed him, 
literally running off the House floor. Almost unanimously, they drew 
a distinction between the private matter of an affair and the public 
act of perjury. Some were also spitting mad that he had been booed 
by some colleagues across the aisle in the moments just before his 
announcement. ``The Democrats were shameless,'' fumed Rep. Peter Hoekstra 
of Michigan. In House speeches before the impeachment vote, members 
on both sides of the aisle were uncharacteristically humble, speaking 
of their own frailty. Assuming, as member after member suggested, 
that there are affairs as yet unrevealed, some of their speeches seemed 
to have an element of ``Who's next?'' nervousness. Rep. Peter King 
of New York, one of handful of moderates who voted against impeachment, 
pleaded that the body count was too high on both sides of the aisle. 
And those who disagreed with King on impeachment seemed to find the 
landscape no less depressing. While still numb, they impeached the 
president in the least surprising development of the day, then moved 
quickly to line up a new Speaker, turning to Rep. Dennis Hastert of 
Illinois. Then, after one final bit of wrangling over whether to elect 
him this week or next month, they chose the latter and got out of 
town before anything else could happen. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>