<DOC>
<DOCNO> ABC19981020.1830.0867 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> CAPTION </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
A little information can be a dangerous thing. Here's another way 
the Internet is playing into our lives. For many people, the Internet 
is a way to bypass the conventional drug store. It's the drugstore 
for the wired generation -- not on corner, but on the Internet -- 
where you can be your own doctor, write your own prescriptions. It 
is fast. It is convenient. It can also be deadly. It could be worse, 
there are side effects that won't kill you but could leave you so 
severely disabled or with life-long handicaps that you might wish 
you had been dead instead. Look online and you will find dozens of 
pharmacies operating all over the world, all of them willing to sell 
drugs to any American with a Credit card. We have no trouble finding 
sites on the Internet willing to sell us drugs. We were able to buy 
Viagra, prozac and even xanax. And these sites all seemed more interested 
in our credit history than in our medical history. The xanax and prozac 
were just keystrokes away, at a web site half a world away, in Thailand. 
It is hard for us to identify them oto inf they do. Buying prescription 
drugs through the mail isn't necessarily legal. You may need a doctor's 
note to buy them in America, but there are lots of countries where 
you don't. I was extremely shocked. A lot of the products that are 
available on these Internet sites are control drugs, meaning that 
they are either opiate derivatives or narcotics. Medical officials 
also worry about prescribing instructions. Temperature and moisture 
can affect a drug's potency and quality. The xanax we ordered showed 
up in the mail protected only by a plastic bag. The postmark read 
Thailand. But was the drug made there? There's no return address. 
We know where the vira came from, a real pharmacy based in San Antonio, 
texas. It's web site wouldn't sell us the drug without a four-question 
consultation with its online doctor. They're bona fide prescriptions 
with bona fide doctor/patient relationships. The law says to prescribe 
the doctors must have a consultation during the course of his professional 
practice. The FDA says people who buy drugs on the Internet may be 
gambling with their health. And until the U.S. government finds a 
way to regulate online drug sales, there's little anyone can do about 
it. it's just a little bit scary. just before we leave this, time 
for one comment from our medical editor, tim Johnson. I was stunned 
at how easy it is to buy these prescription drugs. Even the interaction 
with the doctor is so superficial, you have no idea if the drug is 
right for you or your medical problems. You have no idea if it's being 
produced safely. It's a hive-risk situation. So your conventional 
advice is talk to your doctor, if you can, right? Absolutely. For 
sure don't buy the drugs over the Internet. Information is one thing, 
but something you'll put in your body is quite another. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>