<DOC>
<DOCNO> APW19981020.0229 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
A major South African player promises to shake up the Ugandan telecommunications 
market with offers of better service and lower rates. Mobile Telephone 
Network officially enters the competition Wednesday with cellular 
telephone service, followed by fixed phone service in January. In 
response, the restructured state firm, Uganda Telecomms Ltd., has 
launched an aggressive program to collect back payments from subscribers 
whom it fears will switch to MTN, which is offering free installation. 
Private telephone service, particularly via cellphone, is spreading 
rapidly in most of East Africa, with the exception of Kenya, where 
the state-owned Kenya Post and Telecommunications has not relaxed 
its grip. MTN will soon begin service in Rwanda. It already operates 
in South Africa and Swaziland. Congo, Burundi and Tanzania have had 
private cellphone service for several years. MTN plans to install 
up to 50,000 telephone lines in Uganda. Its fixed line service will 
operate parallel to UTL, which is being prepared for sale as part 
of Uganda's ongoing privatization process. The South African company 
said it has already invested dlrs 30 million of the dlrs 70 million 
it plans to inject into its communications ventures in Uganda. MTN 
is advertising cellular telephone service for 160 shillings (12 cents) 
per minute to other MTN phones inside Uganda, 200 shillings (15 cents) 
to non-MTN clients and 2,200 shillings (dlrs 1.70) per minute for 
international calls. Cellular Telephones or Celtel, the other, private 
cellular service that was launched three years ago, charges 600 shillings 
(46 cents) a minute for calls in Uganda. International calls cost 
about dlrs 3 per minute. ``As of now we have got 500 customers for 
cellular services, and we will get many more,'' said MTN marketing 
manager Eric Van Veen. Celtel has invested nearly dlrs 40 million 
in the market and has about 15,000 subscribers, said Celtel spokesman 
Peter Waiswa. The company recently placed an ad in Kampala papers 
apologizing for a technical failure and offering every subscriber 
a 13,000-shilling (dlrs 10) rebate. The ad quoted managing director 
Aloysius Semmanda saying Celtel's rates were changing but not by how 
much. Celtel charges up to dlrs 100 to install a fixed telephone line, 
down from about dlrs 400 a few months ago. MTN will install for free 
and charge 36,400 shillings (dlrs 28) a month for rental. The Celtel 
charge is dlrs 50. About five companies, most of them back by foreign 
investors, have entered the Ugandan telecommunications market since 
liberalization began in 1992. Some are just Internet providers and 
others do only pager service or fax service. In order to retain market 
share, UTL has slashed domestic and international fax rates. It is 
also trying to collect on back bills from some 2,000 subscribers whose 
service has been suspended for nonpayment. Many subscribers, fed up 
with poor service and being billed for calls they did not make, refused 
to pay. Management says the company fails to recover much of the 45,000 
billion shillings (dlrs 34 million) it bills annually. UTL has a switching 
capacity of 80,000 lines, but only operates 45,000 through 13 exchanges 
nationwide. The MTN consortium is 50 percent owned by MTN International; 
30 percent by Telia Overseas, a Swedish multinational telecommunications 
company; 10 percent by Invesco (Ugandan Investment Company); and 10 
percent by Tristar (Rwanda Investment). 
</TEXT>
</DOC>