<DOC>
<DOCNO> APW19981020.0829 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
A Palestinian man arrested after throwing hand grenades near a bus 
stop in southern Israel told his interrogators that he also killed 
a rabbi in the West Bank town of Hebron this summer, the army said 
Tuesday. The suspect, 29-year-old Salem Rajab Sarsour, started out 
as an activist on the fringes of the Islamic militant group Hamas, 
but after killing Rabbi Shlomo Raanan was admitted into Hamas' military 
wing and was trained in the use of hand grenades, the army said. Sarsour 
also confessed to throwing two hand grenades at Israeli soldiers in 
Hebron on Sept. 30. Two dozen Israeli troops and Palestinian civilians 
were injured in that attack. After an intial silence, Hamas on Tuesday 
claimed responsibility for Sarsour's grenade attack in the southern 
Israeli town of Beersheba a day before. The attack wounded 64 Israelis. 
The Palestinian Authority said in a statement that Sarsour was a double 
agent who had provided information to the Israeli security service 
Shin Bet. After being blackmailed by his Shin Bet handlers who threatened 
to reveal his identity if he did not provide more information, Sarsour 
carried out the attacks to clear his name, the statement said. The 
Palestinian Authority ``holds Israel responsible'' for the attacks, 
the statement said. It was not immediately clear how the claims and 
counterclaims would play out at he Mideast summit at Wye Plantation 
in Maryland. Security is a central issue in the negotiations, with 
Israel pointing to Sarsour's attack in Beersheba as new proof that 
the Palestinians are not doing enough to prevent terror attacks. Sarsour 
is a resident of the Palestinian-controlled area of Hebron. Israeli 
Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu has long complained that Palestinian 
areas are launching pads for terror attacks against Israelis and that 
the Palestinians are doing little to catch the assailants. The army 
said that Sarsour started out as a low-ranking Hamas activist, organizing 
rallies and spraying graffiti on walls. He was jailed twice by Israel 
in 1989 and 1996, the army said. On Aug. 20, Sarsour wandered into 
the Israeli-run part of Hebron, planning to throw firebombs at Israeli 
soldiers, the army said. When he didn't find a target, he climbed 
the fence of the tiny Jewish enclave of Tel Romeida, a cluster of 
several trailers. He spotted Rabbi Shlomo Raanan in one of the trailers, 
climbed through the window and stabbed the rabbi to death, the army 
said. A few days later, Sarsour approached one of the Hamas leaders 
in town and told him that he had killed the rabbi. He was recruited 
into the Hamas military wing, was trained in throwing grenades and 
carried out the Sept. 30 grenade attack in Hebron, the army said. 
On Monday, Sarsour headed to Beersheba. Sarsour, a plasterer by trade, 
hoped to find a day's work in the city and on the way home carry out 
a grenade attack, the army said. When he didn't find work, he walked 
to the central bus station and threw two grenades at a crowded bus 
stop. The Palestinian Authority said that after Sarsour's identity 
became know, Palestinian security forces arrested a friend of the 
suspect who told them Sarsour was an Israeli agent. The friend said 
Sarsour had received money from the Shin Bet in exchange for information 
and that his handlers had given him a mobile phone to make it easier 
for him to pass on information. Sarsour is a father of five. Neighbors 
call him ``Sheik Salem'' because of his religious fervor. He sports 
a large white prayer cap and his wife, Khaloud, wears a face veil 
in addition to the headscarf that is the norm among observant Palestinian 
women. A picture of Hamas founder Sheik Ahmed Yassin hangs in the 
Sarsour home. In 1982, Israel demolished the Sarsour family home and 
Sarsour was jailed twice by Israel during the 1987-93 Palestinian 
uprising. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>