<DOC>
<DOCNO> APW19981020.0816 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
A United Nations team sent to assess Kosovo's progress toward peace 
began work in the province Tuesday and relief convoys resumed after 
missing a day due to renewed violence. Most of Kosovo seemed calm 
after a weekend of shelling and shooting incidents. But the Serbs 
accused the guerrillas of another attack on police, leaving lingering 
doubt about the future of the U.S.-brokered agreement to end the violence. 
NATO commander Gen. Wesley Clark arrived in Belgrade for a meeting 
Tuesday evening with Yugoslav President Slobodan Milosevic _ presumably 
to tell him what must still be done to meet an Oct. 27 deadline to 
comply with the accord or face airstrikes. Yugoslav army troops backed 
by Serbian police maintained an increased and visible presence in 
the area where most of the weekend attacks occurred, and a new incident 
was reported there. The official Yugoslav news agency Tanjug claimed 
a Serb policeman was wounded Tuesday morning when ``terrorists'' attacked 
a police patrol near Klina, 50 kilometers (30 miles) southwest of 
Pristina. The incident could not be verified. The troops are normally 
stationed in the capital of the Serbian province, and therefore are 
allowed to remain in the province under the withdrawal plan. Relief 
convoys rolled again, with Mercy Corps International and other humanitarian 
groups sending 150 tons of food, clothing, mattresses and other items 
to the southwestern Kosovo town of Djinovce. Three other convoys also 
went out, including two from the U.N. High Commissioner for Refugees 
that were postponed Monday due to the Serb military buildup after 
the weekend violence. Hundreds of people have been killed since Milosevic 
launched a crackdown Feb. 28 on ethnic Albanian separatists in Kosovo. 
As winter approaches, officials fear a humanitarian disaster if the 
estimated 300,000 people displaced by the fighting, thousands still 
living in the open, are not allowed to return home. The 20-member 
U.N. team, led by Staffan de Mistura of Sweden, includes representatives 
of human rights, humanitarian, political and peacekeeping offices 
who will serve as the ``eyes and ears'' of Secretary General Kofi 
Annan. ``We are here to assess the situation on the ground after the 
Holbrooke-Milosevic agreement, and to report to the secretary-general,'' 
de Mistura said, referring to the Oct. 12 agreement brokered by U.S. 
envoy Richard Holbrooke. Many Kosovo Albanians who support secession 
from Serbia, the dominant republic in Yugoslavia, were distressed 
about the Holbrooke-Milosevic agreement. British Foreign Secretary 
Robin Cook reiterated Tuesday that Western nations oppose independence 
for Kosovo for fear that a border change in the volatile Balkans would 
lead to problems elsewhere in the region. ``One of the reasons why 
it is so important that we resolve the instability in Kosovo is to 
make sure that it doesn't spread over into wider insecurity in the 
region,'' Cook told reporters in Sofia after talks with Bulgarian 
Premier Ivan Kostov. As part of last week's agreement, a 2,000-member 
international verification force is being organized by the 54-nation 
Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe to ensure that 
Yugoslavia honors its promises. About 25 members of an advance team 
for the monitors are in Kosovo. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>