<DOC>
<DOCNO> MNB19981020.2100.3155 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> CAPTION </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
In an election season that is centered on scandal so far and going 
negative, the race for U.S. Senate in Vermont stands out because of 
one candidate who is doing it his own way, a candidate who isn't attacking 
his oponet. In fact, he concedes he will probably vote the other ticket. 
The candidate is a 79-year-old retired dairy farmer named Fred tuttle. 
As NBC's Jack Ford found out in a report he filed for "weekend today," 
tuttle's campaign can be safely called a first of its kind. It's post 
time. It's not exactly a horse race for the Senate seat this year. 
Retired dairy Fred tuttle isn't exactly running for the office, but 
he is on the republican ballot and a popular man at his hometown's 
world fair. He's a native vermonter, but an oldtime native. He represents 
a way of life that we're losing. Fred first came to statewide attention 
two years ago. His neighbor, filmmaker John O'Brien, built a movie 
around him. A man with a plan is an affectionate look at a dairy farmer 
who runs for congress with a little help from his friends. You need 
to say your name very clearly. Fred tuttle. You see, when you say 
it, it sounds like you're saying furry Turtle. Fred tuttle. Fred tuttle! 
Futfut! And I understand that you made up a lot of your lines. I couldn't 
remember anything. I had to make it all up. John helped me a little 
bit. The movie made Fred a star. Everybody knew me. They seen the 
movie. I've been on television. I've been on the radio. This year 
public television put "man with a plan" on its fall line-up, and that's 
when John O'Brien came up with a new plan. It started as an idea for 
publicity. Someone said let's have him run for real office and hopefully 
he'll win. But there should be a serious element to this too. There 
are 385,000 registered voterers in this state. Fred tuttle had a real 
edge on his primary opponent. Jacques McMull Lin is a Massachusetts 
businessman and only part-time vermont resident. That outcider status 
was taken seriously when he was labeled a carpet bagger. But he spent 
$500,000 and appeared to be willing, but then debated Fred. Fred, 
we have another question from you for Jack. Hey, Jack, you owned a 
place in Warren for 15 years, right? yes. Fred turned the spotlight 
on McMullen's biggest weakness, and that turned the hide. Though he 
spent only $200 on his campaign, he got 55%. What did you think primary 
election night when you realized, hey, I won this thing? I was surprised 
in a way, and in a way, I happen to think everybody's wanting to vote 
for me, and they don't know McMullen. And then you realized -- I realized 
it was something, yeah. And now you got to run for this? I've got 
to do something, yeah. There are some folks, Fred, they think it's 
almost making a mockery out of the election. I hope it don't make 
a joke out of it. Jerry Greenfield doesn't think so. His company is 
sponsoring "man with a plan" on PBS. I talked to somebody yesterday 
who said they voted for Fred in the primary and say said the reason 
was they felt like they could cast a vote that said something. The 
beauty of Fred is that he tells the truth, he is honest. And I think 
people really like that. I think politics has gotten to the point 
where people are very distrustful of it, and that should be a message 
to politicians. Senator Patrick Leahy is his next opponent, but also 
a big fan. He's salt of the earth. He's the kind of person that made 
Vermont what it is, a hard-working dairy farmer, a great sense of 
community. He's obviously having a wnderful time doing this, and God 
bless him. All the experts say that Leahy will win in a walk. When 
it comes time for you to vote on election day and you see for United 
States Senate you and your opponent, who are you going to vote for? 
Patrick Leahy. Not Fred tuttle? I like him. I always vote the way 
he does. Jack McMullen represented the future of Vermont, Wal-marts, 
circuit city, and Fred represents old Vermont, general stores, small 
farms, impeachment who know each other in the neighborhoods. Whether 
we'll ever be able to hold on to that or not, people in their minds 
want to be able to hold on to it. That's why they voted for Fred. 
NBC news correspondent Jack Ford traveling with the tuttle campaign. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>