<DOC>
<DOCNO> MNB19981020.2100.2637 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> CAPTION </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Next month marks the 60th anniversary of the beginning of nearm's 
persecution of the Jews culminating in the haul caust. Fewer and fewer 
of those who survived are still alive to bear witness, but a new computer 
application creates by Stephen Spielberg's shoah foundation has secured 
some of the testimony of the survivors forever. Today he rolled out 
the CD-rom project at specifically teaching school-age children the 
history of the Holocaust. Linda Vester has the story. Who was the 
Jew for them? It could have been a bicycle for rider. It happened 
to be a Jew. In this New York City high school, 10th grade students 
are learning one of the darkest lessons in history not from a book, 
not from a teacher, but first hand from people who lived through it. 
People were hungry. People had no employment, had very little hope. 
So, they needed a scapegoat. That's the one. 80-year-old Sylvia Gross 
Martin and 65-year-old Paula lebowicz are holocaust survivors who 
share their stories with high school classes across america. Paula 
survived auschwitz. She was just 6 years old when the S.S. took her. 
Her father and two sisters died. I felt so responsible. Here I am, 
I'm alive, and she's not. She's not. She's gone. I wanted to know 
what happened with your little kids. In our camp, all the sick and 
the old and whatever was leftover, they left us, and they called us 
like scrap. That's what they called ut. Smets. Which is scrap. We 
were the scrap. Paula and Sylvia are symbols of a disappearing generation. 
Within 20 years, most Sur vie vors will have passed away, but their 
voices will not fall silent. They've been preserved forever on a new 
interactive CD-rom. It's the work of Stephen Spielberg and his shoah 
foundation to enshrine the memory of the Holocaust. This will be as 
important a tool in teaching the Holocaust for all the next generations 
as it would have been had television and the camcorder been around 
during slavery. Can you imagine what we could have learned? Its gas 
Chambers operate at nonstop. It's narrated by Leonardo DiCaprio and 
Winona Ryder. It's aimed at high school students to get them to relate 
to the horrors of half a sergery ago. It's invaluable. There's no 
-- there are no words because people are speaking to them. People 
that were alive and that lived through it are speaking to them with 
a voice. Students at the satellite academy, an alternative high school 
in New York, were the first to try the CD-rom. And on this day, the 
storytellers themselves made a special visit Do you know what the 
worst moment of my life was? When they gave me the number on my arm, 
the tattoo. The CD-rom linked these survivors' personal stories with 
the wider story of genocide and ww II. Spielberg will make it available 
to schools next year and donate copies to schools that can't afford 
it hoping that this will be incorporate Ed into the way that schools 
teach history. What happened to us is different because it was new 
then. Can it happen again? You get. You bet. Doesn't have to be the 
Jew. It can be somebody else. Look in Bosnia. And in Africa. It's 
the same thing. And I hope maybe if it stops a little bit wherever 
I am or whoever listens to me, I feel that I have -- I have done my 
job and I was not here in vain. Linda Vester, NBC news, New York. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>