<DOC>
<DOCNO> MNB19981020.2100.1214 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> CAPTION </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
This morning's "New York Times" first reported the first real question 
surrounding the safety of the upcoming shuttle launch. We broadcast 
them last night on this broadcast as well. With us this eevepening, 
Howard decastro, vice president of the united space alliance, a NASA 
contractor in charge of training the space agencies' flight crews. 
Mr. decastro, this morning's story depending on how you wread it, 
was either frightening or calming. Yes, they found grounds for real 
concern and fear and trepidation, but yes they also repeated that 
their redundancies are all over the place, that training is increased. 
Can you speak to the increase in the kind of precautionary measures 
going on surrounding this shuttle mission? I'd be glad to. You pointed 
out that united space alliance is involved in training, but it's more 
than that. We support NASA on the complete shuttle program. And one 
of the most important issues on safety is the processing of the vehicles 
themselves, which is done at the Kennedy space center. Now, one of 
the issues that comes up is whether or not the lower flight rate puts 
us in a position than at a higher flight rate. And this isn't true. 
You can look at flight rate in a couple of ways, one is the number 
of total missions over a period of time. Another is how frequently 
you fly just one of the vehicles. If we look at discovery and look 
at the last flight, which was 2 June of 1998, you'll notice it's only 
been about four months and 27 days since it last flew, which is a 
very normal processing time for one of the shuttles. In fact, on the 
previous two missions of discovery, which was sds-85 to sds-89, it 
was nine months and 29 days between flights, abbeds of course both 
of those were flown safely and successfully. So, you reject the analogy 
-- it was in the normal "times" article, and quoted throughout NASA 
officials at minimum on background saying that this is like a hot 
Rod. It runs best when run often and fully checked out. I would reject 
that. The safety is the absolute number-one priority of NASA, of united 
space alliance, of all 20,000 people who are involved in human space 
flight. And we wouldn't for a moment do something that is not safe. 
And as to the vehicle having to fly frequently to be safe, the issue 
here is how we process it and how we take care of it. And we do a 
lot of things to make sure. We have wonderful processes and wonderful 
procedures, and when we have a Lull in the flight rate as we've had 
in the last year, we do things differently. We pay very, very close 
attention always to the processes and procedures but during a lull, 
we put extra management attention on them. We conduct extra drills, 
extra simulations. We retrain where necessary. We make absolutely 
sure that all of our people are certified and ready to go. Howard 
decastro has been kind enough to join us. He is vice president and 
program manager for the united space alliance. Thank you. Glad to 
be here. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>