<DOC>
<DOCNO> NBC19981020.1830.0822 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> CAPTION </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
NBC news "in depth" -- tonight, the family, when violence becomes 
a way of life in the home. October is domestic violence awareness 
month, and, despite all the efforts to reduce domestic abuse, it still 
destroys so many families. Last year alone, almost 4 million American 
women were abused by their husbands or boyfriends. That translates 
into one woman physically attacked every nine seconds. And often, 
that violence is witnessed by children. It is a sad lesson that can 
stay with them for life. Tonight, NBC's Kelly O'Donnell begins our 
"in depth" reporting, with the story of one family. For Tina chadwell 
and her five children, something dangerous runs in the family. The 
children are violent with each other. They are violent with other 
children. They are violent with their mother. How often do you guys 
fight? Every day. My kids, they get so angry with each other. Then 
I threw a bat at him and hit him in the head. It's so violent. They 
just hit, hit, hit, hit. a cycle of violence passed down, parent to 
child. Her kids witnessed years of physical and verbal abuse against 
their mother. Even more disturbing, what they saw they now repeat. 
11-year-old Eric learned to use violence to get what he wants from 
his mother. I punched her. When you did that, how did that make you 
feel? Kind of angrier. He would push, hit, throw trash cans. He would 
beat on the other children. Violence that was handed down. Even the 
youngest, 5-year-old Brittany, routinely shows aggression. And 8-year-old 
Kristina took a squabble at school too far. He was poking me in the 
back with the pencil, and I got tired of it, and I hit him with the 
chair. Did you hit him hard? He got a little bump on his head and 
a black eye. The chadwells are among 3 million children in the U.S. 
each year who witness a parent being abused at home. It began during 
their parents' 12-year marriage. But the pattern of abuse continued 
with their mother's new boyfriend. Police reports and counselors' 
notes detail almost daily episodes of violent abuse, verbal and emotional 
control. Neither the husband or the boyfriend would speak to NBC news 
on camera, but both say they are not to blame. Tina admits she sometimes 
fought back. Gradually, Tina saw her children were imitating the male 
role models in their lives. Getting out of the violent home, moving 
hundreds of miles away from her abuser, may still not be enough to 
rescue Tina chadwell's kids. Although the violence is over, the emotional 
consequences go on. The kids' behavior is a troubling result of what 
they saw and heard. All five of her children are quick, too quick, 
to anger. hey! Counselors worry most about Eric. He's basically assumed 
the role of the abuser in the family, and he will use violence as 
a means to get what he wants in the family. I really didn't want to 
hit her. Could you stop yourself? no. Counselors say adult men in 
Eric's life taught him not to respect his mother, not to believe in 
her. She couldn't really be a great mom. a devastating judgment from 
her oldest son. To stop the abuse, Tina enrolled in a two-year New 
Mexico program that helps them move into their new home, and offers 
counseling and job training. Will it work? Experts say children conditioned 
to violence can also learn to control it, but it isn't easy. Tina 
hopes she acted in time to break the dangerous chain of abuse with 
this generation. Kelly O'Donnell, NBC news, Albuquerque. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>