<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981020.0273 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Officials in Switzerland announced Tuesday that they have seized more 
than $90 million from Raul Salinas de Gortari, a brother of Mexico's 
former president, after a police investigation found that Salinas 
filled Swiss bank accounts with money he received for protecting drug 
shipments into the United States. ``All of the evidence showed that 
he was a very important and very powerful man,'' a senior Swiss police 
official, Valentin Roschacher, said of Salinas at a news conference 
in Bern. ``With all of his contacts and power, he could guarantee 
those loads.'' The confiscation of Salinas' fortune _ and a formal 
Swiss request that the authorities in Britain seize $23.4 million 
more that he deposited there _ marked the end of what Swiss officials 
said was the most ambitious investigation they have ever undertaken 
into corruption abroad. With help from law-enforcement officials in 
the United States, Swiss investigators located almost 80 witnesses, 
who said they had seen Salinas meet with traffickers, introduce them 
to other prominent Mexican politicians and pick up suitcases full 
of cash. But the credibility of some of those witnesses has already 
been in dispute, and the Swiss attorney general's order to seize the 
money is only the start of a legal fight that could drag on for months. 
Lawyers for Salinas, the elder brother of former President Carlos 
Salinas de Gortari, said they will go before Switzerland's supreme 
court to demand the return of the funds. In an open letter from the 
maximum-security prison outside Mexico City where he awaits the outcome 
of a murder prosecution against him, Raul Salinas attacked the Swiss 
allegations Tuesday, calling them ``stories of narcofiction that cannot 
survive the most basic scrutiny.'' Swiss officials did not file criminal 
charges of money laundering against Salinas, asserting that the law 
would only allow them to if he had been arrested in Switzerland. They 
also declined to charge his wife, Paulina Castanon, and her brother, 
who were arrested in 1995 after Ms. Castanon tried to retrieve a phony 
Mexican passport that Salinas had hidden in his safe-deposit box at 
a Geneva bank. Because she did not marry Salinas until 1993, the officials 
said, she was not with him during the period between 1987 and 1993 
when he took in most of what they estimated was at least $500 million 
in drug-traffickers' bribes. As he has before, Salinas asserted Tuesday 
that the money in Switzerland was part of an investment fund he pulled 
together from some of Mexico's wealthiest businessmen. But after more 
than two years in which he and his lawyers have been resolutely vague 
on the question, Salinas' lead attorney in the case, Eduardo Luengo 
Creel, told a news conference in Mexico City that three contributors 
have now made formal statements to the Swiss about their participation 
in the plan. The largest of those supposed investors, Carlos Peralta 
Quintero, filed suit against Salinas on Friday in Mexico City, demanding 
the return of $49.7 million that he said he had invested in 1994. 
Peralta, who controls a huge Mexican cellular-telephone and industrial 
conglomerate, gave no indication that he had broken with Raul Salinas, 
who has been a friend since childhood. Rather, the suit appeared to 
be a procedural step to force the Swiss authorities to consider Peralta's 
account of the financial transaction. The two other participants who 
stepped forward, Roberto Gonzalez Barrera and Carlos Hank Rohn, share 
two obvious qualities with Peralta. Both come from families that have 
long been tied to the Salinases, and both are prominent businessmen 
whose enterprises received lavish support during the presidency of 
Carlos Salinas. Neither the Swiss attorney general, Carla del Ponte, 
nor federal police investigators who appeared with her in Bern offered 
a direct answer to questions about the role that Carlos Salinas might 
have played in his brother's affairs. In the 369-page police report 
that is the basis for seizing the money, investigators wrote that 
they could not determine ``how far'' Carlos Salinas and other relatives 
might have been involved in Raul Salinas' illicit affairs. But the 
report adds: ``In our opinion, it has been proven beyond a doubt that 
the circle of family and friends around former President Carlos Salinas 
de Gortari got paid royally by various Mexican and Colombian drug 
cartels for protection from arrest and security of drugs. They are 
therefore co-responsible for the current major drug problems in the 
United States of America.'' A copy of part of the document was obtained 
by The New York Times. Swiss officials said Tuesday that they would 
not make it public. This week, Mexican newspapers reported that Carlos 
Salinas had flown to Cuba from his exile in Dublin, Ireland, in order 
to meet with members of his family and plan a response to the legal 
actions his brother faces. In addition to the Swiss case, Raul Salinas 
is under investigation for money laundering in the United States and 
France. In Mexico, prosecutors last week asked that he receive the 
maximum sentence of 50 years in prison if he is convicted of ordering 
the 1994 murder of a prominent governing-party politician who was 
once his brother-in-law. They also announced that they hoped to use 
the witnesses gathered by the Swiss, and $119 million in bank deposits 
separate from those cited by the Swiss, to pursue a drug-trafficking 
conspiracy case against him. Some corruption charges are already pending 
in the courts. In an interview and in documents released Tuesday, 
Raul Salinas' lawyer, Luengo, took specific aim at nine witnesses 
cited in the Swiss report, asserting that parts of their stories could 
be shown to be contradictory or false. Most of those he named are 
among 16 informants _ some enrolled in the U.S. witness protection 
program _ whom the Swiss have agreed to identify only by pseudonyms. 
Lawyers for Salinas said they would focus on the use of such witnesses 
when they deliver their appeal. Mrs. Del Ponte, the country's chief 
prosecutor, suggested she was unperturbed. ``We are very confident 
that they will uphold the case,'' she said. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>