<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981020.0010 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
The New York Jets may have found themselves a quarterback while finding 
themselves Monday night. Vinny Testaverde muscled and feathered three 
touchdown passes in a 24-14 upset of the first-place New England Patriots. 
Instead of having the season close in on them, the Jets (3-3) pulled 
back up to .500, and a favorable position in the American Football 
Conference East. They are now a game behind both New England and Miami, 
who have each won four games and lost two. Testaverde's final touchdown 
pass was a 43-yard bullet to a streaking Dedric Ward with 3 minutes, 
29 seconds remaining. It proved to be the crushing score. Earlier 
in the period, he teamed with Kyle Brady to put the Jets ahead by 
17-14. It was Brady's second score of the game, and the first time 
in his career that he caught two touchdown passes. Brady's first touchdown 
was positioned by Aaron Glenn's end-zone interception of the Patriots' 
Drew Bledsoe, whose pass was meant for Shawn Jefferson. The victory 
came eight days after the Jets committed five turnovers in losing 
to the St. Louis Rams, a desultory performance that led Coach Bill 
Parcells to bench Glenn Foley in favor of the 34-year-old Testaverde. 
Now 3-0 as a Jets starter after leading New York in the team's return 
to ``Monday Night Football,'' Testaverde again had the benefit of 
a 100-yard performance by Curtis Martin, who along with Parcells was 
making another return to New England, their former team. It was slightly 
less mad than last year's return, although in some quarters it was 
referred to as World War Tuna, a reference to Parcells' nickname. 
Still, the opening half produced dramatics and theatrics. The Patriots 
took a 14-10 lead at halftime, but it was not easy, and the crowd 
often alternated between sullen disbelief and wild excitement. The 
Jets opened the scoring in the first quarter when Brady barely made 
it to the goal line cradling Testaverde's 1-yard pass. On the drive, 
Testaverde made a critical connection with Keyshawn Johnson. On third-and-6, 
Testaverde rolled to his right and left his feet, leaping to get the 
ball over the defense to Johnson for a 20-yard gain. Near the goal 
line, Testaverde again showed his experience. He improvised as he 
was rushed, rolled out, moved in and out of the pocket while his receivers 
seemingly were covered, and then calmly searched for someone _ and 
found Brady, his safety valve. The Patriots quickly retaliated with 
a 76-yard scoring drive capped by a 1-yard run by rookie Robert Edwards, 
who now has scored a touchdown in his first six games, tying a rookie 
record shared by Alan Ameche and Joe Cribbs. It is very likely that 
many in the Foxboro Stadium crowd were keeping track of the running 
backs' yardage. Martin had left New England for the lure of New York 
money and the chance to be reunited with his former coaches. As part 
of the deal that allowed him to become a Jet, the Patriots received 
the Jets' first-round pick. With it, they snared Edwards, who played 
at Georgia. Testaverde led another Jet drive in the second quarter, 
featuring a 14-yard run by Martin that brought them close enough for 
a 38-yard field-goal attempt by John Hall. But Hall's attempt was 
blocked by Chad Eaton, the third time this season a Jets kick has 
been blocked. This one started a Patriot scoring drive that consumed 
77 yards. Bledsoe gave the Patriots a 14-7 lead by connecting with 
tight end Lovett Purnell for 6 yards. But the Jets closed out the 
half with Testaverde and Johnson again collaborating on a big third-down 
play to keep a drive going. This one went for 29 yards on a third-and-10. 
With six seconds left, the Jets got to the 5. Johnson headed for the 
end zone, and Testaverde attempted a high pass over Ty Law. But Johnson 
could not control the pass as he jostled with Law. Hall came on to 
kick a 23-yard field goal. This rivalry has taken on an urgency and 
importance since Parcells took over the Jets. Yet, most great sports 
rivalries have not only a little age on them, but also a tradition 
of teams knocking each other off. This has not been the history here. 
Usually, the Jets and the Patriots have not been good at the same 
time, and there have been few memorable games between them. They have 
met only once in post-season play, in a 1985 AFC wild-card game at 
the Meadowlands. The Patriots won, 26-14. This has become a rivalry 
defined by loss and desertion: Parcells, now joined by Martin, returning 
to the scene of past success. Now they are intruders instead of icons. 
Only two years ago, Parcells was coaching the Patriots en route to 
a Super Bowl appearance, and Martin was doing the running. Martin 
was in his second year, was headed for the Pro Bowl and was respected 
for his graciousness and team spirit. Although Parcells took over 
the Jets last season, Martin was still here, in his third season, 
his career stretching into the new millennium a likelihood. A year 
ago, Bledsoe seemed almost consumed by facing his former coach. He 
played erratically, and even earned an unsportsmanlike penalty for 
his tirade against Jets safety Victor Green. Even Coach Pete Carroll, 
who was in his first year with the Patriots last season, said the 
Parcells legacy was monumental to overcome, and distracting. The clubs 
faced each other in a Sunday night game here last season. It was the 
Jets' only prime-time appearance all year, and it went into a dramatic 
overtime before the Patriots won. This time around, Bledsoe and Carroll 
were more understated, as if they each have survived the post-Parcells 
comparisons, and thrived. ``It's not near the same situation it was 
last year,'' Bledsoe said. ``There's only one first time.'' 
</TEXT>
</DOC>