<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981020.0307 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Eager to appear neutral on a highly charged issue, the conservative 
government of Spain said Tuesday that it would let the nation's courts 
decide whether Madrid had the right to ask London to extradite Gen. 
Augusto Pinochet, the former Chilean dictator, for trial there. But 
lawyers close to the case said in private the Madrid government was 
working hard to have the judiciary rule against extradition. Foreign 
Minister Abel Matutes, the first senior official to speak clearly 
on the topic since Scotland Yard arrested Pinochet on Friday, said 
the government would take no action to block the extradition process 
that a Spanish judge has initiated. ``The government is waiting for 
the judicial authorities to decide definitively if the extradition 
should proceed'' before it sends the request to Britain, Matutes told 
Spanish radio. On Monday, nonetheless, a prosecutor who was representing 
Attorney General Jesus Cardenal filed an appeal before the tribunal 
dealing with Pinochet. The appeal argued that Spain had no jurisdiction 
to try the general for crimes committed outside Spain. The investigating 
magistrate Baltasar Garzon, 42, said in telephone interview Tuesday 
that he had faced permanent opposition from government prosecutors 
since he began in 1996 to investigate torture and killings by the 
Argentine and Chilean military rulers in the '70s and '80s. Last March, 
and then in May and September, the attorney general instructed government 
prosecutors to oppose his investigations, Garzon said. Asked whether 
he worried about the outcome, the magistrate said: ``I feel at ease. 
I trust our country's institutions. We are on solid legal ground. 
Spain has signed and ratified the relevant Geneva Conventions, and 
their language has been incorporated into our national legislation.'' 
These Geneva Conventions require signatory countries to prosecute 
grave violations of human rights and crimes against humanity that 
are committed anywhere. Tuesday, Manuel Garca Castellon, another judge 
in Madrid who was conducting a parallel investigation into the disappearance 
of more than 4,000 people in the Chilean dictatorship, handed over 
his cases to Garzon. Court officials said that was to avoid a duplication 
of effort and would simplify working with the British. Garzon, who 
had to act in haste when he heard that Pinochet, who had surgery, 
was to leave Britain earlier than planned, initially asked the British 
police for permission to interrogate the 82-year-old general in connection 
with the death of only one political prisoner. On Monday he broadened 
his arrest order to include the killing or disappearance of 94 people 
of several nationalities. For the prime minister, Jose Maria Aznar, 
the Spanish trap set for Pinochet last Friday was all the more embarrassing, 
because news of the arrest arrived in the middle of an Ibero-American 
conference in Oporto, Portugal. Both the prime minister and the civilian 
president of Chile, Eduardo Frei, were on hand. Frei and other Chilean 
officials have put strong pressure on Madrid to undo the case against 
Pinochet, contending that he had diplomatic immunity as a Senator 
for Life, a post he created for himself before leaving office. Aznar, 
when first asked about the extradition, said: ``The government may 
or may not receive requests, and it may or may not study them, depending 
on whether it receives them or not and depending on what they are 
founded on. But, of course, I will say nothing until I know what the 
facts are based on.'' A key to whether Garzon can proceed will be 
a meeting early next week, when nine of the 12 magistrates of the 
tribunal are expected to convene and rule on whether Spain can claim 
jurisdiction to weigh Pinochet's human rights record. That step, the 
government said, will determine whether the judge in the case has 
the right to request extradition. But the request would still have 
to pass political hurdles like an approval by the justice ministry 
and, possibly, Aznar's Cabinet. Political experts in Madrid said Matutes' 
statement would make it more difficult for the government to ignore 
rulings that favored extradition. The experts said the government's 
strategy therefore focused on arguments before the National Court. 
Elsewhere in Europe, socialist politicians have applauded the move 
against the former right-wing dictator. France's Prime Minister Lionel 
Jospin told reporters on Monday: ``It seems to me a good thing that 
this dictator can be brought to justice, even late in his life.'' 
The news of the arrest, he said was ``welcome and just''. France, 
however, chose to pass on the opportunity to have the Chilean arrested 
on French soil. Before turning to a London clinic, Pinochet had apparently 
planned to have his surgery done in France, but the French foreign 
ministry refused his visa request. According to French diplomats, 
France had private indications that judge Garzon was planning to file 
an extradition request and Paris preferred to avoid being caught up 
in the case. In Washington, which played a pivotal role in Pinochet's 
coup in 1973, State Department officials said the United States was 
not involved in the controversy. ``It's a legal matter among the governments 
of the U.K., Spain and Chile,'' a State Department official, speaking 
on condition of anonymity. ``The United States is not involved.'' 
</TEXT>
</DOC>