<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981020.0017 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
The hunger is obvious from the very first cry of ``Hello, darlings!,'' 
the signature salutation she hurls at the audience in her nightclub 
act. There's a new stridency in the voice: a loud, raw, anxious quality 
that suggests that the speaker would very much like you to like her, 
but knows that isn't going to happen. Once she starts singing, sliding 
between defiant squawks and forlorn mewing sounds, you expect her 
to lose it right there on the stage. Sally Bowles, while never exactly 
the picture of mental stability, has definitely slid closer to the 
edge. And her place of employment, the Kit Kat Klub, as re-envisioned 
in the Roundabout Theater Company's hit revival of ``Cabaret,'' is 
seeming even bleaker than it used to be. With Jennifer Jason Leigh 
in the role, how could it be otherwise? This deeply gifted risk-taking 
actress specializes in needy neurotics in her movies, from the identity-seeking 
stalker of ``Single White Female'' to the talentless sister of a singing 
star in ``Georgia.'' Many of the startling qualities she brought to 
those brave, vanity-free portrayals are definitely evident in her 
Sally Bowles, the bed-hopping chanteuse with a heart of glass. The 
effort seems all the braver when you remember that Ms. Leigh has the 
unenviable task of succeeding Natasha Richardson, who won a Tony for 
her brilliant portrait of this loser. But there's a problem here. 
We get Sally the self-destructive strumpet loud and clear. But Sally 
the siren is nowhere to be seen. Her presence is much missed. This 
wildly popular incarnation of ``Cabaret,'' directed by Sam Mendes 
and Rob Marshall, has been back on its feet on West 43rd Street for 
more than a month now, after an enforced hiatus resulting from a Times 
Square construction accident this summer. In many ways, it is much 
the same show, a lurid, deliberately grim presentation of Weimar decadence 
as a prelude to the Holocaust. But with the departure of Ms. Richardson 
and Alan Cumming, who played the nightclub's creepy M.C. (and who 
returns after the show moves to Studio 54 next month), the production's 
center has shifted. Though Robert Sella (who has become a platinum 
blond for the show, bringing to mind a Caucasian Grace Jones) is a 
creditable, enthusiastic replacement for Cumming, neither he nor Ms. 
Leigh walks the line between seediness and showmanship as adroitly 
as their predecessors. As a consequence, you may find your attention 
more drawn to the nominally supporting parts, where there are some 
surprising rewards, especially from Blair Brown, triumphantly cast 
against type in the role of the frumpy middle-class landlady, first 
played in this version by Mary Louise Wilson. But first, the issue 
of Ms. Leigh's Sally. Even a ``Cabaret'' as grim as this one demands, 
as Sally herself puts it, ``a little allure'' from its heroine. This 
was something Ms. Richardson provided in spades, even as she limned 
the character's underlying desperation. Ms. Leigh, whose assumed British 
accent is still wobbly, exhales desperation and defeat in every utterance 
and every pose. Even leading a chorus of cigar-wielding dominatrix 
types (and she is, by the way, a strong and supple dancer), this Sally 
seems to be anticipating a kick in the face. Her black helmet of hair 
may be designed to evoke Louise Brooks' Lulu, the femme fatale of 
the great German silent movie ``Pandora's Box,'' but she is much less 
vamp than victim. The interpretation has arresting moments, as when 
she blows a forlorn kiss to the audience after singing ``Mein Herr.'' 
But Sally has to embody the ambiguous temptations of the Berlin with 
which Clifford (John Benjamin Hickey), her American boyfriend, falls 
in love. A glamour-free Sally has a dangerously low seduction quotient. 
Hickey, on the other hand, has grown into a new assurance since the 
revival opened last spring. Perhaps Ms. Leigh's breakable Sally has 
inspired him to become stronger as a counterbalance. His Clifford 
remains the goony, naive American, but there are more shadings to 
both his moral and sexual ambivalence. Similarly, Michele Pawk and 
Denis O'Hare, as a Nazi-sympathizing prostitute and businessman, have 
refined and deepened performances that were excellent to begin with. 
Their aggressive singing of ``Tomorrow Belongs to Me,'' the Aryan 
anthem, has become the show's shiver-making high point. The revelation, 
however, is Ms. Brown, best known as the winsome Molly Dodd on television 
and too often described in the 1980s as ``the thinking man's sex symbol.'' 
As Fraulein Schneider, a rueful survivor of war and revolution, Ms. 
Brown is tougher and earthier than her predecessor. Ms. Wilson gave 
off a deflated air, like someone who had been hit by a steamroller 
and never risen to her feet. Ms. Brown's Fraulein is definitely still 
standing. There's steel, as well as regret and nostalgia, in her robust 
singing voice. And there's a new sensuality and pathos in her relationship 
with Herr Schultz, the Jewish fruiterer played by Ron Rifkin. Rifkin 
was always affecting in this role; there is now a richness in the 
part that approaches the tragic. They have become the characters whose 
fate you most wonder and worry about when the evening ends. Ms. Leigh's 
Sally, it is clear from her first entrance, is as surely headed for 
destruction as those bound for the concentration camps. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>