<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981020.0415 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Near the end of ``Ghost Town,'' Robert Coover's exuberant, word-rich 
parody of an American western, a photographer shows up to take pictures 
of a man about to be hanged. What ensues is a wonderfully brief and 
witty takeoff on art criticism, gallows humor of a literal sort: ``It 
was his studied opinion, the man said, spreading out his samples and 
compelling attention, that a photograph of one hanged man has a more 
melancholical aspect about it than do those of groups, though men 
strung up in multitudes of a dozen or more not only provide peculiar 
challenges and opportunities for the enterprising photographist, being 
less of a stereotype, as might be said, but they also have a way of 
opening up the foreground of pictorial scrutiny and drawing attention 
to those who have not yet been hanged.'' Several of the features of 
Coover's new novel are contained in that passage. There is the utterly 
deadpan appreciation of the grotesque, for example, and the comically 
vernacular elegance of the writing as well as Coover's almost lubricious 
sense of the mythic. ``Ghost Town'' is a funny, ribald and, as the 
photographer might have put it, melancholical story, set in the sere 
and surreal landscape of a place called the Territory. The Territory 
is a place where Zane Gray or Louis L'Amour might have set their stories, 
and Coover's book is an affectionate and mostly delicious parody of 
what they would have written. I say mostly delicious because it is 
extremely difficult to sustain a parody through more than a few pages. 
Once the reader gets the joke, the rest has a tendency to become a 
variation on the theme, and can get tiresome quickly. Coover's parody 
does flag here and there, becoming repetitive. His ever-shifting landscape, 
a cross between Brett Hart and Salvador Dali, shifts once or twice 
too often. But that is a minor problem. When Coover reaches a high 
point, as he does with his ``photographist,'' the point is high indeed, 
and these points come frequently enough to rescue the book from its 
moments of languor. We begin with a lone cowboy riding toward an empty 
horizon, and within one or two pages, two elements of the book have 
already become apparent. One is Coover's striking gift for language, 
his ability to create a narrative tone in perfect harmony with the 
universe of his story. ``No resistance,'' our narrator says when the 
cowboy comes across a well and tries to crank its rusty handle. ``Like 
wagging a dead man's bones.'' This is a book of constant stylistic 
inventiveness. The second element is the mock mythic quality of a 
story in which the author mimics an archetype but then both lampoons 
and exceeds it. ``Beer is drawn,'' begins a description of a saloon 
in Coover's ghost town. ``An ear is torn off. A bony bald man in a 
white shirt, yellow suspenders, and black string tie bangs out a melody 
on the grand piano, against which a buxom rouged-up lady with wild 
orange curls leans, singing a song about a good girl who went bad.'' 
Here and there, as we follow Coover's cowboy on his antic and fierce 
adventures, we reach a metaphysical moment as the cowboy reflects 
philosophically, striking a blunt, roughneck, profanity-laced existentialism 
that seems actually to improve on Sartre. ``He is a drifter,'' Coover 
has his narrator tell us, ``and one whose history escapes him even 
as he experiences it, and yet to drift is to adventure and to overstudy 
one's history is to be ruled by it, and he is above all a free man, 
intent on pursuing his own meaning even if there is none.'' Coover's 
cowboy, never given a name, dwells in a treacherous, unfeeling universe, 
a place where there is not only overwhelming danger and despair but 
where mirage and reality blend and interchange constantly and duplicitously. 
He sees things that are suddenly behind him or that continue to recede 
toward the horizon as he approaches them. When he finally enters the 
town where the action of ``Ghost Town'' takes place, it is empty, 
as ghost towns are, but soon it is filled with a motley crowd representative 
of all of the western archetypes. There are the gamblers with scars, 
half-breeds, lynch mobs, the gunmen who plug holes in their rivals' 
hearts as casually as they would toss back a shot of red-eye. There 
is the over-endowed saloon singer who falls for the cowboy, and the 
schoolmarm who dresses in strict black and corrects everybody's grammar. 
There are Indians and settlers, rattlesnakes and mustangs and the 
desert surrounding the town like a hostile ocean around an island. 
Coover's characters, including the cowboy, speak in a dialect of the 
author's invention that has the feel of authenticity to it. ``We'da 
hung yu straight off,'' the cowboy is told at one point, ``yu -dodrabbid 
no-good thievin varmint, but on accounta yu wuz wunst a lawman, yu'll 
git a trial, fair'n square, and then we'll hang yu.'' The story itself, 
insofar as there is a story, consists of an ever more farcical series 
of adventures, in which the cowboy, who becomes sheriff, desperately 
escapes the amorous intentions of the saloon singer. Several times 
he is about to be hanged or otherwise maltreated, and each time Coover 
invents some new way for him to be rescued. In the end, a sort of 
final confrontation takes place in which the cowboy voyages through 
the town, whose features and inhabitants are seen as if in fun-house 
mirrors, in an act of redemptive but unrewarded virtue. No good deed 
goes unpunished, the saying goes, and the cowboy is punished by a 
kind of eternal return, back to the condition he was in when we first 
met him, making his lonely way through a world so unsteady that we 
are never sure what exactly is dream and what has actually happened. 
It is a testimony to the power of Coover's writing that when we take 
leave of our hero, we are left with deeper feelings, about loneliness 
and the futility of the quest for meaning, that go well beyond what 
the usual satire would provide. PUBLICATION NOTES: `Ghost Town' By 
Robert Coover 147 pages. Henry Holt &AMP; Co. $24. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>