<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981020.0418 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
A powerful Republican senator dropped his opposition Tuesday to President 
Clinton's choice to head the Food and Drug Administration, clearing 
the way for the Senate to approve the nomination before adjourning. 
The agency has become one of the most influential in the federal government, 
responsible for assuring the safety of drugs, medical devices, food 
and cosmetics for millions of Americans. In June, the president nominated 
Dr. Jane E. Henney, a cancer specialist with experience in government 
and academia, as the agency's next commissioner, replacing Dr. David 
Kessler, who left 18 months ago to become dean of the Yale University 
Medical School. Despite Henney's seemingly unblemished record, a handful 
of conservatives, led by Sen. Don Nickles of Oklahoma, the Republican 
whip, objected to her nomination. They expressed concern that Henney 
might confound Congress by taking advocacy positions on issues like 
abortion and tobacco, just as Kessler had. But Nickles announced on 
the Senate floor Tuesday that Henney and her boss, Secretary of Health 
and Human Services Donna Shalala, had addressed three specific concerns 
and that he was lifting his opposition. A voice vote on Henney's nomination 
could come on Wednesday, the last day the Senate is expected to be 
in session this year. ``I'm confident that she'll be a very able administrator 
who will not play politics, who doesn't have a political agenda, who 
will try to administer the Food and Drug Administration as a professional 
organization to make sure the drugs and medical devices are safe and 
sound for America's population,'' Nickles said. Earlier this year, 
Henney's nomination appeared to be sailing through the Senate. The 
Labor and Human Resources Committee approved her by voice vote in 
September. But Nickles then blocked Henney's nomination until he could 
question her. The Clinton administration insisted for months that 
Nickles had been ``misinformed'' about Henney's positions on several 
issues, and tried to win over the Oklahoman, who is the No. 2 Republican 
in the Senate, with a series of meetings and phone calls in recent 
weeks. Henney cleared her first hurdle by reassuring Nickles, who 
has had one of the most conservative records in the Senate, that if 
confirmed she would not solicit an American manufacturer for RU-486, 
the French abortion pill. Federal money may be used to pay for an 
abortion only if a doctor certifies that without the procedure a pregnant 
woman's health or life is endangered. Shalala promised not to include 
harm to a women's mental health as reason to authorize a federally 
financed abortion. Finally, the Health and Human Services Department 
promised Nickles that it would not deny approval for a state's children's 
health insurance program because that plan did not cover abortion 
for teen-agers. Henney has also promised to carry out changes that 
Congress approved last year that are intended to modernize the food 
and drug agency. ``This is a very encouraging step, but we're not 
taking anything for granted,'' a spokeswoman for the department, Laurie 
Boeder, said Tuesday night. ``Secretary Shalala is still working very 
hard on the nomination.'' Henney, a 51-year-old Indiana native, has 
been the vice president for health sciences at the University of New 
Mexico since 1994. In that job she oversees the daily operations of 
one of the state's largest health care centers, with an annual budget 
of $466 million. She was Kessler's deputy for operations from 1992 
to 1994, but played no role in the agency's rulings on tobacco in 
that period or on RU-486, top department aides said Tuesday night. 
Kessler became a lightning rod for Republican critics by challenging 
the tobacco industry and asserting the agency's authority to regulate 
cigarettes and smokeless tobacco. Much of the agency's authority over 
tobacco, however, was struck down by the 4th U.S. Circuit Court of 
Appeals, in Richmond, Va., after the industry appealed the ruling. 
The government, in turn, appealed that decision, so the breadth of 
the agency's authority will ultimately be determined by the Supreme 
Court. In the spending bill that the House approved Tuesday, though, 
lawmakers included $34 million to help the FDA enforce regulations 
that require retailers to restrict tobacco sales to people 18 years 
or older. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>