<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981020.0222 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Eight years ago, some time after a large chunk of lead broke off its 
top and tumbled to the ground, the crumbling Albert Memorial was swathed 
in an ignominious wrapping. The strange thing was, a lot of people 
liked it better that way. Some compared the new-look monument to a 
Christo installation. ``It looks like a diminutive skyscraper and 
has a nice simple shape, a sculptural character,'' Michael Manser, 
a former president of the Royal Institute of British Architects, said 
approvingly in 1993. ``The light falls on it in rather an extraordinary 
way.'' Now the scaffolding is coming off. After a four-year $18.7 
million overhaul involving more than 100 artisans and craftsman, the 
200-foot-high monument, an expression of the widowed Queen Victoria's 
endless love for her dead husband, Prince Albert, and Britain's most 
elaborate example of high Victorian neo-Gothic architecture, is to 
be unveiled again to the public, its final wrapping removed after 
a slow striptease over the past six months. At a grand sound-and-light 
show in Kensington Gardens on Wednesday, Albert's great-great-granddaughter, 
Queen Elizabeth, will formally reopen the monument, throwing her full 
support behind a structure that the 19th-century philosopher R.G. 
Collingwood once called ``visibly misshapen, corrupt, crawling, verminous'' 
and has been dogged by extremes of opinion ever since. ``This is England's 
Taj Mahal,'' said the architect Alasdair Glass, who has devoted 10 
years to the restoration as English Heritage's project manager for 
the Memorial. Glass compares it to the monument built by the emperor 
Shah Jahan as a memorial to his wife: ``It's the most magnificent 
monument in the world to a concubine who wasn't female,'' he said. 
Stephen Bayley, a design expert and the author of a book on the memorial, 
said: ``In its vulgarity and absurdity, there's something deeply touching 
about it. It's a monument to a much more innocent age.'' It was by 
no means certain that the monument would even be restored. Always 
at the mercy of vicissitudes _ some eras have appreciated Gothic architecture 
more than others _ the monument went deeply out of favor during World 
War I. In 1915, the gilding on the enormous statue of Albert in the 
monument's center was stripped away, ostensibly so it wouldn't glint 
and provide a target for enemy fire, but probably because the German-born 
Albert was none too popular at the time. Deprived of its shiny coating 
and covered with protective sheep's grease, the statue turned an ugly 
greenish shade. During World War II, the monument was hit by friendly 
fire, and repaired only shoddily. Meanwhile, original flaws in the 
design were becoming more and more worrisome. The memorial's builders 
had used a lethal combination of lead and cast-iron that encouraged 
leaks and caused the lead to crack and the iron to expand, letting 
more water in. By the time the lead fragment fell off eight years 
ago, the public was already used to seeing the ground littered with 
little pieces of the intricate Venetian mosaics at the top of the 
monument. The refurbishment has been painstaking, involving, for starters, 
hundreds of sheets of 23{-carat, double-weight gold leaf, which have 
restored the 12-ton, 25-foot-high statue of Albert to its original 
glittering splendor. Sculptors have replaced broken fingers and noses 
that had broken off from the figures of artists and architects depicted 
around the monument's base. Engineers have worked to restore its structural 
stability. And the exercise has given the country a chance to revisit 
the history of Albert of Saxe-Coburg-Gotha, the hardworking German 
cousin who won Queen Victoria's heart and became not only her consort 
but the real power behind the throne. Prince Albert was only 42 when 
he died of typhoid fever contracted after a late-night trip in the 
cold in 1861 to chastise one of his sons over his uncouth behavior. 
His heartbroken widow plunged into deep mourning and wore black for 
the rest of her days. The nation, meanwhile, stricken with remorse 
over its sometimes unkind treatment of Albert in life, decided to 
make it up to him in death. Memorials began to spring up like mushrooms: 
more than 25 free-standing statues of the late prince were built, 
in cities across the country. In London, it was decided that the definitive 
monument would be placed in Kensington Gardens, near the site of the 
1851 Great Exhibition of Works of Industry of All Nations, which Albert 
had organized with great success. The architectural competition to 
design the memorial was won by Sir George Gilbert Scott, Britain's 
leading Victorian neo-Gothic revivalist and a passionate acolyte of 
Augustus Pugin who was yearning to build a Pugin-like structure of 
his own. ``I was awakened from my slumber by the thunder of Pugin's 
writings,'' he once wrote. As a monument to the dead prince, Scott's 
structure was designed to celebrate Albert's belief in progress and 
his catholic interests, which extended to art, architecture, sculpture, 
agriculture, manufacturing and the industrial arts. This was achieved 
by the inclusion of elaborate allegorical statues portraying agriculture 
and the like and by an extraordinary marble frieze at the base of 
the monument. The frieze depicts, in relief, some 169 figures from 
the Western cultural tradition, including such writers as Homer and 
Shakespeare, painters like Duerer and Stephen of Cologne, and a slew 
of architects, from Cheops, who built the Great Pyramid at Giza, to 
Pugin himself, whose frieze appears in front of a modest profile of 
Scott, the only living person in the series (Victoria demanded that 
he be included). Moreover, as an expression of Victorian England's 
view of its central position relative to the rest of the world, the 
monument was meant to show the nation at the height of her powers 
and in all her glory, rising above places like the Americas (represented 
by a buffalo and a group of semiclad figures, one of them wearing 
a feather headdress). As a Gothic temple, it was to be the biggest, 
busiest, most elaborate memorial the country had ever seen, heaving 
with symbolism, a multicolored combination of polished stone, gilded 
metalwork, Italian marble, mosaics and glass jewels towering into 
the sky. What Scott wanted, he said, was to use the miniature medieval 
shrines and reliquaries of the churches of Continental Europe as starting 
points, expanding them on an enormous scale. ``The whole thing is 
blown-up jewelry on a gigantic scale,'' said Glass. ``It really ought 
to be two feet high.'' When the statue was built, at a total cost 
in those days of about 150,000 pounds (the queen paid for half of 
the 6,000-pound Statue of Albert herself), it was declared a worthy 
monument to a man more appreciated in death than in life (except by 
his wife). The queen, admittedly biased, declared it ``really magnificent.'' 
Today, most Britons seem fond of the monument, as a historical icon 
and a symbol of a past that can never be recreated. ``British Victorian 
civilization was absurd in the purest sense, and this is an absurd 
monument to it,'' Bayley said. Although the memorial is a ``gigantic 
work of Victorian schmaltz,'' wrote Rowan Moore, The Evening Standard's 
architecture critic, in a recent appreciation of the monument, that 
is beside the point. ``The main point of the Albert Memorial,'' he 
declared, ``is that, in a supposedly buttoned-up, hardheaded century, 
such an excessive, preposterous but also impressive monument to love 
and grief could have been built in a public place. It is a British 
Taj Mahal, even if it's a Taj Mahal in dubious taste.'' 
</TEXT>
</DOC>