<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981020.0280 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Chancellor-elect Gerhard Schroeder reached a final agreement Tuesday 
on the shape of a new left-of-center government that has pledged itself 
to redistribute taxes, shut down nuclear power plants and restrengthen 
Germany's generous social welfare programs. Three weeks after Schroeder's 
decisive election victory over Chancellor Helmut Kohl, his Social 
Democratic Party reached a broad coalition agreement with the environmentalist 
Green Party. But while the coalition talks have been remarkably smooth 
for the most part, Germany's six leading economic institutes asserted 
Tuesday that Schroeder's economic program will do almost nothing to 
solve the nation's severe unemployment problems. Meanwhile, industry 
leaders denounced Schroeder's tax-reform plan as a recipe for stagnation 
and reiterated their vow to boycott the new government's ``alliance 
for jobs'' _ round-table negotiations embracing industry, labor unions 
and the government over measures to create more jobs. The coalition 
agreement Tuesday was a major milestone in German politics, laying 
down the blueprint and structure for the first new government this 
country has seen since Kohl took power 16 years ago. Never before 
has Germany had a government in which key posts will be held by the 
Green Party, which arose out of the environmental and pacifist movements 
of the 1970s. In general, the new government is younger, more female 
and in many ways more diverse than Kohl's administration. Joschka 
Fischer, the Greens' popular and pragmatic leader, will be the new 
foreign minister and the new ``vice chancellor.'' Although the Green 
Party came of age as a passionate opponent of stationing NATO missiles 
in Germany, Fischer has promised to continue Germany's existing foreign 
policy and its support for NATO. Schroeder and Fischer betrayed no 
concern about the rising tide of economic criticism. At a news conference 
Tuesday in Bonn, both men pronounced themselves satisfied with the 
outcome of their negotiations and confident about the future. But 
the real importance of the coalition agreement is what it says about 
the new government's plans and priorities. Because the coalition marks 
a formal agreement between the parties on their legislative goals, 
the two sides had to reconcile key differences and commit themselves 
to a common platform. For the most part, Schroeder's Social Democrats 
set the tone on almost every issue. In a major change for Germany, 
the new government has committed itself to relaxing citizenship requirements 
for millions of second- and third-generation immigrants from countries 
like Turkey. The two parties also committed themselves to shutting 
down all nuclear power plants, which produce a substantial amount 
of Germany's electricity. In a setback for the Greens, however, the 
new government refused to set a timetable, and many Social Democrats 
say the process will take more than 20 years. By far the biggest controversy 
has been over economic policy, where left-wing traditionalists within 
the Social Democratic Party set the dominant tone. Schroeder's choice 
for economics minister, a computer entrepreneur named Jost Stollmann, 
abruptly walked away from the job on Monday after proclaiming that 
the new government was not ready to do what was necessary to spur 
economic growth. The highlights of that plan call for a broad tax 
reform that is supposed to simplify the country's byzantine system 
and that would reduce the overall burden by about 10 million marks, 
or about 1 percent, a year. In a nod to the Greens, the new government 
will also raise gasoline taxes by about 12 percent in the hope of 
both discouraging fuel consumption and providing money to lower individual 
income tax rates. The other main pillar of the program is a so-called 
``alliance for jobs,'' a series of round-table negotiations in which 
political leaders and unions would try to assemble a package of measures 
to increase employment. Business leaders were already infuriated, 
and reiterated their charge that the tax reform would shift as much 
as $60 billion a year in taxes onto business while providing almost 
no real relief through lower rates. ``It is another step toward stagnation 
and higher unemployment,'' said Hans-Olaf Henkel, head of the German 
Federation of Industry. But Tuesday Schroeder came under fire from 
a more neutral source: the six leading economic research institutes 
that provide regular advice to the German government. In a report, 
the six institutes said the Social Democrats should have tried to 
cut taxes far more dramatically and do more to simplify the system. 
``This is not the kind of comprehensive tax reform that we have seen 
in other countries, and that is a shame,'' said Willi Leibfritz, an 
economist at the Munich-based IFO institute. The institutes also criticized 
the new government's support for much higher wage demands from German 
unions and warned that Schroeder's ``alliance for work'' would have 
little real impact on joblessness. ``According to the view of the 
institutes, it should not be expected that the employment situation 
can be quickly and thoroughly improved by an `alliance for jobs,''' 
the report said. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>