<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981020.0201 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Is it possible that there can be too much of something as perfect 
as chocolate? Countless writers from cooks to psychologists have tried 
to offer the final word on this divine substance. And even the stodgiest 
restaurants attempt to outdo each other with versions of ``death by 
chocolate,'' which usually turns out to mean mud cake sludge. Awash 
in this excess, it can be impossible to truly appreciate chocolate. 
Which is all the more reason to welcome Nick Malgieri's deliciously 
sophisticated ``Chocolate: From Simple Cookies to Extravagant Showstoppers'' 
(HarperCollins, $35). Malgieri, the director of baking at the Peter 
Kump Cooking School, offers 380 recipes for pies, drinks, custards, 
sauces, candies and even blueprints for cookie houses. After a week 
of baking, my love affair with the cocoa bean has been renewed. True 
chocoholics know that chocolate is a universe of flavors, textures 
and pleasures that's as complex as wine or cheese. What's most rewarding 
about Malgieri's book is the way he opens back up the range of what 
chocolate can do, and then sorts it out for you. The bittersweet, 
milk and unsweetened chocolates in his triple chocolate cheesecake, 
for example, don't run together, provided you follow his mixing instructions. 
Instead, they bring out each other's characteristics. There's a fine 
foursquare recipe for chocolate cake with stewed prunes _ a combination 
that may strike the modern reader as strange, but that once wasn't 
so uncommon. No, it doesn't taste like a cake that has fallen on top 
of a hospital breakfast. The dried fruit beautifully underscores the 
richness of the chocolate. And I'm grateful for the recipe for chocolate 
mayonnaise cake, something I haven't had since I was a child. ( Malgieri 
writes that using mayonnaise this way was an idea thought up 60 years 
ago by the wife of a grocer.) It's a light, yet substantial cake, 
just as I remember, and I love the way the bitterness of the cocoa 
begs for a dusting of confectioners' sugar. Malgieri also shows that 
chocolate doesn't always have to be the diva of the dessert cart. 
It performs very nicely even in a supporting role. In his rugelach 
recipe, Malgieri uses a cream cheese dough and a filling of brown 
sugar and cinnamon. Then he lets fly with the semisweet chips. Yes! 
It's too bad that Malgieri's baking instructions are sometimes sketchier 
than they should be. One cookie recipe calls for putting two pans 
in the oven at the same time, in the upper and lower thirds of the 
oven. He doesn't add that you should switch the sheets midway to insure 
even baking. After you've made the supernatural brownies, he asks 
that you cover them up and leave them alone until the next day, without 
explaining why. That's Torture-by-Brownie. The reason, as I discovered 
for myself, is that they'll turn into fudgey melt-in-your mouth bars, 
and cut better, too. Beginners who don't own expensive kitchenware 
will find plenty within their reach, like the chocolate biscotti. 
And cooks eager to stretch their skills will find Malgieri an inspiring 
coach. His guidelines for tempering _ the process of melting chocolate 
and then cooling it and then reheating it so that it coats smoothly 
and seamlessly _ are the least anxiety-producing that I've yet read. 
SUPERNATURAL BROWNIES Adapted from ``Chocolate: From Simple Cookies 
to Extravagant Showstoppers'' Time: 1 hour, plus overnight resting 
16 tablespoons unsalted butter, plus additional for buttering pan 
8 ounces bittersweet or semisweet chocolate, cut into \-inch pieces 
4 large eggs { teaspoon salt 1 cup granulated sugar 1 cup firmly packed 
dark brown sugar 2 teaspoons vanilla extract 1 cup all-purpose flour 
2 cups ({ pound) walnut or pecan pieces (optional). 1. Set a rack 
at the middle level of the oven and preheat to 350 degrees. Butter 
a 13-by-9-by-2-inch pan, line it with parchment paper or foil and 
butter the parchment or foil. 2. Bring a medium saucepan of water 
to a boil and turn off heat. In a large, heatproof bowl, combine butter 
and chocolate and set over pan of water. (A double-boiler may also 
be used.) Stir occasionally until melted. 3. In a large bowl, whisk 
eggs until thick and lemon-colored, then whisk in salt, sugars and 
vanilla. Stir in chocolate and butter mixture, then fold in flour. 
4. Pour batter into prepared pan and spread evenly. Bake for about 
45 minutes, until top has formed a shiny crust and batter is moderately 
firm. Cool in pan on a rack. Wrap pan in plastic wrap and let rest 
overnight at room temperature or refrigerated. 5. To cut brownies, 
bring to room temperature, unmold onto a a cookie sheet, remove paper 
and place a second cookie sheet on top. Turn brownies right side up 
and trim away edges. Cut brownies into 2-inch squares. Yield: 24 brownies. 
Note: Brownies are best stored individually wrapped, in a tin or plastic 
container with a tight-fitting cover, or in the freezer. If you have 
a 12-by-18-inch half-sheet pan, you may double this recipe easily. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>