<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981020.0365 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Organizers of a midtown rally to mourn the slaying of a gay college 
student in Wyoming charged Tuesday that ``the police created chaos'' 
that led to a melee Monday night with sporadic clashes between the 
police and demonstrators and scores of arrests. ``The police refused 
to negotiate with us. The police refused even to talk to us,'' said 
Sara Pursley, one of the organizers of the demonstration, which did 
not have a permit. ``And by doing so, they created far more havoc 
in the city than we had ever planned to create.'' The police responded 
Tuesday that they were forced to make arrests only after demonstrators 
spilled out from the sidewalks into the streets, blocking traffic. 
The march, called to protest the killing of Matthew Shepard, 21, who 
died on Oct. 12 after being beaten and lashed to a fence like a scarecrow 
in what the authorities called a bias-related crime, was billed as 
a peaceful ``political funeral,'' organized on short notice by word 
of mouth among gays and lesbians, e-mail notices and flyers distributed 
in Manhattan's Chelsea, Brooklyn's Park Slope and other neighborhoods. 
But as some 4,000 protesters gathered around the fountain outside 
the Plaza Hotel shortly after 6 p.m., trouble quickly started. The 
crowd, too large to be contained on the sidewalks, tried to march 
down Fifth Avenue and the police began making arrests, starting with 
the parade's negotiators, organizers and marshals. Disorganized but 
passionate, the crowd surged south anyway, at one point becoming trapped 
between police lines on West 43d Street between Fifth Avenue and the 
Avenue of the Americas, then charged by police horses. In the aftermath, 
it appeared that both the organizers and the police were stunned by 
the size of the turnout and the way that Shepard's death had galvanized 
emotions. ``We were expecting about 500 people when we started putting 
this together,'' on the night of Shepard's death, Ms. Pursley said. 
``But by the time it rolled around, we realized it was going to be 
pretty gigantic.'' The police, for their part, had only about 70 officers 
assigned to the demonstration as it began. A Level 1 mobilization, 
doubling the police presence with officers from the Manhattan North 
and South task forces, was quickly called. A Level 2 mobilization, 
drawing in task forces from the other boroughs, was announced at 6:20, 
followed 20 minutes later by a Level 3, drawing squads of officers 
from all Manhattan precincts. A highly unusual Level 4 mobilization, 
pulling in hundreds of officers from all over the city, was announced 
at 7 p.m. The police first tried to block demonstrators from marching 
on Fifth Avenue, but the protesters swung west on West 55th Street, 
then south, directly into the oncoming traffic on Avenue of the Americas. 
Demonstration leaders said one police commander told them they could 
have Fifth Avenue, and the march went back east on West 54th Street. 
But another commander blocked Fifth Avenue with a solid line of officers 
and motor scooters at West 42d Street. Some marshals tried, unsuccessfully, 
to halt the demonstration at West 44th Street, then raced ahead, linked 
arms and forced the marchers only West 43d Street, where there was 
a long standoff. ``Shame, shame, shame,'' chanted the demonstrators, 
as brief, club-swinging charges by the police broke out. Protesters, 
including a woman in a wheelchair, were arrested and loaded aboard 
hastily commandeered transit buses, and the horses were brought into 
the packed crowd. Demonstrators hurled water bottles and candles at 
the police. Eventually large groups of protesters worked their way 
past the Public Library on Fifth Avenue and West 42d Street and went 
on _ in a markedly calmer, almost choreographed manner, one demonstrator 
remarked _ to Madison Square Park, where the rally ended around 9 
p.m. The police, who by this time had greatly increased their numbers, 
allowed the march to continue. There was confusion, too, over the 
number of arrests. The police said Tuesday that 84 people had been 
arrested. But the organizers, at a news conference at the midtown 
headquarters of the Gay and Lesbian Anti-Violence Project, said their 
legal observers had counted at least 136 arrests. One reason for the 
discrepancy could be that some people taken into custody were later 
released because, in the confusion of making many arrests, some officers 
failed to fill out necessary paper work. One of the first people arrested 
in front of the Plaza Hotel, Mark Robinson, said in a telephone interview 
from his holding cell 24 hours later that he had still not been before 
a judge. `'The degree of disorganization here is staggering,'' Robinson 
said. One serious problem was that some of those arrested, most of 
whom were held at least overnight, were said to be taking a complex 
series of drugs to combat HIV infection or AIDS. ``I'm really terrified 
right now,'' said John Irizarry, who missed two complete dosages of 
the 44 pills he must take daily for multiple complications from AIDS, 
including kidney and heart disease. ``Whatever you do, you can't miss 
a dose of your medicine, it could definitely be life-threatening. 
I'm just scared to death. ``I had no idea whatsoever this would happen,'' 
Irizarry said, speaking from the office of his doctor, Paul Curtis 
Bellman, where he was being rehydrated intravenously because he had 
little water in jail. ``I just went to a peaceful candlelight vigil. 
It's my first time being arrested or having any contact with the police 
other than just asking directions.'' Ms. Pursley, the organizer, said 
there had been no effort to apply for a demonstration permit because 
``the political climate in New York City now is almost impossible,'' 
and the police would have tried to shunt the demonstration to side 
streets or deserted areas. Asked if there had been any contacts with 
the police before the crowd materialized at the Plaza, she said there 
had not. But, she added, the lack of a permit was ``no excuse for 
the way the police responded. It was cruel and brutal.'' As the crowd 
dispersed Monday night, First Deputy Police Commissioner Patrick Kelleher 
defended the police tactics, saying: `'They had a right to gather. 
But once they left the sidewalk, they were endangering the motorists, 
they were endangering the pedestrians. And we were forced to make 
arrests.'' Mayor Rudolph Giuliani said Tuesday that, while he sympathized 
with the marcher's cause, ``the police reacted to people attempting 
to block the most crowded city in America. And if they do it again, 
precisely the same thing will happen. ``The police originally, obviously, 
did not have the correct number of police there; they didn't know 
this was going to take place,'' the mayor said, adding: ``I very much 
support the point that the lawful marchers were making, but I'm very 
unsympathetic to those who acted illegally. I would hope the organizers 
of the march are responsible enough to make that distinction.'' 
</TEXT>
</DOC>