<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981020.0264 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Spurred on by the recent death of a star graduate student who killed 
himself with cyanide, Harvard is changing some of its policies to 
improve support through the stressful pre-doctoral years, university 
officials said Tuesday. Jason Altom, a 27-year-old, fifth-year graduate 
student in chemistry, was the third Harvard graduate student to commit 
suicide since last year, and the one whose death carried the most 
pointed message to the university about the pain for some of graduate-school 
life. In a suicide letter provided by his family to the Harvard Crimson, 
Altom said his death could have been avoided and wrote: ``Professors 
here have too much power over the lives of their grad students.'' 
He supported the idea of arranging for a group of professors to oversee 
students' thesis work, diluting the power of a student's direct adviser: 
``If I had such a committee now I know things would be different,'' 
he wrote. That was back in August that Altom wrote the note and then 
killed himself using cyanide taken from his laboratory. In September, 
the Chemistry Department responded by announcing a nine-point plan 
that included creating just the kind of committee Altom had advocated, 
along with offering more counseling, more social mixing, lectures 
about coping with stress, and more advice on careers both in and out 
of academia. Such a multiple-mentor plan had already been under consideration, 
Dr. Alan Long, director of graduate studies at Harvard's Chemistry 
Department, said Tuesday, but ``thoughts about implementing such a 
system were certainly revived'' by Altom's writings. More broadly, 
Harvard's Graduate School of Arts and Sciences surveyed its students 
during registration this fall about their relationships with their 
advisers, and has been conducting a series of student-faculty talks 
on the issue. It has also begun a series of ``Succeeding in Graduate 
School'' lectures on topics from time management to the how-to's of 
communicating with an adviser, and added instruction to help foreign 
students adjust to America and Harvard. ``It's not that this recent 
student death has been the trigger for initiating these discussions,'' 
said Margot Gill, the administrative dean of the graduate school. 
``But we don't want to miss the opportunity now to be sure we have 
asked the question across all of our departments: `Is there more we 
ought to be doing?''' The recent suicides _ by Altom; Fung Lam, a 
first-year graduate student who had just begun in the same lab as 
Altom last year; and Hailei Ge, a computer-science student who jumped 
from a building _ have cast a spotlight on the difficulties for some 
of high-pressure graduate school life, especially at such a competitive 
university. ``This is not an isolated incident by any stretch,'' said 
Kevin Boyer, executive director of the National Association of Graduate-Professional 
Students, which represents the campuses of about half the country's 
2 million graduate and professional students, about 400,000 of them 
doctoral candidates. ``There are a lot of examples of students who 
react to the stress badly, and I think while the situation isn't typical, 
it's something more common than people will admit.'' ``Graduate school,'' 
he said, `` is a highly stressful situation in that it's a kind of 
apprenticeship-slash-employment-slash-academic experience all rolled 
into one, and as a result you have students with significant financial 
pressures, significant research pressures, significant teaching obligations, 
and you have to layer on all of that the familial issues, because 
half the people in graduate school are married.'' In research-oriented 
graduate school, a student's adviser can often take on particularly 
central importance as the provider of the student's grant money, instruction, 
guidance on thesis-writing and even selection of the thesis-approval 
committee. Boyer said that his association advocates the kind of multiple-mentor 
system that the Harvard Chemistry Department has just approved, and 
in particular, he said, it is important for students to have a faculty 
mentor other than their adviser _ to whom they can complain if they 
have adviser problems, and who can encourage them to have a life outside 
the lab or library. Eight graduate students have committed suicide 
at Harvard since 1980, officials said _ not an unusual rate for a 
university. Of those, three have been in the laboratory of Altom's 
mentor, Nobel-Prize-winning chemist Elias J. Corey. But Long asserted 
Tuesday that by all indications, the first two deaths, one last year 
and one in 1987, had nothing to do with the students' work in Chemistry. 
One student, he noted, had been very successful in his work, and the 
other had barely begun. Despite their efforts, Harvard officials said 
Tuesday, they expect no quick fix for the tricky adviser-advisee relationship, 
in large part because it depends so heavily on the particular human 
foibles of each teacher and student. Experts agreed that such relationships 
tend naturally to be fraught with complexity, intensity and tension. 
''Students are interested in impressing their professors,'' said Anne 
Pruitt, scholar in residence at the Council of Graduate Schools in 
Washington, D.C. ``They want to become scholars; they want to do a 
good job; they know their professors are the persons who are going 
to take the lead in their placement whenever they graduate, and so 
it's for many a high-pressure kind of experience. The student's future 
is on the line'' 
</TEXT>
</DOC>