<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981020.0342 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Lawyers for President Clinton and Paula Jones clashed Tuesday before 
a panel of federal appeals court judges over her attempt to reinstate 
her sexual harassment lawsuit, and the judges seemed clearly sympathetic 
to her argument that the case was wrongly dismissed last April. Ms. 
Jones' lawyers implored the three-judge panel of the 8th U.S. Circuit 
Court of Appeals to allow a jury to hear her claim that Clinton is 
a habitual sexual predator who crudely propositioned her in 1991. 
While the lawyers offered a variety of arguments, the issue they pressed 
most forcefully was the president's admission that he misled them 
about having engaged in a sexual relationship with Monica Lewinsky. 
James Fisher, a Dallas attorney representing Ms. Jones, told the judges 
that Clinton repeatedly ``split hairs, dodged questions and lied'' 
in the January 17 deposition when he was asked about his relationship 
with the former White House intern. ``This court needs to send a message 
to Washington that the civil justice system will not countenance perjury, 
obstruction of justice or subornation of perjury,'' he said. It was 
Clinton's misleading if not untruthful responses in the Jones deposition 
last January that led independent counsel Kenneth Starr to send a 
report to Congress that the president may have committed impeachable 
offenses. Clinton's lawyers countered that testimony about Ms. Lewinsky 
was not relevant to the case and that, even if Ms. Jones' account 
was true, U.S. District Judge Susan Webber Wright in Little Rock, 
Ark., was correct to throw out the case because the allegations did 
not amount to sexual harassment. At least two of the three judges 
seemed by their comments and questions during the hour-long arguments 
to be leaning towards Ms. Jones' contention that a jury, not the judge, 
should decide whether what happened to her constituted sexual harassment. 
One of the two judges, Pasco M. Bowman, the chief of the panel, was 
openly dismissive of suggestions that the conduct of which Clinton 
is accused _ inviting Ms. Jones to a hotel suite in Little Rock in 
1991 and making a crude sexual request _ could not amount to legal 
sexual harassment. Bowman did not even ask any questions of Fisher, 
who held forth for the first half hour, and only began asking challenging 
questions when Amy Sabrin, Clinton's lawyer, began her presentation. 
The Supreme Court and lower federal courts have been wrestling in 
recent years with what degree of offensive behavior rises to the level 
of sexual harassment, and Ms. Sabrin sought to portray Ms. Jones' 
charges as falling far short of those standards. She said that Ms. 
Jones suffered no harm at her workplace, suffered no psychological 
symptoms from the alleged encounter and her contact with Clinton in 
the hotel room and on two other occasions amounted to only about 15 
minutes. ``How bad is bad enough,'' Bowman asked at one point. He 
said that recent court decisions seemed to recognize that even one 
incident might be severe enough to be deemed sexual harassment. Ms. 
Sabrin seemed to have little success arguing that Wright was correct 
in ruling that testimony about Ms. Lewinsky was not material to Ms. 
Jones' case. Bowman said that if the appeals panel reinstated the 
case, evidence about Clinton's liaison with Ms. Lewinsky should serve 
to establish a pattern and practice on Clinton's part. Judge Donald 
R. Ross asked Fisher why the Lewinsky matter was relevant if it involved 
consensual sex. Fisher said Ms. Jones was entitled to use the Lewinsky 
issue to demonstrate that Clinton rewarded subordinate women in the 
workplace with opportunities and punished those who refused to comply. 
Miles W. Lord, who retired as the chief judge of the 8th Circuit in 
1985 and who had been appointed by President John F. Kennedy, sat 
through Tuesday's argument and said afterward that he believed it 
did not go well for Clinton. ``These fellows are all pretty strong 
conservatives and it clearly showed through,'' he said in an interview. 
Ross seemed a bit sympathetic to the president, he said, but on balance 
still seemed inclined to send Ms. Jones' case to a jury. Ms. Jones 
canceled plans to appear in the courtroom Tuesday because, her lawyers 
said, she could not obtain baby sitting help to come from her home 
in California. Clinton was not expected to appear but a small folding 
chair with a tag reserving the chair for ``William Jefferson Clinton'' 
was set up in the well of the courtroom. Both sides have been in intense 
negotiations in the last few weeks to settle the case that has brought 
Clinton to the brink of impeachment. The talks broke down over the 
weekend when Ms. Jones' camp of competing sets of lawyers, would-be 
benefactors and informal advisers fell to bickering over how much 
money she should get to withdraw the lawsuit. The White House swiftly 
rejected her final demand that Clinton pay her $1 million as part 
of a $2 million settlement package. It is unusual for a party to try 
and settle a case it has already won, but White House officials have 
said that they are expecting the appeals court to reinstate the case. 
More importantly, Clinton and his advisers have decided that eliminating 
the Jones case from the political landscape will help them in dealing 
with Congress over impeachment. Robert Bennett, Clinton's principal 
attorney in the Jones lawsuit, was present Tuesday but did not argue 
the case. When Clinton swore he had not engaged in sexual relations 
with Ms. Lewinsky during the January deposition, Bennett reinforced 
the denial. Bennett has since written to Wright saying he, too, was 
misled by the president, and his withdrawal from Tuesday's argument 
was widely seen as an effort to avoid questioning about that from 
the judges. He later told reporters that the last settlement offer 
from the Jones camp was unacceptable both because the $1 million demand 
was too high and because the other $1 million was to come from Abe 
Hirschfeld, a New York-based real estate magnate. Hirschfeld has said 
he wants to provide the money to help end what he has described as 
a silly lawsuit, but White House officials are wary of his involvement. 
It is unclear, they said, whether his contribution would be a donation 
to Clinton. Bennett said he still hoped that a settlement could be 
achieved in coming days, a sentiment echoed a few minutes later before 
the same group of reporters by Donovan J. Campbell, one of Ms. Jones' 
lawyers. Ms. Jones has her own powerful reasons for achieving a settlement. 
Even if she were to have her case reinstated and go on to win at trial, 
there is no guarantee she would win damages anywhere near the $700,000 
the president has offered. The three judges on the panel hearing Tuesday's 
argument, all appointees of Republican presidents and regarded as 
judicial conservatives, have ruled against Clinton in the past on 
other matters in the Jones case. Bowman and Judge Arlen C. Beam, who 
also seemed sympathetic to Ms. Jones, were appointed by President 
Reagan; Ross was appointed by President Richard M. Nixon. Moreover, 
they have in recent months become more open to allowing sexual harassment 
cases to go to a jury. In July, for example, a separate three-judge 
panel that was also headed by Bowman, ruled that a female worker at 
United Parcel Service in Little Rock could bring her case to trial. 
In that case, a lower court judge had thrown out the complaint on 
summary judgment, as did Wright in Ms. Jones' case. The 8th Circuit 
judges said they were making the ruling even though they believed 
the case was borderline, because a supervisor did nothing more than 
pat the woman on the back, brush up against her and tell her she smelled 
nice. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>