<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981020.0012 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
While walking onto the practice field one day late last week, Jets 
Coach Bill Parcells, in that loud, raspy voice of his, said something 
to quarterback Vinny Testaverde that shocked a small group of Jets 
players accustomed to shocking Parcells statements. ``Vinny,'' several 
of the players recalled the coach saying, ``you're my quarterback 
for the rest of the season.'' It wasn't exactly what Parcells said 
that had the players shaking their heads, it was the timing. Standing 
5 feet behind Testaverde was Glenn Foley, the former starter and now 
the backup. There was no question in the minds of the players that 
Parcells made the statement strictly to agitate Foley. Parcells' words 
may have been accurate, even if they were meant to tweak Foley. Testaverde's 
excellent performance in Monday night's 24-14 victory over New England 
gives him the job, probably for the rest of the year. Parcells may 
have flip-flopped his quarterbacks more than a stack of blueberry 
pancakes, but the wheel has stopped on Testaverde for the near future. 
Congratulations, Vinny, just watch your back. Ask Foley. The question 
is, what does Testaverde do with his new position, and what does it 
mean for the Jets' future? Testaverde played well against New England. 
His throws were sharp, and at times his command of the offense was 
outstanding. He took two tough hits in the third quarter and got up 
immediately, seemingly wanting to use national television as a stage 
to counter the talk that he is a soft player. He scrambled well to 
buy time. And Testaverde saved the Jets' season by leading the team 
to a victory. Overall, he was great on one of the biggest stages in 
football. And that's the problem. What happened Monday night was encouraging 
for the immediate future, for this month and this season. But eventually 
Parcells must decide if Testaverde is the man who can lead the Jets 
to a Super Bowl. Is his good play this season a sign that Testaverde 
has shed the inconsistency of his career, or just a mirage, with the 
erratic Testaverde waiting just around the corner ready to pop off 
his mask in time for Halloween? Is Testaverde the answer? Can a player 
whose record as a starter is 51-83 in 12 years get the Jets to a Super 
Bowl? Testaverde deserves a break because he has played on some bad 
teams, but there are very few people in the National Football League 
who believe that Testaverde, at age 34, can still win a championship. 
But against a top-notch Patriots defense, he looked like a champion. 
He may be poised to prove people wrong in a big way. It was uncanny 
how well he played. The Patriots threw body after body into his face, 
and Testaverde would calmly sidestep the pass rush and throw a dart. 
Late in the game, Testaverde tossed a 43-yard pass to Dedric Ward 
to seal the game. He finished 22 of 32 with 3 touchdowns. He got practically 
every receiver involved in the offense, especially Keyshawn Johnson, 
who had 4 catches for 78 yards. What this means for Foley is that 
he is the loser in the Jets' quarterback derby. Foley is 1-7 as a 
starter, and his great game against San Francisco earlier this season 
seems like an eternity ago. Foley may be good, but the only thing 
anyone can go by is his record. What also hurts Foley is that his 
relationship with Parcells has reached rock bottom. The trip there 
started when, according to several Jets players, Parcells and Foley 
got into a loud, expletive-filled argument this month, with Foley 
protesting how Parcells has put him on the quarterback merry-go-round. 
Foley is not a selfish person, so he hasn't tried to sabotage Testaverde 
in the locker room in any way like some backups do. After the Jets' 
first series against the Patriots, in which Testaverde took the offense 
56 yards in eight plays for a touchdown, Foley was the first to congratulate 
him on the sideline. When speaking to the media, Foley is mostly upbeat. 
But teammates say Foley is bitter about his situation. He constantly 
complains to them about Parcells and wonders what his future is with 
the Jets, they say. The future of the position as a whole, despite 
Testaverde's great game, is in doubt. Once the season is over, the 
Jets will still probably explore the free-agent market, which is easier 
said than done. The choices are thin, filled with land mines like 
Kerry Collins and Scott Mitchell. Maybe Parcells gambles and sticks 
with Testaverde, and the two make a Super Bowl run together next year. 
It would be a risk, asking an aging quarterback to lead your team, 
but Parcells has never been someone shy about playing poker. And right 
now, Testaverde may be the best bet he has. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>