<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981020.0184 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
How much to tip is an anxiety-provoking question that follows a traveler 
from airport to hotel to restaurant, nationally and internationally. 
Do you tip a hotel-room housekeeper? How about the masseuse? The golf 
pro? A restaurant's captain? The general manager of the Inn at Union 
Square in San Francisco, which has banned tipping, says the ban ranks 
high on guests' lists of favorite features. But few have followed 
this lead. Generally, tipping is the custom throughout America. Customs 
overseas are usually noted in guide books, though the size of tips 
may not be specified. In Japan, for example, service charges are added 
and there is no tipping at hotels or in taxis, according to Marian 
Goldberg, a spokeswoman for the Japan National Tourist Organization. 
But she said tour guides in Japan are not offended by tips. At the 
edge of some aspects of American travel, the service charge added 
to the tab can be seen working its way in. For example, it's not uncommon 
now to see on a menu, ``For parties of eight or more, a service charge 
of XX percent will be added to the total bill.'' The percentage is 
frequently 15 or 20 percent. Restaurants want to present one check, 
not juggle eight, and getting a hot meal in front of so many people 
at once is difficult and individual tips may not cover this extra 
effort. Resorts add service charges to bills because otherwise the 
guest may envision a battalion of hands held out: bellmen, housekeepers, 
waiters, golf pros, bartenders, lifeguards and many others. In addition, 
it is difficult to figure out where to keep cash while lifting weights. 
On the other hand, when it is clear that a service is performed by 
someone who is not a resort employee, there should be a tip: for a 
massage, I usually give 10 percent, rounded up, but the manager of 
a New York health club said that 15 to 20 percent was the usual amount 
there. There aren't a lot of general guides about tipping. Original 
Tipping Page (www.cis.columbia.edu/homepages/gonzalu/tipping/tipping.html) 
may be found on the Web, but its rates strike me as eccentric. Here 
are a few rules of thumb, with the understanding that some organizations, 
like cruise companies, publish guidelines on amounts and that these 
should take precedence. But no tip should be provided when service 
is discourteous. It is demoralizing to those providing good service 
and undermines the idea that tipping is optional. Step 1: Plan The 
primary way to avoid tipping anxiety is to be prepared. A supply of 
new one-dollar bills should be held at the ready. Really fussy travelers 
on long trips carry along smaller envelopes or notecards and envelopes 
to meet situations where naked currency seems awkward, for concierges, 
for example. At hotels and motels, according to Katherine Potter, 
a spokeswoman for the American Hotel and Motel Association, tips typically 
do not rise and fall with the price of the room. Like most experts 
in this area, Ms. Potter emphasized that no tip is ever required, 
but this nostrum does little to soothe a traveler who wants to avoid 
seeming stingy or a fool. I have watched people suffer for hours after 
grossly overtipping through error. The solution is to forget the error; 
recipients focus on their good luck, not the scorn of the donor. The 
person who cleans the hotel room should get $1 or $2 a guest for each 
night, and more if you are messy or have asked for many extra deliveries. 
A prompt delivery of an iron and board is worth $2. Travelers who 
go to conventions and meetings in hotels might want to be sure to 
tip well because they are identified as representatives of an organization 
and want to create good will. If you get particular help, ask whether 
the employee will be on duty the day you leave. If not, tip on the 
spot. Leaving the tip on the bathroom counter helps assure it gets 
to the person who does the work. Room service can be a bother. Check 
the menu first to see if a service charge will be added. A tip beyond 
that is not necessary unless there is something special about the 
delivery. If no charge is added, 15 to 20 percent of the bill is fine. 
The person who brings up the bags and opens the room for you should 
get $1 or $2, unless you have a whole trolley of luggage, when it 
should be more. The door attendant who calls a cab should get $1. 
Employees at airports indicate that tips range from $1 to $2 a bag. 
Fred Baer, manager of ground transportation for the Port Authority 
of New York and New Jersey, said that the airlines had policies that 
skycaps _ the uniformed porters who are the only people legally allowed 
to carry bags at New York airports _ were not allowed to solicit tips. 
At Terminal 4 of Kennedy International Airport, Baer said, a minimum 
charge of $1 a bag is in effect, and signs on the skycaps' carts note 
this. Some Aren't Tipped Economy hotels with no bell staff may have 
security guards in the registration area. Anthony Marshall, president 
and dean of the Educational Institute of the American Hotel and Motel 
Association, said that guards help prevent crime just by their presence, 
and that they should not have tasks that take them away. But he said, 
if they escort a guest to a room, they can be tipped like a bellman. 
Salaried people who sit behind desks, like managers of hotels, are 
not usually tipped. Luxury-hotel concierges are. When they have really 
delivered _ tickets for a hit show for that night, say _ they should 
get substantial money (perhaps $50 for a couple of $150 tickets) in 
an envelope, with a note; Incidentally, calling ahead with requests 
to the concierge can produce better results. Cruise lines that permit 
tipping _ some luxury lines like Seabourn and Silversea do not _ are 
not shy about providing guidance on giving. Almost everywhere, a 15 
percent service charge is added to wine and liquor service, so no 
further tip is needed. Housekeepers and dining room workers on cruise 
ships get nominal pay, and tips are part of their basic compensation. 
If no suggestions are provided, spokeswomen for the Cruise Lines International 
Association, a marketing group, say that the basic tips are $2.50 
to $3 a day per passenger for the waiter, the same amount for whoever 
cleans the cabin, and half as much for the dining room bus employee. 
Flight attendants are not tipped. Waiters on trains are tipped as 
in restaurants: 15 to 20 percent. If the meal is included the price 
of the ticket, it is easy to be generous: $5 at a minimum. People 
at the car-rental counter are not tipped, but if someone brings your 
car to the door in the rain and loads your bags, it's worth $1 or 
$2. Tour guides may be tipped. Paul Luskin, secretary of the Guides 
Association of New York, recommends $1 a person. ``But never tip if 
it is asked for,'' he said. At the Inn on Union Square where tipping 
was banned in June 1995, ``We asked how much they earned from tips,'' 
said Brooks Bayly, the general manager. ``Then we raised their pay 
that much and abolished tips.'' ``We do have a codicil,'' he added. 
``If a guest tries to tip an employee three times, we tell them to 
accept. Don't want to make a guest mad.'' 
</TEXT>
</DOC>