<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981020.0258 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
To the Russians crazy enough to live there, summer in the Siberian 
Arctic is merely a deep breath before the next winter, a few weeks 
of melted ice and midnight sun in which to gird for the next deep 
freeze. Either they use those weeks to haul in enough food and fuel 
to make it to the next thaw or they shiver and starve through the 
coming months of darkness. The freighter Kapitan Glotov was skimming 
eastward along that Arctic coast in late September, loaded with half 
of the next year's food supply for much of northeastern Siberia, when 
the ship's Dutch owners radioed the skipper an order: stop. And so 
it did, just short of the tiny port of Tiksi, where it had planned 
to unload its cargo onto barges before the rivers turned to ice, when 
barges could still distribute it. ``The shipping company kept sending 
us instructions that we could enter the port of Tiksi and unload only 
with its permission,'' said the freighter's captain, Aleksandr L. 
Vyalov. ``The problem was that the freight bill could not be paid.'' 
The real problem was that the bottom had dropped from Russia's economy. 
As the ship steamed toward Tiksi, the rubles that Russia had pledged 
to pay the $475,000 freight bill lost two-thirds of their value. The 
Dutch demanded more money. The bank holding the cash was in limbo, 
unable to pay even a kopeck. And Siberia, oblivious to the whole dispute, 
began to freeze over. It is easy to call Russia's travails political 
or fiscal, but here in the Siberian republic of Yakutia, where a bad 
debt can condemn thousands to months of hunger, they can be a matter 
of survival. All across Arctic Russia, almost 40 percent of the nation's 
land mass, at least eight million people must be fed and kept warm. 
That vast enterprise leached untold billions of rubles from the old 
Soviet Union. Now it soaks up billions from the Russian government, 
which finds it too expensive and logistically daunting to move from 
Siberia many of the millions of people the Soviet authorities lured 
there to mine the region's fabulous natural wealth. Among the people 
who run these vast, frozen lands, there is growing concern that the 
supply effort _ like the Russian economy, the government and the country's 
adventure with capitalism _ is cracking under the strain. ``In Soviet 
times they brought not just the minimum amount of supplies, but `insurance' 
reserves too,'' the governor of Yakutia, Vasily M. Vlasov, said in 
an interview. ``In the Arctic they supplied diesel oil and food for 
12 months and even more, half the next year. ``Since '91 we've survived 
six, seven years on the previous regime. As of today, those reserves 
are 100 percent exhausted.'' In a situation that seems tailored for 
panic, no one seems to doubt that the North will slog through. The 
only question is how, and for how long. ``We've gotten used to getting 
by without money,'' said Valery L. Popov, Yakutia's minister of housing 
and communal services. ``But this cannot go on forever.'' Life in 
the northern latitudes has never been a sidewalk brunch. But what 
ails Russia at large has put the north on the critical list. Food 
and heat cost money, and Russia has none. The Russian government is 
too broke to meet the full cost of sending supplies to the Arctic. 
Regional governments like Yakutia's are picking up some slack, even 
as the ruble's crash has sent the cost of food, fuel and transportation 
skyrocketing. But many regions are also broke. And so some Arctic 
areas, especially along Russia's long border with Alaska, face a winter 
in which villages may get few or no supplies at all. Russia's disastrous 
harvest, the worst in 45 years, led farming regions to husband their 
crops instead of exporting them, which led to hoarding in populous 
regions like Moscow. Food imports _ up to half of some meats _ have 
all but dried up because of the fiscal crisis. Northern regions at 
the end of this food chain are left with a pittance. Resupply is further 
hobbled by the near-collapse of Russia's fleet of nuclear-powered 
icebreakers, half of which are now dockbound by mechanical problems 
or lack of money. Cuts in the meteorological budget may have led to 
a seriously late forecast for winter's onset _ and the stranding of 
supply barges that now cannot sail up frozen rivers. Overall, ``the 
situation is serious, but it's not irretrievable,'' said Valery G. 
Georg, deputy chief of the Russian government's committee on northern 
affairs. Along Russia's east coast, from the Bering Strait to northern 
Japan, there is talk of evacuating villages left without food or fuel. 
In a telegram on Oct. 2, the elders of the Chukchi Autonomous District, 
which borders the strait, warned Moscow that food and medicine were 
running out and their remaining fuel would last less than three weeks. 
Parts of the Kamchatka Peninsula, opposite the western tip of the 
Aleutian Islands of Alaska, received no deliveries before navigable 
rivers froze over. Russian public television last month called the 
situation there catastrophic. Norilsk, a big smelting center in north-central 
Russia, is short of money for winter supplies because frozen rivers 
have blocked exports of metals. Even in European Russia, where good 
roads insure the delivery of supplies, Norway and Finland are offering 
relief aid to those who can no longer afford food. In northern Siberia, 
where cheap river transport is now a frozen-out option, villagers 
are pinning hope on hugely expensive zimniks _ winter roads, built 
on the frozen rivers _ and resupply by air. ``As of today, we have 
enough flour, salt and cereals. And that's it,'' said Georgy N. Fyodorov, 
administrator of the Ust-Yansk District, an Arctic coast area three 
times the size of Switzerland that is home to 14,000 people. One obvious 
solution is to relocate people from the most remote areas, where life 
and work are simply beyond normal economics. But costs are enormous, 
and there are thousands and thousands of people who need to be moved. 
This is a world of cold, darkness and sometimes hardship completely 
alien to Westerners: towns and even mid-rise cities built entirely 
on stilts sunk deep into the permafrost; temperatures so low _ 65 
below zero for weeks on end _ that autos have double-pane windshields 
and houses triple-pane windows; rivers that in some places are ice-free 
only two or three weeks a year; a tundra larger than Western Europe, 
without a single railroad and with precious few highways. And almost 
no people, until the Soviet Union began luring them there decades 
ago. Millions came to Siberia and the north because the Soviet government 
paid them _ handsomely, for the times _ to exploit the area's stores 
of gold, diamonds, tin, platinum and oil. To sustain them, the Kremlin 
set up a ``northern delivery'' program, run from St. Petersburg, which 
hauled in supplies on a military-style schedule, without regard to 
cost. In post-Soviet Russia, cost matters. Carrying food thousands 
of miles, then dispersing it among tiny villages hundreds of miles 
apart, is hugely inefficient. Heating houses and factories at 85 degrees 
below the freezing point of water is fantastically expensive: A ton 
of diesel oil that costs 2,000 rubles in Moscow is worth five times 
that by the time it reaches Yakutia, officials here say. Worse still, 
the Soviet authorities did little maintenance. Democratic Russia inherited 
a patchwork of dilapidated mines, schools and towns and a system of 
social services like medical care in places where many professionals 
just will not work. The Russians have hemorrhaged cash to keep it 
all together. This year they will spend 530 million rubles _ $85 million, 
before the ruble's crash in August _ to feed and heat people in the 
Koryak Autonomous Territory. The territory is larger than Britain, 
with barely 31,000 residents. A third of the money goes just to move 
supplies. ``You could take all the population of Koryak, put them 
in five-star hotels in Moscow and give them three meals a day to eat 
and it'd be less expensive,'' said Georg, the senior official on northern 
affairs. ``But it's the policy of the government, and we have no choice.'' 
The immense republic of Yakutia _ imagine six Frances, freeze-dried 
and pieced together _ is a poster child for the problems of resupply. 
Stretching from the Arctic Ocean almost to China, Yakutia covers more 
frozen territory than any other region of Russia and boasts an embarrassment 
of gold and diamond mines. Mostly it is empty space: mining camps 
and villages along three north-south rivers; one railroad, only a 
couple of hundred miles long; one major highway, and one million people, 
a quarter of them in the capital of Yakutsk. Another 100,000 live 
in the Arctic. The coldest spot on earth is here, in a depression 
several hundred miles north of the capital, and virtually the entire 
region is permafrost. The region is heated by some 1,700 government-owned 
steam boilers _ some of them almost 100 years old. A rickety 1,400 
miles of pipes, insulated with sawdust, ashes, snow or nothing at 
all, link them to homes and businesses. ``Up to 50 percent of the 
heat is used to improve the weather,'' Popov joked. To sustain the 
north, the Yakutia and Russian governments planned this year to spend 
about three billion rubles _ perhaps $500 million before the ruble 
crashed in August, but worth considerably less now. The money was 
for eight ocean shipments _ two freighters of food and six big oil 
tankers _ and countless barges of coal, oil and food brought up the 
broad Lena River from the south. Russia was to provide 841 million 
rubles for freight, but so far has sent only 250 million. Prime Minister 
Yevgeny Primakov recently signed a decree ordering money for northern 
supplies. But the Finance Ministry says it has no money _ and anyway 
it is too late to deliver most supplies by cheap river transport. 
``We don't need money in November,'' Popov said. ``We need it now. 
Ice is approaching the shore.'' And costs are rising _ about 40 percent 
for fuel and shipping since the ruble plunged. Three fuel tankers 
refused to unload this fall, Vlasov said, until he warned them that 
the resulting crisis would put Yakutia ``on its back.'' The Kapitan 
Glotov also agreed to unload after the government agreed to negotiate 
a new price, but only if the goods were kept under seal on shore, 
Yakutia officials said. Finally, fearing that the goods would be sold 
to black marketeers or held until distribution was impossible, Vlasov 
called in the militia and put the shipment on river barges under armed 
guard. ``I'm not embarrassed to say that we had to use force,'' he 
said, smiling and crooking his finger around an imaginary trigger. 
``There was no other way because of the time limit. Those rivers are 
getting frozen.'' He has cause for concern. Only 47,000 tons of food 
have been shipped to northern Yakutia, barely half the 89,000 tons 
shipped last year. Low water levels on the Yana River prevented coal 
shipments from reaching many settlements, insuring costly midwinter 
trips to refuel villages. Much of the north is rationing heat _ holding 
daytime temperatures in homes and businesses to a chilly 54 degrees 
_ because there is not enough fuel for the oil burners that are the 
main source of steam. In Ust-Yansk, a mining region that sits atop 
the Arctic Ocean delta of the Yana River, coal is used to generate 
steam. But that district has exhausted its 108 million ruble budget 
_ less than half of what was requested from Moscow _ and has no extra 
money to buy food. A 500-day food reserve left from Soviet days is 
now gone. So is the old 18-month fuel reserve. All power is turned 
off from 11 p.m. to 6 a.m. _ a span soon to be lengthened by two hours 
_ and, soon, from 9 a.m. to noon as well. Fyodorov said he missed 
``the good old Soviet days,'' when supplies were timely and sufficient. 
``Five years ago, if I had been asked about this situation, I would 
have said it is catastrophic,'' he said. ``Today, compared to what's 
going on elsewhere and to the Russian Federation, I'd say we're more 
or less normal.'' 
</TEXT>
</DOC>