<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981020.0375 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Mayor Lee Brown, Rep. Sheila Jackson-Lee, D-Texas, four City Council 
members and several civil rights leaders are asking the Justice Department 
to determine whether the fatal shooting of a Mexican immigrant by 
six Houston police officers in July violated federal civil rights 
laws. The case of Pedro Oregon, 22, shot 12 times by officers who 
had burst into his bedroom while chasing an informant's tip that drugs 
were being sold in the apartment, has strained relations in the nation's 
fourth-largest city between police, city officials and a sizable Hispanic 
community. The tension was worsened by a county grand jury's decision 
on Monday indicting only one of the six officers and only on a misdemeanor 
charge of trespassing. In Washington, the Justice Department responded 
Tuesday that it was aware of the Oregon case. ``It's something we 
are already looking at, something that has been open for some time 
now,'' said Christine DiBartolo, a spokeswoman. Lawyers for the Oregon 
family denounced the grand jury's decision, and said they would press 
lawsuits against the officers and the city. ``I think it is very significant 
that the mayor has called for the attorney general of the United States 
to initiate an investigation and I am heartened by certain members 
of the City Council who are likewise calling for investigation,'' 
said Richard Mithoff, a lawyer for the Oregon family. ``The whole 
incident is senseless and it just drives home, unfortunately, the 
tragic notion that there are really two Americas.'' Brown issued a 
statement intended to soothe tempers, saying that the grand jury decision 
was ``just one step in a series of steps to be taken in this case.'' 
He promised that the police department's internal investigation would 
continue, and asked for the separate federal investigation to augment 
it. Mithoff has filed a civil suit demanding $35 million in compensation 
for Oregon's death, but said the family would be willing to negotiate 
a settlement if it came with changes in city policies and police procedures. 
Paul Nugent, another lawyer for the Oregon family, said he found the 
grand jury's decision ``disgusting and puzzling,'' and said he could 
not understand why only one officer was indicted. The shooting occurred 
on July 12 when six members of a Houston police task force in a largely 
Hispanic section of the city burst into Oregon's apartment following 
what they said was a tip from an informant that drugs were being sold 
there. According to Mithoff, three people in the apartment's living 
room, Oregon's brother, his brother-in-law and a female friend, were 
handcuffed and put on the ground while the officers made their way 
down the hallway to Oregon's bedroom. The officers burst into the 
room and more than 30 shots were fired, all by the officers. Twelve 
struck Oregon, nine in the back, Mithoff said. Police officials, quoted 
anonymously by The Houston Chronicle, said that Oregon had brandished 
a gun and that the shooting had started when one of the officers' 
weapons accidentally discharged, striking another officer. The officers 
believed the shot came from Oregon, the officials said. A gun was 
found in Oregon's bedroom, Mithoff said, but it had not been fired. 
The officers had no warrant to enter the apartment. And despite several 
searches that night and on subsequent nights, police officers were 
unable to find evidence of drugs in the apartment or any evidence 
linking Oregon, a landscape gardener, soccer coach and father of two, 
to the drug trade. But John Holmes Jr., the district attorney of Harris 
County, said the shooting could still be justified if Oregon had resisted, 
because under Texas law it is unlawful to resist any police search 
or arrest, even an illegal one. ``I am unaware of any evidence suggesting 
that the persons in the residence did not know the entry was gained 
by police officers,'' Holmes wrote in July in a letter to The Chronicle. 
Nugent said the case had stirred many Hispanic residents in Houston 
because it resembled other incidents of police abuse. ``This young 
man was a soccer player,'' Mithoff said. ``He coached a little girls' 
soccer team. He went to bed early that night because he was coaching 
a game the next morning. And they shot him 12 times from the back 
in the middle of the night in his own bedroom.'' 
</TEXT>
</DOC>