<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981020.0349 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Responding to a wave of grousing in the nation's military about President 
Clinton's affair with Monica Lewinsky, military leaders have taken 
the unusual step of warning officers and enlisted personnel that they 
could face punishment for denouncing the commander-in-chief. There 
has hardly been a groundswell of public criticism among the nation's 
1.4 million soldiers, sailors, airmen and Marines. But the furor surrounding 
Kenneth Starr's report to Congress last month accusing Clinton of 
impeachable offenses has prompted military personnel to write a number 
of public rebukes of the president, mostly in articles or letters 
in newspapers and magazines. The rumblings have raised enough concern 
at the Pentagon that military authorities have on at least two occasions 
in recent weeks responded by warning that Article 88 of the Uniformed 
Code of Military Justice explicitly prohibits officers from speaking 
``contemptuous words'' against the president, the secretary of defense 
or other civilian leaders of the armed services. Each of the services 
has similar rules that apply to enlisted personnel. The assistant 
commandant of the Marine Corps, Gen. Terrence Dake, sent an electronic 
memorandum to all generals in the service on Oct. 9 urging them to 
remind Marines of the prohibitions. ``It is unethical for individuals 
who wear the uniform of a Marine to engage in public dialogue on political 
and legal matters such as impeachment,'' he wrote. In September, days 
after Starr's report saturated the news, an article in the official 
newspaper at F.E. Warren Air Force Base in Wyoming delivered a similarly 
stern reminder. The article, which officials said the Air Force has 
since circulated informally to other bases, warned Air Force personnel 
that they ``aren't allowed to discuss the president in the same manner 
as civilians,'' citing Article 88. The wave of public criticisms of 
Clinton was first reported Tuesday in the The Los Angeles Times. Dake's 
memorandum was first reported in The Washington Times on Friday. By 
all accounts, the affair has consumed the nation's military in much 
the same way it has consumed the nation in general: in other words, 
with the same mixture of fascination and revulsion, derision for Clinton 
and contempt for the independent prosecutor, Kenneth Starr, a feeling 
of outrage and a desire that it would all just go away. But within 
the rigid world of military discipline, the scandal has a deeper undercurrent, 
since a series of officers and enlisted personnel have been punished 
under the Uniformed Code of Military Justice for the same behavior 
Clinton has acknowledged with Ms. Lewinsky: an extramarital affair 
with a subordinate in the workplace. From the start of his presidency, 
Clinton has had a strained relationship with the military, whose members 
viewed his evasion of the draft and his policies on matters like gays 
in the military with suspicion, if not resentment. Now the scandal 
that has brought him to the brink of an impeachment inquiry has revived 
long-simmering feelings, held by some in the ranks, that Clinton is 
not fit to lead. ``How can anyone in the military defend President 
Clinton?'' Master Sgt. Stephen Kapp, stationed at Misawa Air Base 
in Japan, wrote in a letter to the editor of Air Force Times, published 
on Sept. 28. He went on to call for Clinton's resignation, saying, 
``This president has made a mockery out of our country.'' Recent retirees, 
freed from the restraints of the Uniform Code, have been more vociferous. 
One, Col. John Baer of the Army, wrote a letter to The Army Times 
saying he had torn up a certificate of appreciation signed by Clinton 
and mailed it back to the White House. A much more prominent retiree, 
Colin Powell, the Army general who served as chairman of the Joint 
Chiefs of Staff under President Bush, has in recent weeks been pointed 
in his disappointment. Asked for his views at an impromptu news conference 
at the airport in Modesto, Calif., on Monday evening, Powell said 
that Clinton's behavior was ``a disgrace to the presidency and the 
Oval Office.'' Prosecutions under Article 88 are extremely rare. More 
often than not, commanders handle violations with administrative punishment 
or simply a warning to knock it off, as happened a few weeks ago at 
Fort Bragg in North Carolina when joking at a morning workout veered 
close to ridicule of Clinton. In 1993, shortly after Clinton took 
office, a senior Air Force officer, Maj. Gen. Harold Campbell, was 
forced to retire and fined $7,000 after he described the president 
as a ``dope-smoking,'' ``skirt-chasing'' and ``draft-dodging'' commander 
in chief at a NATO banquet. Since then, the threat of punishment under 
Article 88 has kept a lid on criticism of Clinton's presidency, but 
not entirely. In an article published in Navy Times on Oct. 12, Maj. 
Shane Sellers of the Marine Corps called the president ``an adulterous 
liar.'' Sellers, an intelligence officer assigned to the Defense Intelligence 
Agency, lamented that Clinton was not held to the same standard as 
uniformed officers. ``It's not about sex,'' Sellers, a 20-year veteran, 
wrote. ``It's tawdry and titillating, to be sure. But for all its 
soap-opera quality, what Clinton and Monica did as consenting adults 
boils down to adultery. And one should call an adulterous liar exactly 
what he is _ a criminal.'' His remarks were published three days after 
Dake's warning. Although it seems his article was written before the 
memorandum, the Marine Corps has begun an investigation into whether 
Sellers' remarks crossed the line into ``contemptuous words.'' A spokesman, 
Col. Stu Wagner, said Tuesday that Sellers could face punishment for 
his remarks. In the same edition of The Navy Times, Staff Sgt. C.T. 
Taylor, a Marine based in Virginia Beach, Va., also questioned the 
president's fitness to lead, saying he should resign. ``Is it too 
much to expect our president to be the last bastion of morality in 
a society where morality and values are ever declining?'' he wrote. 
So far, the Marines have not yet opened an investigation into his 
remarks or any others that could fall under Article 88. The Army, 
Navy and Air Force are not currently investigating any violations, 
according to spokesmen for each. The White House spokesman, Joe Lockhart, 
said Tuesday that the president did not believe that the scandal had 
affected the morale of the armed forces. ``I think the president has 
enormous respect for the men and women in uniform in this country,'' 
Lockhart said, ``and I think that respect is reciprocated.'' 
</TEXT>
</DOC>