<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981020.0321 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Ellen Passe sat in the passenger seat of an RX 300, the new Lexus 
midsized sport utility vehicle, while her 2-year-old son, Alex, fiddled 
with the steering wheel. Outside the car, her husband, Michael, spoke 
with a salesman at a midtown Manhattan Lexus dealership. ``Where are 
my heated seats?'' Ms. Passe asked good-naturedly. The salesman quickly 
pointed to a small button near the CD player. Ms. Passe smiled. For 
the Passes, it had come down to a choice between a Jeep Grand Cherokee 
and this Lexus, both priced at roughly $32,000. But based on their 
experience owning a Lexus sedan, Passe seemed fairly sure of what 
their final decision would be. And they did later buy the Lexus. ``We 
love the Lexus experience,'' Passe said. ``And the service? Well, 
there isn't any comparison.'' Since the Toyota Motor Corp. created 
the Lexus brand a decade ago, families like the Passes have gradually 
developed a fierce loyalty to it, transforming this upstart _ initially 
seen as an unlikely threat to BMW, Mercedes-Benz, Lincoln and Cadillac 
_ into a major automotive success story. How did Lexus, even with 
designs that are often called bland, become one of the top-selling 
American luxury cars, behind only Lincoln, Cadillac and Mercedes? 
Its quick ascent provides a vivid lesson in how a mass marketer can 
carve out new territory. For one thing, Toyota created a distinct 
identity for Lexus by making it one of the first brands to focus on 
more than just the car, providing owners a level of service that had 
not been seen in the industry but that is now emulated by competitors. 
Toyota kept Lexus dealerships separate and did not dilute the brand 
with low-priced, less luxurious vehicles to attract buyers. And thanks 
to Toyota's deep pockets, Lexus could respond quickly to changing 
tastes by offering new models. A look at the Lexus strategy, in fact, 
points up the missteps made by the Honda Motor Co. and the Nissan 
Motor Co., which launched their own upscale brands, Acura and Infiniti, 
in the United States at about the same time. From the start, Lexus 
took aim at the status-conscious Mercedes driver, while its Japanese 
rivals offered a broader lineup, making it harder for them to crack 
the top end of the market later. Infiniti and Acura are still recovering. 
In the first nine months of 1998, Lexus sold about 112,000 cars and 
light trucks in the United States, a 59 percent increase over the 
comparable period a year earlier _ and more than BMW, which sold about 
98,000, up 4 percent. Mercedes has sold 124,000 vehicles this year, 
up 56 percent. Meanwhile, Infiniti sales fell 11 percent, to 44,000, 
and Acura's sagged 7 percent, to 82,000, even as they both offered 
hefty discounts to increase sales. Of course, if the long economic 
boom does falter, sales of all luxury cars will surely suffer. But 
for now, Lexus is thriving. ``Of all the Japanese luxury brands, Lexus 
is the only one that could be called a success,'' said Eric Noble, 
an analyst with AutoPacific, an automobile marketing and product consulting 
company in Santa Ana, Calif. ``Infiniti, Lexus and Acura all do a 
pretty good job of handling the consumer,'' he said. But, he noted, 
``Lexus has products that are what the consumer wants.'' By striving 
from the outset to match Mercedes' prestige, Lexus took hold more 
quickly in this country, said Susan Jacobs, president of Jacobs &AMP; 
Associates, a consulting company in Rutherford, N.J. On top of that, 
Lexus' focus on service earned it loyal customers. Lexus was one of 
the first to offer a replacement car while a customer's car was being 
repaired, showroom breakfast buffets and free lifetime car washes. 
The company also sponsored opera and jazz events. Because of its connection 
to Toyota, Lexus inherited a reputation for value and reliability, 
said Scott F. Merlis, president of Merlis Automotive International 
Inc., a Westport, Conn., investment bank. ``They were able to tap 
into Toyota's product development system and broaden the line quickly,'' 
he said. Lexus, which began with two sedans, now has eight models. 
The element of surprise also worked to Lexus' advantage, according 
to Ms. Jacobs. When the first Lexus models hit showrooms in 1989, 
existing luxury-car makers, especially the Europeans, took little 
notice. ``They didn't believe that a start-up luxury brand could threaten 
their 100-year heritage,'' she said. To be sure, all the Japanese 
auto makers _ Lexus included _ made missteps in the mid-1990s that 
hurt sales. Lexus mistakenly increased prices just as the Europeans 
slashed theirs by as much as 15 percent. Lexus also relied on its 
reputation too heavily for too long and was slow to make noticeable 
design changes, said John Casesa, an analyst at Schroder &AMP; Co. 
``The Europeans so effectively responded to the initial Japanese attack,'' 
he said, ``that it's taken Lexus nine years of slugging away with 
the same message and the same product positioning'' to gain sales 
from those who previously owned European luxury cars. In the past, 
some critics said, Lexus also updated cars by copying style changes 
from other makers. A Lexus sport model brought out in the fall of 
1997, for instance, offered oval headlights similar to those introduced 
by Mercedes two years earlier. At the same time, Acura, initially 
somewhere between a Honda and a full-scale luxury line, tried to revamp 
its image as a true luxury-car maker. But it merely confused customers 
by altering its model names in 1995, switching from brand names to 
a European-style mix of letters and numbers. In addition, its plan 
to retire the name Integra, just when the car was the best-selling 
and most widely known Acura model, was quickly abandoned. Yet the 
very existence of the Integra, starting at a humble $16,000, and the 
lack of a powerful V-8 flagship model has made it difficult for Acura 
to gain true luxury status. ``By having a vehicle like Integra, it 
isn't clear it's a luxury car,'' said Lincoln Merrihew, an analyst 
for J.D. Power &AMP; Associates, a marketing information company. 
``It's about image.'' Infiniti has tried to stake out its own territory 
in a crowded field, mimicking BMW by focusing on unique design and 
superior handling and performance. But because of financial problems 
at Nissan, the company, whose exterior designs differed the most from 
then-current luxury models, was least able to update models and expand 
its product line to respond to competitors' lower prices. Infiniti's 
early advertising campaign, widely considered bizarre because it did 
not show any cars, also hurt its launch. Each auto maker has had some 
success revamping its lines and introducing new models. Acura's redesigned 
TL sedan, for example, nudged ahead of a comparable Lexus in sales 
in September. Backed by Honda's strong reputation as an engine maker, 
Acura now plans to focus on building high-performance cars aimed at 
enthusiast drivers, said Jeff Conrad, Acura's national vice president 
for marketing. Infiniti, taking a similar tack, plans to introduce 
a high-performance car aimed at empty-nest baby boomers. The company 
will also introduce one new car each year for the next four years, 
said Steve Kight, Infiniti's marketing director. Lexus, which had 
initially sold itself as a lower-cost answer to Mercedes but then 
let prices balloon, charged back by refocusing on value, introducing 
new models like the GS 400 sport sedan. It also redesigned several 
models, like its entry-level ES 300 and top-of-the-line sedan, the 
LS 400, adding features while maintaining or cutting prices. And Lexus 
is only now beginning to redesign some models in response to criticism 
that its cars are dependable but unexciting, Casesa and Noble said. 
Now, with the introduction of the RX 300 _ which even Cadillac's general 
manager, John F. Smith, calls the best blending of car and truck attributes 
_ Lexus is seeking to establish a name as a trendsetter as well. Lexus' 
midsized model follows closely on the heels of Mercedes' new small 
sport utility vehicle, which has sold extremely well. Both appeal 
to drivers who want the comforts of a luxury car along with the best 
attributes of sport utilities. But the Mercedes is more rugged than 
the Lexus, and thus closer in feel to larger American sport utilities. 
The smaller Lexus sport utility vehicle, available only since March, 
and the LX 470, an upgraded version of the Toyota Land Cruiser, now 
account for about 30 percent of Lexus sales in the United States and 
makes Lexus the only luxury brand offering two models in one of the 
fastest growing and most profitable corners of the market. In July, 
it also helped make Lexus briefly the best-selling luxury brand in 
this country. Lexus sold 14,673 vehicles that month. The appeal of 
the RX 300 seems to be that it offers the high perch and four-wheel 
drive of a sport utility vehicle without some of the drawbacks, like 
poor ride and truck-like handling. It is also lower to the ground 
than most larger sport utilities and thus easier to climb into. ``It's 
an example of their willingness to push the envelope,'' Merrihew said. 
``It's luxury applied to a part of the market that hasn't seen it 
before.'' And in luxury cars, a stable of fresh, exciting products 
is key. ``Product is about 90 percent of the game,'' said Smith of 
Cadillac, which pushed out its large sport utility model, the Escalade, 
in 10 months. The Escalade, a version of GMC's Yukon Denali, will 
appear in showrooms this fall. Right now new models, like sport utility 
vehicles, ``drive a lot of showroom traffic,'' bringing in customers 
who may end up buying cars instead. Cadillac plans to introduce one 
new car model each year as it works to develop its own hybrid sport 
utility, which will be available in a few years. BMW is about two 
years away as well. Lexus' efforts to rev up its image, moving from 
dependable stalwart to maker of vehicles offering a more exciting 
driving experience, is a tack other luxury-car makers are taking to 
appeal to younger buyers. BMW, whose cars have always had a reputation 
for high performance and driving excitement, already has an edge here. 
``We want to be a moving target,'' says Bryan Bergsteinsson, the Lexus 
group vice president and general manager. Speaking of the company's 
competition, he said, ``If they can follow us, when they get there, 
we'll be gone.'' But this time around, it will not be as easy, Ms. 
Jacobs and other analysts forecast. ``They're finding the right ideas 
to make themselves stand out,'' she said. But ``Lexus now is playing 
on a much more level playing field than in the early 1990s. The Europeans 
are more aware of the threat Lexus can pose.'' 
</TEXT>
</DOC>