<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981020.0323 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
A month after Iran's government dissociated itself from death threats 
to the British author Salman Rushdie, the decision is still exposing 
fissures among Iran's rival centers of power. A majority in Iran's 
conservative-dominated Parliament has signed a letter insisting that 
a religious decree calling for Rushdie's death for blasphemy against 
Islam is still valid. They also declared that Muslims had a duty to 
carry out the decree. Although Iran's foreign minister, Kamal Kharazzi, 
said on Sept. 24 that his country would not aid or reward anyone who 
killed Rushdie, two hard-line Iranian groups have since publicly vowed 
to carry out the 1989 decree, and they have offered new bounties on 
the author's life. And last Friday, in the latest of several anti-government 
demonstrations, at least 75 members of the hard-line Ansar e-Hezbollah 
gathered in Tehran to issue new threats against Rushdie, unveiling 
a three-story mural dedicated to the memory of a man they said tried 
to kill the author nine years ago. ``We don't obey the foreign minister,'' 
chanted a member of the group, which has long been linked to violence 
and is believed to have the backing of high-level clerics in the government. 
``Remember our faces, Salman Rushdie. We will kill you.'' According 
to journalists who were present, Iranian security forces made no effort 
to break up the demonstration, and neither has the government made 
any evident effort to silence the organizations now offering bounties 
of more than $3 million payable on Rushdie's death. Diplomats and 
political experts say the protests by conservatives have underscored 
the powerful constraints still facing the government of President 
Mohammad Khatami, a relative moderate, as he seeks to reshape his 
country's image with a gentler face. ``All of this must be seen as 
part of the broader challenge to Khatami,'' a Western diplomat said 
in a telephone interview. ``There are a lot of people determined to 
oppose him everywhere he turns, and the Rushdie case is one in which 
some conservatives are trying to portray his stance as a betrayal.'' 
Many powerful figures in Iran _ including those who dominate Parliament, 
the judiciary, and the office of the current supreme leader, Ayatollah 
Ali Khamenei _ have interpreted the landslide victory won by Khatami 
in the country's May 1997 presidential elections as a threat to their 
long hold on power. And some conservatives see the government's new 
stance on the Rushdie case as deviating from the Islamic republic's 
strict religious principles. ``We call on the government to apologize 
for this mistake,'' a group of war veterans said last week in announcing 
that it would collect $333,000 to be paid to anyone who assassinated 
Rushdie. Despite the renewed threats, the British government, which 
restored full diplomatic relations with Iran after Kharazzi's announcement, 
has said it has no reason to believe that Iran has changed its position. 
And on Monday, a group of international committees that had campaigned 
on behalf of Rushdie announced in Norway that they had agreed to disband 
in recognition of a deal that they said had reduced the risk to the 
author's life. Still, Rushdie, who last month pronounced himself a 
free man for the first time in nearly a decade, met on Friday with 
the British foreign secretary, Robin Cook, to review the latest developments. 
The religious decree, or fatwa, against Rushdie was issued by Ayatollah 
Ruhollah Khomeini, who was the country's supreme leader but who died 
several months later. Islamic scholars have said no one else has the 
right to lift the ruling, which accused Rushdie of having defamed 
Islam with his novel ``The Satanic Verses.'' Since that time, Iran's 
policy has been that it did not officially sanction the death decree. 
But Kharazzi's more gentle restatement of that position, made during 
talks in New York with British officials, reflected the temperate 
tone that Khatami has brought to Iranian politics. Kharazzi pledged 
that Iran would not encourage or assist anybody in threatening Rushdie's 
life. He also dissociated the government from the bounty that a powerful 
religious charity, the 15th Khordad Foundation, has put the author's 
head. But since his announcement, that foundation has announced that 
it would add $300,000 to a bounty that already stood at $2.5 million. 
And the newspaper Kayhan reported on Sunday that another bounty had 
been offered by the 2,000 residents of Kiyapay village in northern 
Iran. A village official quoted by the paper said the residents had 
opened a bank account to gather donations and had pledged to provide 
farmland, fruit gardens, ``a house, and 10 carpets as a reward for 
carrying out the execution sentence against the author of the blasphemous 
book.'' 
</TEXT>
</DOC>