<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981020.0378 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
For undisclosed reasons, Sen. John Glenn has been dropped from one 
of the main age-related experiments in which the 77-year-old former 
astronaut had planned to take part during his return to space next 
week, NASA officials confirmed Tuesday. Glenn will still fly aboard 
the shuttle Discovery on Oct. 29. But in August he was dropped without 
announcement from a widely publicized experiment designed to test 
the hypnotic effects of very small amounts of the natural hormone, 
melatonin, on sleep and daytime activities in space. The study's principal 
investigator, Dr. Charles A. Czeisler of Brigham and Women's Hospital 
in Boston, said in interviews over the weekend that he was surprised 
when he had to disqualify Glenn. ``He did not meet one of the medical 
criteria that was established for participation in our study,'' Czeisler 
said. But he declined to specify the reason for the change, citing 
NASA's rule forbidding disclosure of medical information without the 
subject's permission. Through his spokesman, Jack Sparks, Glenn declined 
to elaborate. NASA had rated the melatonin experiment as one of the 
two top priorities in the human studies aboard Glenn's shuttle flight. 
Glenn will still participate in two other planned experiments _ monitoring 
sleep and use of protein _ that focus on studying similarities between 
aging on Earth and flying weightless in space. Sleep disorders are 
a particular problem among the elderly and astronauts, who in adjusting 
to the 90 minute day-night cycles in space often take sleeping pills 
and sometimes stimulants. The experiments have been cited as the principal 
reasons Glenn is going into space for the second time. In 1962, Glenn 
became the first American to orbit Earth, and aboard Discovery he 
will become the oldest person to fly in space. Glenn, an Ohio Democrat, 
won his seat on the shuttle flight by lobbying NASA for two years 
to fly as a human guinea pig for geriatric studies. The amounts of 
melatonin Glenn would have taken are 10 to 30 times smaller than the 
over-the-counter pills many people take to reduce jet lag on long 
airplane flights. There are dozens of ailments or sleep disorders 
that exclude participation in Czeisler's study. Dr. John B. Charles, 
who helps coordinate the human studies aboard the Discovery, said 
that in his studies Czeisler had put ``strict requirements that don't 
apply to people who buy melatonin off the shelf in health food stores.'' 
Once Czeisler's team recognized a problem, NASA decided ``the best 
thing was to eliminate the melatonin aspect of the experiment and 
continue with the circadian rhythm aspects of the study'' that are 
``at least as important as the melatonin study,'' Charles said. ``It 
is certainly not the complete study that we had hoped to accomplish 
originally on this mission,'' Charles said, ``but we are still doing 
everything except swallowing a pill.'' Glenn's disqualification from 
the melatonin portion of the sleep study came just before he underwent 
the second in a series of sleep studies at the Johnson Space Center 
in Houston that will be compared to data gathered in space. The development 
is surprising because NASA has long known the criteria for the melatonin 
study and has said it has more than 40 years of medical information 
on Glenn. Asked why NASA had not detected a problem earlier, Charles 
said: ``There are imperfections in the transmission of data between 
people who have it, especially confidential medical data.'' And Czeisler 
said he believed that the few doctors at NASA who had access to Glenn's 
medical records ``did not have extensive information about our exclusionary 
criteria.'' Ordinarily, Czeisler's team examines candidates for the 
sleep studies in Boston. But Czeisler said his team agreed to NASA's 
request that its doctors conduct the examinations in Houston. The 
melatonin studies were conducted on four members of the Neurolab shuttle 
flight earlier this year, and another member of the Discovery's crew, 
Dr. Chiaki Mukai, will be a fifth participant, Czeisler said. Czeisler's 
specialty is sleep disorders, and in a scientific paper in 1991 he 
pointed out similarities in disorders of sleep and the body clock 
among the elderly and astronauts. The consent form that volunteers 
must sign to take part in the study states that ``results could lead 
to the development of a new treatment for sleep disturbances associated 
with spaceflight'' and ``could have a profound impact on the health, 
productivity and safety'' for people ``such as shift workers and the 
elderly.'' The original plan called for Glenn to swallow a pill before 
retiring on each of the nine nights on the flight. On some nights 
he would take melatonin, on others, a placebo. Because of the disqualification, 
the scientists will not be able to use Glenn to test two of their 
original four hypotheses. The two studies that will be excluded are 
that taking melatonin before sleep reduces sleep disruption and improves 
efficiency during flight, and that the improved sleep resulting from 
melatonin use will make a crew member perkier and perform better the 
following day. Glenn will still make important contributions about 
sleep because it will be the first time that sleep recordings have 
been made on someone his age in space, said Czeisler and his co-investigator, 
Dr. Rod J. Hughes. On four night, Glenn and Mukai will wear special 
sensors that record brain waves and movement of the eyes and chin. 
They will also strap a device on the chest to record the number of 
respirations. A wrist device will record movements while awake and 
asleep, and a fingertip sensor will measure the amount of oxygen in 
the blood. Glenn and Mukai will also swallow a pill containing a thermometer 
to continually measure their core body temperatures and correlate 
that data with their sleep patterns. An antenna worn over the upper 
part of the body will detect signals and alert the crew member to 
swallow another thermometer pill after the previous one passes through 
the digestive system. For 20 minutes on the following day, Glenn and 
Mukai will perform tasks on a laptop computer to measure alertness, 
fatigue, sleepiness, vigilance and other mood and cognitive functions. 
Hughes said: ``Maybe I'm rationalizing, but one could argue that including 
Glenn in the melatonin portion of the trial was a little bit of walking 
before you learn how to crawl.'' Glenn will participate in other studies 
of how the body uses protein in space. No problems have arisen in 
those studies, Dr. Arny A. Ferrando of the University of Texas Medical 
Branch in Galveston and the principal investigator of the protein 
studies, said in an interview. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>