<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981020.0296 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Don't be fooled by the family's tacky living quarters outside Dallas: 
a cramped, broken-down trailer home whose chief amenities are a fridge 
used mostly for beer, a large television set that seldom shuts up 
and plastic cutlery accumulated over years of eating takeout. The 
slobbish Ansel Smith, his tarty second wife, Sharla, his pot-smoking 
son, Chris, and his 20-year-old still-virginal daughter, Dottie, haven't 
abandoned _ nor have they been abandoned by _ the miraculous American 
economic juggernaut. They are part of the system and each, in his 
or her own way, contributes to the national weal and woe. As much 
as Jeeter Lester and his ``Tobacco Road'' clan were symptomatic of 
the Great Depression of the 1930s, the Smith family reflects the values 
of the boom years of the 1980s and 1990s. It's just that the Smiths 
haven't participated to quite the degree that made billionaires of 
those who wheeled and dealed in savings-and-loan institutions, real 
estate development and computer technology. The Smiths are on the 
bottom rung of the ladder, but at least they're on it, or so they 
believe, possibly because television tells them so. That is one of 
the unstated factors giving zest to ``Killer Joe,'' Tracy Letts' violent, 
satiric and often dangerously funny family comedy, now at the SoHo 
Playhouse Off Broadway. The new production, a commercial venture starring 
Scott Glenn and Amanda Plummer, is being presented in association 
with the 29th Street Rep, which produced an earlier, equally effective 
production of the play in New York four years ago. Ansel Smith (Marc 
A. Nelson) is an auto mechanic, Sharla (Ms. Plummer) waitresses at 
a Pizza Hut, Chris (Mike Shannon) sells dope whenever he pulls himself 
together, and Dottie (Sarah Paulson) once had a job with a chiropodist. 
Ansel's extended family would also include his alcoholic ex-wife, 
Adele, and her boyfriend, Rex. Adele and Rex are never seen but they 
become as vivid to the audience as any of the characters who are. 
Presiding over the play, until the Smith family revels get lethally 
out of hand, is Killer Joe Cooper (Glenn), a cool, nattily dressed 
Dallas police detective who runs a little business on the side. Other 
cops might be in laundromats or vending machines; Joe is in contract 
murder. It's Chris who first proposes the plan that propels the play, 
mostly because his mother stole the cocaine he was going to sell to 
pay off his $6,000 debt to some local hoods. Having learned that Adele 
has a $50,000 life insurance policy, of which Dottie is the sole beneficiary, 
Chris suggests to his father that they hire Killer Joe to carry out 
a contract on her. Ansel mulls over the idea for a minute or two before 
deciding that it might be just the ticket to provide the family with 
some much needed cash. Sharla thinks it's a swell idea, and even the 
quiet, almost beatific Dottie agrees. She remembers how, when she 
was 2, her mom once tried to suffocate her with a pillow. Problems 
arise when, during the contract negotiations, Joe demands his $25,000 
payment in advance. Since they scarcely have enough cash to pay for 
their Kentucky fried chicken, they are stymied until Joe proposes 
a compromise. He's been much taken by the childlike Dottie. He says 
that, instead of cash, he will accept Dottie as a retainer. This pleases 
everyone, including Dottie who, in her turn, has been much taken by 
the smooth-talking, well-scrubbed detective who hardly ever uses four-letter 
words. ``Killer Joe'' begins like a white-trash cartoon in which middle-class 
behavior is turned inside out. The sodden Chris objects to his stepmother's 
opening the door to him when she is wearing nothing below the waist. 
Sharla points out that it is the middle of the night and she didn't 
know who was knocking. Dottie's virginity is a source of worry. The 
potbellied Ansel plods around in gray-tinged briefs in need of a new 
elastic. Whenever he tries to act like a father, his attention inevitably 
slides over to the more compelling images on the television set. Though 
``Killer Joe'' behaves like a cartoon, its firm dramatic structure 
builds to a furious climax that has the punch of reality. It is both 
dismaying in its physical and psychological brutality and horrendously 
comic. As written by Letts and as beautifully acted by Mr. Glenn and 
Ms. Paulson, the courtship of Joe and Dottie even succeeds in being 
moving. They are the only characters in the play who don't traffic 
in double-crosses. The director is Wilson Milam, who staged the play's 
1993 premiere in Chicago, the first New York production, and successful 
runs in London, initially at the Gate Theater and then at the Vaudeville 
in the West End. By this time, it is clear that he has complete control 
of the exotic material as well as the actors to realize it. Ms. Plummer's 
Sharla is a delight, at the beginning a brassily self-assured trailer 
park Circe, then a bewildered wreck, while Shannon's Chris is a perfect, 
self-pitying lout. Nelson gives the production's most consistently 
realized performance as Ansel, but then he has been doing the role 
off and on from Chicago through the London runs. The Smiths may seem 
outrageous but, as someone in the play observes: ``A normal person 
is just someone you don't know very well.'' ``Killer Joe'' is an immensely 
entertaining pop artifact, written, directed and performed with neon-lit 
flamboyance. Lift your Styrofoam cups to toast a hit. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>