<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981020.0332 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Goldman, Sachs &AMP; Co. named 57 new partners Tuesday, awarding them 
an ownership stake in the world's most profitable private partnership 
with the promise of a lucrative public offering down the road. Among 
those named was Abby Joseph Cohen, Goldman's chief portfolio strategist. 
Ms. Cohen's positive predictions about the stock market made her a 
Wall Street superstar in the 1990s, but her reputation suffered after 
the sharp summer selloff that raised the specter of a bear market. 
The Wall Street firm will add the 57 to its current roster of 189 
partners. But 20 to 25 existing partners are expected to retire _ 
or become limited in Goldman's parlance _ before the firm's fiscal 
year ends on Nov. 28. Some of those people will retire voluntarily, 
executives of the firm said, while others will be pushed out to make 
way for the younger recruits. Being named a partner of Goldman, Sachs 
is one of the richest rewards on Wall Street, with partners earning 
an average of more than $1 million a year as well as building equity 
stakes in one of the world's most profitable financial companies. 
For the most senior partners, that stake is valued in the hundreds 
of millions of dollars. This year's crop of partners will also benefit 
greatly if Goldman follows through with its plan to issue shares to 
the public for the first time in its 130-year history. Partners voted 
to take the firm public earlier this year, a move that would have 
ended the partnership and denied that status to the people offered 
partnerships Tuesday. But the firm delayed the sale of shares indefinitely 
last month because of turmoil in the markets and weaker-than-expected 
operating profits for Goldman and other financial companies, and it 
quickly revived the traditional partnership selection process. Goldman, 
Sachs names partners only every other year, and the newest group could 
well be the last before Goldman does issue shares. At that time, even 
the most junior ones, including those named Tuesday, would have stakes 
valued in the tens of millions. To be sure, the economics of going 
public is not what it was a few months ago. Even with the recent rebound 
in financial-company share prices, Goldman's Wall Street peers have 
seen their valuations cut in half from July peaks, meaning that Goldman 
shares, if issued Wednesday or in the near future, would be unlikely 
to command the high prices once envisioned. Moreover, Goldman's partners, 
even after subtracting for expected retirements, would number perhaps 
220, meaning that each one would have a smaller slice of the equity 
than the 189 would have. Less fortunate are the partners expected 
to retire. As limited partners, they sacrifice their equity stakes 
in the firm, though they have the option of investing in Goldman, 
Sachs and earning what is often a hefty annual return on their capital. 
Limited partners are expected to receive a share of the profits if 
Goldman goes public, but their potential gain will be much smaller 
than that of the general partners. ``I am sure that with the prospect 
of an IPO just around the corner, there are some in that batch of 
retired partners who are not too happy about it,'' a current limited 
partner said. ``But I am sure there are others who just thought this 
was the time. You can't wait forever, and being a Goldman partner 
is an extremely demanding job.'' Among those expected to retire this 
year are William J. Buckley and Richard M. Hayden, partners in the 
equities division, and Christopher Flowers of the financial institutions 
group. Flowers, who helped prepare Goldman's plan to issue shares 
earlier this year and is one of the most senior partners, announced 
his retirement recently after he failed to win one of the top spots 
in the firm's revamped executive hierarchy. Ms. Cohen is the best 
known among the 57 new partners, who will collect their brass rings 
if they accept Goldman's invitation next month. Two other women were 
also named partners, bringing the total at the firm to 17. Goldman 
has been criticized in the past for having few women partners. Several 
new partners are recent recruits to Goldman. They include Kendrick 
R. Wilson 3d, who was hired earlier this year and who specializes 
in advising banks on mergers and acquisitions. Goldman also lured 
Michael J. Carr, a mergers-and-acquisitions specialist, away from 
a rival investment bank, Salomon Smith Barney, in August, with the 
promise of big gains when Goldman issued shares. ``These appointments 
recognize the contributions and potential of some of the firm's most 
valued senior professionals,'' Jon S. Corzine and Henry M. Paulson 
Jr., co-chairmen and co-chief executives, said in a statement. THE 
NEW PARTNERS NAMED ARE: Bradley I. Abelow David M. Baum Richard J. 
Bronks Michael J. Carr Christopher J. Carrera Mary Ann Casati Andrew 
A. Chisholm Abby Joseph Cohen Claudio Costamagna Philip M. Darivoff 
David A. Dechman Alexander C. Dibelius Paul S. Efron Pieter Maarten 
Feenstra Edward C. Forst Christopher G. French Richard J. Gnodde Jeffrey 
B. Goldenberg Amy O. Goodfriend Andrew M. Gordon M. Roch Hillenbrand 
Timothy J. Ingrassia Stefan J. Jentzsch Chansoo Joung Matthew G. L'Heureux 
Thomas D. Lasersohn Anthony D. Lauto Robert H. Litzenberger David 
J. Mastrocola Sanjeev K. Mehra Wayne L. Moore Thomas S. Murphy Jr. 
Avi M. Nash Michael E. Novogratz Greg M. Ostroff Robert J. Pace Michael 
A. Price Scott S. Prince Emmanuel Roman Ralph F. Rosenberg Michael 
S. Rubinoff Richard M. Ruzika Michael D. Ryan Tsutomu Sato Jonathan 
S. Savitz Antoine Schwartz Dinakar Singh Christian J. Siva-Jothy Jonathan 
S. Sobel Hsueh J. Sung Robert B. Tudor III Malcolm B. Turnbull John 
E. Urban George H. Walker Kendrick R. Wilson III Yasuyo Yamazaki Yoel 
Zaoui 
</TEXT>
</DOC>