<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981020.0436 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
In the face of conservative rebellion, House Republican leaders enlisted 
Democrats on Tuesday night to win approval for a $500 billion catchall 
spending package, an unwieldy 40-pound document of nearly 4,000 pages 
that virtually no one had time to read before the vote. With the entire 
House up for re-election in just two weeks and most lawmakers anxious 
to get home to campaign, the House voted 333-95 to accept the colossal 
package, copies of which arrived on the House floor for review by 
members less than four hours before Tuesday night's vote. Republican 
leaders had to rely on Democrats to help pass the bill. In the end, 
170 Democrats joined 162 Republicans and one independent to support 
it, while 64 Republicans and 31 Democrats voted against it. The biggest 
defection came from conservatives, who complained that the bill raided 
this year's anticipated budget surplus, provided no serious tax cut 
and expanded spending for social programs. They blamed President Clinton 
and liberals, but they held House Speaker Newt Gingrich accountable 
for what they said was his selling out his revolutionary fervor of 
1994. Just before the vote, Gingrich roared back, presenting himself 
on the House floor as a statesman and a consensus-builder. He denounced 
the conservative firebrands, his former allies for whom he was once 
their spokesman, as ``perfectionists'' who did not understand the 
art of compromise and who had become ``petty dictators'' in their 
own little worlds. ``Surely those of us who have grown up and matured 
in this process understand after the last four years we have to work 
together on big issues,'' he declared. ``If we don't work together 
on big issues, nothing gets done.'' He said of the final cost of the 
package: ``Yes our liberal friends get a few things, and in a free 
society when you are sharing power between the legislative and executive 
branch, that is precisely the outcome you should expect to get.'' 
The omnibus bill, which allocates money for hundreds of programs large 
and small and incorporates numerous policy decisions that Congress 
never debated, now goes to the Senate. Along with many House members, 
several senators expressed outrage on Tuesday at the final price tag 
and the 11th-hour wheeling and dealing among congressional leaders 
and the White House that brought the spending package to fruition. 
But the Senate is expected to it on Wednesday anyway, bringing down 
the curtain on the 105th Congress. The package accounts for about 
one-third of the $1.7-trillion budget. After a generation of deficits, 
it includes a surplus, but many members were infuriated that it spends 
about $20 billion of the anticipated $70 billion surplus for ``emergency'' 
tasks, from immunizing the government's computers to the 2000 bug 
to helping farmers trying to cope with the loss of Asian export markets. 
Anger at the Republican leaders for spending so much and for turning 
the budget into a free-form bazaar dominated by special-interest pleadings 
came from across the political spectrum. Rep. Bob Livingston, R-La., 
who is chairman of the Appropriations Committee, called the process 
``ugly'' and said, ``I hated it.'' On the other side of the Capitol, 
Sen. Robert Byrd of West Virginia, the ranking Democrat on the Appropriations 
Committee who is famous for the huge amount of pork-barrel spending 
he directs to his home state, complained: ``This is a creation without 
a mother or father. It's more like a Frankenstein monster patched 
together from old legislative body parts that don't quite fit.'' But 
those grievances, once aired, seemed to melt in the face of more money 
for most congressional districts and a widespread desire to get the 
whole thing over with and with Gingrich's impassioned plea for support. 
And those Republicans who, like Livingston, reviled the process, still 
defended it. He said that this Congress was finishing ahead of the 
time finished by 10 of the last 15 sessions of Congress. Gingrich 
went beyond his previous approach of trying to sell the bill on the 
basis of its smaller parts, such as the banning of needle-exchange 
programs in the District of Columbia. Instead, he belittled the conservatives 
as obstructionists who were unrealistic in their demands. In defending 
the provision in the final bill for more than $9 billion in money 
for defense projects, he invoked Ronald Reagan, a near-sainted figure 
to conservatives. ``Ronald Reagan said that protecting our young men 
and women in uniform was more important than the deficit,'' Gingrich 
declared. The final vote showed that moderate Republicans and Democrats 
were the ones most pleased with the bill, although a handful of moderates, 
such as Rep. Christopher Shays, R-Conn., opposed it as a budget-buster. 
``The moderates have really come into their own, and this package 
reflects it,'' said a beaming Rep. Sherwood Boehlert, R-N.Y. ``We've 
ended up on the center ground,'' he said, citing funding for education 
programs, home-heating fuel for low-income Americans, summer jobs 
for disadvantaged students, full financing for the International Monetary 
Fund and more money for Amtrak, a priority for members from the Northeast, 
who tend to be more moderate than those from other parts of the country. 
Rep. Porter Goss, R-Fla., laughed at his colleagues who complained 
about not being given a chance to read the bill. ``People have been 
massaging this bill for the last two weeks,'' said Goss, chairman 
of the Select Committee on Intelligence, an area of the budget that 
received a substantial increase. ``Where two or three people have 
gathered together, this bill has been crafted,'' he said. He said 
the final compromise was forced by a sensible desire by Republicans 
to avoid a government shutdown. But the vote revealed a severe split 
in the Republican Party that may be hard to patch up. Conservatives 
were hinting of future storms over this budget. ``There's going to 
be an accounting for this process,'' said Rep. Tom Coburn of Oklahoma. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>