<DOC>
<DOCNO> PRI19981020.2000.2998 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
This is THE WORLD. I'm Lisa Mullins. In Kosovo, reports of scattered 
fighting are testing the agreement U.S. Envoy Richard Holbrooke signed 
last week with Serbian leader Slobodan Milosevic. With NATO's October 
27th deadline looming, skirmishes have been reported between ethnic 
Albanian rebels and Serb police. And Serb tanks and troops rather 
than pulling out have been seen moving to a front line in Central 
Kosovo. Meanwhile, NATO commander Wesley Clarke is in Belgrade this 
week to monitor more closely the efforts underway to pull Serb troops 
out of Kosovo. THE WORLD's Nanet Chebek is in Kosovo's provincial 
capital, Pristina now. Nanet, on the military front, how significant 
are these latest reports of skirmishes and Serb troop movements? Are 
they a sign that tensions have not yet lessened? What we have at the 
moment are unconfirmed reports from both sides. The Serbs are saying 
that the Albanians have attacked and they're saying that they have 
one wounded policeman. The Albanian side is saying that it was the 
Serbian security forces who attacked. We're talking about the region 
of Drenitz around the town of Kleena. From a political viewpoint, 
these skirmishes are important because they are a signal to the international 
community that there will be a lot of problems before we actually 
see proper and true implementation of the agreement struck between 
Holbrooke and Milosevic. Can you talk a little bit about the people 
who need help at this point? Yesterday, the U.N. High Commission for 
Refugees had to call off two convoys of relief supplies because of 
reports of mortar shelling and some shooting. Are they making any 
kind of progress today in getting assistance to the refugees and is 
there a sign that the refugees are prepared to head back to their 
homes? Well, there has been programs. These convoys which departed 
today have actually reached their destinations and the UNHTR has actually 
denied the reports about the shelling yesterday. Those were unconfirmed 
reports. The United Nations Refugee Agency sent out their own field 
officers into the region where fighting was said to have taken place. 
And their field officers came back saying that there was no shelling. 
So there's quite a strong propaganda war that is being waged here 
in Kosovo with both sides trying to get the other side to take the 
blame for whatever happens or does not happen. What is the condition 
right now for the refugees? Is it fair to say that things are getting 
worse for them? Things are getting a little bit better and a lot worse. 
The little bit better is that the scale of the fighting is very, very 
low. We have very low intensity warfare in Kosovo at the moment. And 
a number of those villages could actually return to their villages. 
That's the good news. Now comes a whole load of bad news. First of 
all, a lot of those villages have been raised from the ground, have 
been destroyed. A lot of those homes simply don't exist anymore; those 
people don't have a place to go back to. That's one part of the story. 
The other part is they don't trust the Serbs in any possible way. 
They're not prepared to go back to any village which has any Serbian 
policemen anywhere near by. And the agreement between Holbrooke and 
Milosevic says that the Serb forces have to withdraw to the limits 
which they had in March this year before the large scale fighting 
began. So that means that the Serbian police is actually present on 
the territory of Kosovo, and then there's a third factor as well for 
the Kosovo Liberation Army, which is an armed successionist movement 
which is fighting for independence of Kosovo. There have been reports 
that the Kosovo Liberation Army was actually actively discouraging 
the displaced people from returning to their homes. Nanet, the 2,000 
piece monitors are scheduled to come to Kosovo within a week's time. 
Is there a sense that this fighting, albeit sporadic fighting, could 
possibly hinder the kind of work that they might be doing? It will 
certainly hinder their work, and I'm afraid that what we are going 
to see is we'll see the two sides continuing to battle each other, 
trying to pin the blame on the other side. And I'm afraid that the 
monitors will be sort of drawn, sucked into this game whether they 
want to or not. I'm not sure how efficient the can be in actually 
bringing peace to Kosovo. Probably the more efficient factor of bringing 
not really peace but cease fire will be general winter, will be actually 
the beginning of the snow season here. That might sort of help to 
sort of decrease the level of the fighting, but I'm afraid that the 
monitoring mission as such is no panacea. It's not going to help the 
situation fundamentally. The only thing that those people will be 
able to do is they will be able to verify who's actually breaking 
the cease fire and who's sort of not abiding by the agreement. But 
it's far from clear that they will be able to do so efficiently. THE 
WORLD's Nanet Chebek speaking to us from Pristina. Thank you, once 
again, Nanet. You're welcome, Lisa. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>