<DOC>
<DOCNO> PRI19981020.2000.0451 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
The current talks are focused exclusively on the Israelis and Palestinians. 
Agreement must be reached on their territorial disputes before the 
Mid East peace process can expand to issues involving Syria and Lebanon. 
In Syria, progress toward a peace settlement with Israel has been 
stalled for two years. President Hafaz al-Assad had ruled Syria for 
28 years and there is on sign that his grip on this enigmatic and 
isolated nation is weakening. For THE WORLD, Fergus Nichol from Damascus. 
In the scrum of the evening shopping hour at the Hamadiya Suk, a perfume 
seller hustles for customers. Oriental here, Syria, rose and jasmine, 
and the bulay and the ombra, very nice. Above the determined salesman 
is a portrait of President Assad. In fact, it's just one of the dozens 
of pictures at this busy intersection. It's an all pervasive personality 
cult, the constant reminder to Syrian citizens that Mr. Assad remains 
the hub of absolute political control that's even here in the market. 
There are watchful eyes. That tight control is maintained by an efficient 
network of loyalists in the army, the intelligence services, even 
the people's assembly. But the assembly speaker of the Lakada Kadura 
defends the relationship between parliament and president. What we 
are doing, we are doing not for the president. We are doing for our 
home, for our country, for our life. If the president can say what 
the people need, what the people hope, what the people dream, why 
must there be an opposite between the two things. Democracy is not 
the same all over the world. With new clubs, cafes, and restaurants 
opening all the time, social life in Damascus is dynamic and there 
has been real progress towards economic liberalization, too, but it's 
not matched by political freedom. In every part of this otherwise 
strikingly modern secular society, the clear if unspoken rule is keep 
well clear of politics. I asked the independent economic consultant, 
Dr. Nabil Sokar, if real economic freedom is possible in this climate. 
I think so if we have economic liberalization first, political liberalization 
good for the suit. I think you cannot destabilize your economic and 
political structures all at the same time. Look what happened in Russia. 
The outside world has welcomed Syria's attempts to end its economic 
isolation, but what really concerns the international community about 
this reclusive country is it's strategic position in the region. The 
Golan Heights occupied by the Israelis in 1967 is one of the regions 
most controversial areas, but ironically one of the most tranquil. 
The animals graze in the afternoon heat haze and Syrian farmers plant 
their crops right up the Israeli wire in the U.N. patrolled zone. 
This rural tranquillity reinforces the belief of some observers that 
if and when the Middle East peace process ever gets around to Syria, 
a deal between the two countries could be made to work on the ground. 
Bazil Eastwood is the British ambassador in Damascus. The Syrians 
say that they have made a strategic decision for peace, and at base, 
I would accept that. And what has happened on the Golan shows that 
a deal between Israel and Syria would stick. I think therefore that 
although no one can foretell the future with confidence, it is durable 
commitment not just temporary. Party loyalists waste no opportunity 
to pledge allegiance to Mr. Assad. Despite intermittent reports of 
ill health, there's no impression that his grip is loosening. It's 
widely assumed that his second son, Bashad, is being groomed as the 
heir apparent. For now though, whether or not the son secures the 
crown of the father, political debate in Syria boils down to this 
chant: Hafaz al-Assad forever. Reporting for THE WORLD, this is Fergus 
Nichol in Damascus. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>