<DOC>
<DOCNO> ABC19981227.1830.1226 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> CAPTION </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
On the beaches of southern Italy this weekend, nearly 300 people were 
arrested. They were not students on a fling, but illegal immigrants 
from Iraq, Turkey and Albania, on their way, they hoped, to western 
Europe. As ABC's Sheila MacVicar reports, a growing wave of immigrants 
is arriving not only in Italy, but in Greece. Illegal immigrants living 
in tents in a land that is not theirs. Dozens of them, crowded together, 
not in Florida or Texas, but a suburb of athens. These people are 
from Iraq, and Greece is their first stop inside the borders of Europe. 
Taba habeeb and her family paid a smuggler thousands of dollars to 
bring them here. They want to move on. We need to go to another country, 
to stay with my whole family. They need money, to pay another smuggler 
to take them across yet another border. One morning I'll come here 
and three families have left. Or someone has left. Someone maybe I've 
known for a year, but his time came. He was able to leave. He got 
his money together. It was the right conditions. I don't know exactly 
what, and the person is just gone. But the biggest challenge is not 
dealing with the illegal immigrants already in Greece. It's trying 
to stop the many thousands more who want to use this country's remote 
and lengthy coastline as a steppingstone to wealthy Europe. Greece 
is a point of entry into Europe for people from Africa, the Middle 
East, India, Pakistan and Albania, from those poorer nations with 
fewer opportunities. Because it is a point of entry, other European 
nations have insisted that border checks here remain in place. But 
beyond Greece, most of the borders of Europe are open with no checks 
for passports. That's why there is so much pressure on Greece and 
neighboring Italy, the southern flank of Europe. Every day, coast 
guard ships intercept yet another load of would-be immigrants. More 
go undetected. We want to keep our borders very closely watched from 
now on. So it's not going to be easy. It's going to become more and 
more difficult for new people to come in illegally. More difficult 
because Greece has added 1,000 new police officers to patrol its borders, 
bought new boats for coastal waters, and has now offered amnesty to 
some of its illegal immigrants, in an attempt to finally close its 
doors. This was an effort to draw the line, to open the ministry doors, 
to see who is who and who is where. But that's it. But smuggling people 
is a very lucrative and owing business for organized crime. And European 
police sources say, close the route in one place and the smugglers 
will find another. Sheila MacVicar, ABC News, Athens. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>