<DOC>
<DOCNO> ABC19981227.1830.0515 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> CAPTION </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
With President Clinton's future still very much a question Mark, "censure" 
was the word of the day on Capitol Hill today. Just how and when was 
the subject of debate on the Sunday talk shows. And as senators and 
pundits took to the air, Mr. Clinton took to the streets. Here's ABC's 
Tim O'Brien. Only a week after becoming the second president in American 
history to be impeached President Clinton took an extraordinary impromptu 
stroll through the streets of Washington this afternoon. We love you. 
All the trappings of a campaign stop belied a developing consensus 
he will soon have to stand trial to determine whether he should remain 
in office. Senators on both sides of the aisle were on the air today 
proclaiming the trial a foregone conclusion. I think a trial is inevitable. 
I believe that is the way the Senate will begin its work. We do need 
to move to a trial. That's our constitutional responsibility. Whatever 
the remedy, getting it over with quickly also seems a Priority. We 
are the indispensable country. The world can't get along without us 
right now. But we have to tend to our own affairs, get this particular 
thing behind us. And there is still serious doubt over whether there 
are the required 67 votes in the Senate, a two-thirds majority, to 
remove Mr. clinton from office. And that leaves censure as theost 
likely remedy in the end. But the censure would probably be in addition 
to a trial, not instead of one. The timing could be crucial. Censure 
could come at any point. Obviously, early in the process you could 
move to adjourn and take up a Censure motion. That would be debated 
by the full Senate. You could do it afterwards as sanctions are considered. 
There is no prescribed way with which to deal with the censure motion. 
If the censure resolution occurs before the end of the trial, senators 
would still have leverage to persuade the president to accept a Fine 
or at least admit guilt. I think he has to admit it, because everybody 
in the world knows he did lie under oath. And I think he's got to 
get rid of this phony set of legal parsing and hairsplitting. But 
if a trial goes to conclusion and the president is acquitted, he would 
have little incentive to admit to anything. There would be no penalty 
the Senate could impose other than expressing its outrage at the president's 
conduct. Outrage Mr. Clinton would be free to ignore. Tim O'Brien, 
ABC News, Washington. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>