<DOC>
<DOCNO> APW19981227.0183 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
The defection of Khmer Rouge intellectual Khieu Samphan to the Cambodian 
government brings an end to decades of posturing in which he played 
the moderate, public front-man for a gang of history's worst killers. 
Khieu Samphan and Nuon Chea, the mysterious ideologue who was second-in-command 
behind longtime leader Pol Pot, hammered two of the final nails in 
the coffin of their movement Saturday by defecting _ in reality, surrendering 
_ to the Phnom Penh government. After two years of ruptures in which 
the once-feared guerrilla group dwindled to almost nothing, the defections 
leave only the brutal one-legged general, Ta Mok, still holding out 
in the Cambodian jungles with perhaps 100 loyalists. The death knell 
comes eight months after Pol Pot, the supreme Khmer Rouge leader until 
he was purged in a power struggle in 1997, succumbed to a purported 
heart attack. The faces of Pol Pot, Nuon Chea and Ta Mok were hardly 
known to the world during the Khmer Rouge's secretive, bloody reign 
of terror from 1975 to 1979, when as many as 2 million Cambodians 
perished. Instead, Khieu Samphan was the smiling, polite figurehead 
put forward as head of state of what was called Democratic Kampuchea. 
But researchers who have studied Cambodia under the Khmer Rouge say 
that Khieu Samphan bore much more responsibility for the deaths of 
his countrymen than is often attributed to him. In particular, Khieu 
Samphan was used by Pol Pot to carry out internal purges. As for Nuon 
Chea, evidence shows he was more deeply involved in blood-letting 
than Pol Pot himself. ``Khieu Samphan's political star rose literally 
on heaps of corpses,'' said Steven Heder, an expert on the Khmer Rouge 
who lectures at London's School of Oriental and African Studies. Born 
in 1931 and the son of a provincial judge, Khieu Samphan won a government 
scholarship to study in Cambodia's colonial-ruler France, where he 
became involved in communist politics. So did Pol Pot and other top 
leaders of what became the Khmer Rouge. The doctoral thesis he submitted 
at the University of Paris in 1959 is seen as a blueprint of Khmer 
Rouge economic policy once it seized power in 1975 _ economic self-reliance 
and the collectivization of agriculture. On his return to Cambodia, 
Khieu Samphan became a professor and helped establish a left-wing 
newspaper. He established a reputation as a principled, honest intellectual 
and built up a student following. His activities and popularity alienated 
then-ruler Prince Norodom Sihanouk, whose police stripped and beat 
Khieu Samphan on the streets of the capital in July 1960 and detained 
him for a month. In 1962, Khieu Samphan won a seat in the National 
Assembly. Sihanouk, hoping to corrupt him and dent his reputation, 
appointed Khieu Samphan secretary of state for commerce. He lost his 
position for refusing to accept a bribe to overlook illegal meat trading. 
Khieu Samphan was re-elected in 1966 but worsening repression drove 
him underground into the jungle. Most Cambodians believed Sihanouk 
had had him killed. After Sihanouk was overthrown by a U.S.-backed 
coup in 1970, the prince formed an alliance with the Khmer Rouge. 
Khieu Samphan surfaced in 1973 when, as the guerrillas' military commander-in-chief 
_ one of his first front-man roles _ he hosted a visit by the prince 
to the guerrilla zone. The Khmer Rouge seized Phnom Penh on April 
17, 1975, and cut Cambodia off from the world. All forms of a market 
economy were banned and the cities emptied. Residents were force-marched 
to the countryside to labor on agricultural collectives. A year later, 
they dispensed with Sihanouk _ who was kept prisoner in his palace 
_ as figurehead and made Khieu Samphan head of state to preside over 
the deaths of as many as 2 million of his countrymen. Vietnam invaded 
Cambodia on Christmas Day, 1978, and toppled the Khmer Rouge two weeks 
later. Khieu Samphan became chief spokesman and representative in 
the decade of maneuverings that followed. The Khmer Rouge joined royalist 
and republican factions in an alliance to drive out the Vietnamese, 
Cambodia's traditional enemy. Under international pressure, Hanoi 
pulled out its troops in 1989. Khieu Samphan negotiated multilateral 
peace accords reached in 1991. But he was attacked by a government-orchestrated 
mob in Phnom Penh that year and withdrew to the jungles. The Khmer 
Rouge boycotted U.N.-organized elections in 1993. The movement began 
breaking up in 1996, but Khieu Samphan stayed with the hard-liners 
_ against his will, some believed. He remained the most authoritative 
voice on clandestine radio broadcasts. Sihanouk, Prime Minister Hun 
Sen and other leaders often drew a distinction between Khieu Samphan 
and other Khmer Rouge chieftains. A small number of younger Cambodians 
fed up with corruption even to this day voice admiration for his perceived 
personal honesty. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>