<DOC>
<DOCNO> APW19981227.0201 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
The appeals from the ``rotten kid'' struck a nerve among Chinese fretful 
over the rise in problem juveniles, prompting a flood of letters to 
the Beijing Evening News from worried parents and anguished children. 
``I'm one of those so-called good kids, because my schoolwork is pretty 
good,'' wrote one youngster. ``After school, I smoke, drink and get 
into fights, but nobody punishes me because I'm a good student. I 
know I'm a bad kid, but my parents are blinded by my good grades. 
I hope someone will come save us.'' Rising juvenile crime, suicides 
and other behavioral problems have many Chinese questioning the wisdom 
of the government's policy of controlling population growth by limiting 
urban families to one child. In just a single generation, five-child 
extended families have shrunk to single-child nuclear families in 
the cities. Some ``little emperors'' end up smothered by the attentions 
of their well-meaning parents. Others are left on their own with little 
supervision or emotional support. ``The one-child policy is a method, 
but it is a hopeless method. The cost is very high,'' said Chen Yiyun, 
an expert on families at the Chinese Academy of Social Sciences. ``But 
we are also having the same problems as in the West, so we can't blame 
everything on the one-child policy.'' The rising juvenile crime rate 
_ minors account for at least two-thirds of all those arrested _ and 
the gravity of crimes committed by children barely into their teens 
has shocked many Chinese. The problem was considered serious enough 
for the National People's Congress to pass a law last April on juvenile 
delinquency. The tendency of parents and grandparents to pamper and 
overprotect their single offspring has long prompted jokes about teen-agers 
who don't know how to wash their own backs, let alone do laundry. 
Reports in the official media reflect more alarming trends. A gang 
of more than 30 teen-agers in the northern city of Xi'an committed 
dozens of armed robberies and rapes over the past few years. The youngest, 
an 11-year-old, participated in four gang rapes, police said. The 
boy was ``cute and lovable, with a very sweet smile,'' according to 
a report in the official newspaper Legal Daily. He also belonged to 
the gang's core, partly because he had access to a car and often drove 
his cohorts around town. Another gang member was the son of a government 
official and a student with excellent grades who extorted money from 
his classmates. The gang members' status as only children was only 
one factor behind their behavior, Gao Chengge, a psychologist at the 
Yifu Hospital in Xi'an, said in a telephone interview. Rising divorce 
rates and intensifying economic pressures that keep many parents too 
busy with work to spend time with their children are also to blame, 
he said. China's ban on private gun ownership has helped prevent the 
widespread firearms use like that which has plagued American cities, 
but state media report killings by children. In one case, a 14-year-old 
was charged with strangling his 10-year-old cousin after kidnapping 
the boy to demand ransom from his uncle in order to pay a debt of 
12,000 yuan, or about dlrs 1,450. In another, a 15-year-old slammed 
a brick on the head of an 11-year-old, dragged her into his house 
and beat her before dumping her in a manure pile, where she suffocated. 
A 16-year-old was beaten to death by five boys after an argument over 
10 cents worth of soda and gum. The chief suspect is a 13-year-old 
who had dropped out of elementary school. The ``rotten kid'' letters 
drew hundreds of responses from alienated youths, Chinese parents 
and educators during the two months the Evening News ran the weekly 
series earlier this year. Parents expressed their frustrations at 
not knowing how to communicate with their children, or how to get 
them to study. Children poured out their own troubles: Parents with 
no time to talk to their children or so preoccupied with school performance 
they disregard the youngsters' feelings. ``I never go home a minute 
earlier than I have to, because I feel I have nothing to say to my 
family. Our views and thoughts are totally different,'' wrote a 16-year-old 
named Lingling. ``I may seem well behaved, but I'm not.'' Schools 
are trying to counter the problem with ethics and morality classes 
for children and by promoting awareness of mental health issues among 
parents. Children need more than just book learning, said Fang Ge, 
an education psychologist. ``People need to pay attention not only 
to intelligence but to other qualities, such as a sense of responsibility, 
confidence and independence. Children need social skills as well as 
education,'' Fang said. In many cases, problems arise not because 
of a lack of attention, but because parents tend to be overprotective, 
said Fang Liluo, a psychiatrist who often counsels families. ``The 
children are too cherished. Each parent believes, `My child must be 
the best,' and loads too many expectations on the child,'' Fang said. 
Such children are perpetually immature, she said. ``They can't endure 
mistakes, are easily frustrated and unable to deal with problems.'' 
Reports from around the country indicate a surge in the use of tranquilizers 
by adolescents unable to sleep due to anxiety over school. The Beijing 
Youth Daily surveyed middle school students and said one-third of 
those questioned admitted to having thought about suicide at least 
once or twice. One-tenth had thought about it often. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>