<DOC>
<DOCNO> APW19981227.0368 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Broadening a crackdown on dissent, China swiftly tried and sentenced 
a labor activist Sunday to 10 years imprisonment for telling a U.S. 
government-funded radio network about farmers' protests, his wife 
said. Zhang Shanguang was the fourth dissident given a lengthy jail 
term in a week. He was sentenced following a closed-door, 2-hour, 
20-minute hearing from which his wife, friends and relatives were 
barred, his wife, Hou Xuezhu, said. ``It's unjust, unfair,'' she said. 
The harsh sentence underscored the ruling Communist Party's determination 
to keep a tight grip on power as it grapples with mounting unemployment 
and economic difficulties, and heads into a politically charged year. 
The 10th anniversary of the government's crackdown on democracy protests 
on Tiananmen Square falls in June. A few months later, in October, 
the Communist Party will fete the 50th anniversary of its rule over 
China, and in December China takes back control of the Portuguese 
colony of Macau. Chinese leaders are anxious to ensure that no one 
seizes upon these events to push for change or vent grievances. They 
also want to prevent democracy and labor activists from tapping into 
the discontent caused by millions of lay-offs from state factories 
that are being shut down and restructured. In a strident speech last 
week, President Jiang Zemin vowed to crush any challenges to Communist 
Party rule and ordered that threats to stability be ``resolutely nipped 
in the bud.'' Zhang's summary trial follows heavy sentences given 
last week to three of China's most prominent dissidents: Xu Wenli, 
Qin Yongmin and Wang Youcai. They were charged with endangering state 
security and sentenced to 13 years, 12 years and 11 years respectively 
for trying to organize the China Democracy Party. Zhang, however, 
was not a member of the would-be opposition group and his sentence 
suggested a broadening of the government's efforts to crush dissent. 
The U.S. Embassy in Beijing, through its spokesman, Bill Palmer, said 
Sunday it was ``deeply disappointed with the guilty verdicts and the 
extremely harsh sentences'' handed down in the past week. Zhang had 
been working on setting up an association to protect the rights of 
laid-off workers when he was arrested in July, after the visit to 
China by U.S. President Bill Clinton. At his trial, the court in Huaihua 
city in south China's Hunan province convicted Zhang of providing 
``intelligence'' to people overseas by giving an interview to Radio 
Free Asia about farmers' protests and heavy rural taxes, his wife 
said. The U.S. government-funded network has irked Chinese officials 
with reports on human rights and other issues, and its broadcasts 
are sometimes jammed in China. His wife said Zhang gave the radio 
just one interview in March and spoke about a protest by 70 to 80 
farmers. After the closed hearing, the court adjourned for 30 minutes 
before passing sentence, his wife said. She said she was allowed into 
the court for the sentencing, but was not allowed to speak to her 
husband. Zhang is sick with tuberculosis and has lost ``a lot'' of 
weight in detention, she said. But ``his spirit is very good,'' she 
added. Court officials told her that she had not been allowed into 
the hearing because Zhang's case involved ``state secrets,'' she said. 
Under China's criminal code, Zhang was facing a maximum penalty of 
death. His wife said that apart from a 10-year sentence Zhang also 
was stripped of his political rights for five years, meaning he will 
be under close official supervision after his release. Zhang had already 
served a seven-year jail term for labor activism and prosecutors had 
reportedly called on the court to strictly punish him as a repeat 
offender. Hunan police mobilized ``a large number'' of officers to 
watch other dissidents at home and prevent them from going to the 
court to show support for Zhang, Human Rights in China, a New York-based 
rights group, said. Despite the tight security, it said some people 
from as far away as Beijing, 1,500 kilometers (930 miles) to the north, 
had given police the slip and were in Huaihua to show their support. 
It also said that 274 people in more than 20 provinces and major cities 
had signed an open letter calling for Zhang's release. The letter 
was addressed to President Jiang Zemin, Premier Zhu Rongji and Mary 
Robinson, the United Nation's top human rights official, who visited 
China in September, it said. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>