<DOC>
<DOCNO> APW19981227.0350 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
The United Nations called Sunday for a 48-hour cease-fire between 
the Angolan government and UNITA rebels to allow an investigation 
team to reach the site of a U.N. aircraft that crashed with 14 people 
on board this weekend. The C-130 aircraft went down in an area 500 
kilometers (310 miles) southeast of the capital Luanda where the government 
army has been fighting UNITA for nearly a month. It was not known 
if there were any survivors. U.N. spokesman Hamadoun Toure said there 
was no immediate information on the cause of the crash. He cited government 
sources in the central highland city of Huambo as saying they had 
seen a plane go down in flames shortly after takeoff from there and 
that it had crashed 25 miles (40 kilometers) away in Vila Nova. An 
Angolan government plane was shot down Dec. 14, just north of another 
central highland city of Kuito, killing 10 people. It was not clear 
who had fired at the aircraft. Onboard the plane that crashed Saturday 
were four Angolans, two Russians, an Australian, an Egyptian, a Cameroonian, 
a Zambian, a Namibian, a South African, a Bolivian and a Filipino. 
Eight were members of the U.N. Observer Mission in Angola and two 
were employed by a private communications company, Dinacom, working 
with the United Nations, Toure said. The other four were the plane's 
crew. The World Food Program reacted to the crash by suspending food 
delivery flights throughout Angola until Wednesday, pending more information 
on the crash, according to Brenda Barton, a spokeswoman for the organization 
in the Kenyan capital of Nairobi. The U.N. military observers are 
charged with monitoring a 1994 peace accord that is severely threatened 
by fighting between the government and UNITA rebels that flared up 
again three weeks ago. Kuito and Huambo, which lie some 130 kilometers 
(80 miles) apart, have served as a stage for heavy battles between 
UNITA and the government for nearly a month. Neither the government 
nor the rebels responded to the U.N. call for a cease-fire, Toure 
said. U.N. Secretary-General Kofi Annan appealed to the Angolan government 
and to UNITA to allow members of the U.N. Observer Mission in Angola 
to go to the crash site and assist in search and rescue operations, 
a spokesman said in a statement. The plane, owned by TransAfric and 
chartered by the United Nations, was headed for Saurimo, in the province 
of Lunda Sul, about 390 miles (625 kilometers) east of Huambo, Toure 
said. The four-engine C-130, one of the most widely used military 
transport planes, can carry up to 92 people. The U.N. Security Council 
has expressed dismay that Angola appears headed back to civil war, 
which has ravaged the southern African nation since the country's 
1975 independence from Portugal. Diplomats have been unable to get 
both sides to adhere to a 1994 peace accord. The agreement called 
for UNITA, whose name is a Portuguese acronym for the National Union 
for the Total Independence for Angola, to disarm and to hand areas 
under its control to the government. However, lingering hostility 
between the two sides has hindered implementation of the deal. The 
council on Wednesday again accused Angolan rebel leaders of undermining 
the peace process and demanded an immediate end to the fighting. WFP's 
Barton said that food distribution to approximately 400,000 Angolans 
displaced by the conflict would not be interrupted by the grounded 
flights. But she said the situation was ``grave'' because air cargo 
is the only way to replenish supplies. Commercial food supplies via 
roads have been shut down by the fighting. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>