<DOC>
<DOCNO> APW19981227.0216 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu on Sunday cleared a major political 
hurdle in his bid for re-election when a top contender within the 
Likud party dropped out of the race. However, a challenge to Netanyahu's 
leadership from within was announced by Uzi Landau, 55, chairman of 
the powerful Knesset Foreign Affairs and Defense Committee. Landau 
is unlikely to unseat Netanyahu, and the Netanyahu critic in Likud 
rated as having the best chance, Jerusalem Mayor Ehud Olmert, took 
himself out of the race Sunday. Olmert, a hawk who has campaigned 
for building the controversial Har Homa neighborhood in traditionally 
Arab east Jerusalem, was the only party member with enough stature 
and following in Likud to have a fighting chance against Netanyahu. 
However, Olmert reportedly took the decision to bow out after failing 
to enlist the support of Defense Minister Yitzhak Mordechai, who is 
popular among the Sephardim, or Jews from Middle East countries. The 
lack of a serious challenge so far strengthened Netanyahu's chances 
to again be the party's candidate for re-election. The announcements 
came in advance of the Likud Central Committee meeting later Sunday. 
The panel is to set the stage for selecting a party leader and begin 
the process of choosing the a list of candidates for the Knesset. 
The Likud candidate is expected to face Labor Party leader Ehud Barak 
in elections, the date for which is expected to be set by parliament 
soon. But there are also several candidates forming centrist parties 
that could complicate the picture. Landau represents the right wing 
within Likud that has been dismayed by Netanyahu's flip-flops on policy 
issues and political maneuvering designed to keep his six-party coalition 
in power. ``Likud has become the party of the moment with a leader 
who changes course according to the direction of the wind. Such victory 
is not a genuine victory,'' Landau told a Tel Aviv press conference 
where he announced his candidacy. The hard liners were also deeply 
disappointed by Netanyahu's signing of the Wye accord, which set the 
stage for three further withdrawals from the West Bank. The hardliners 
feel that Netanyahu agreed to territorial concessions without secure 
enough guarantees that the Palestinians would crack down hard enough 
against terrorism. Landau, a Likud veteran with a Ph.d in systems 
analysis from the Massachusetts Institute of Technology, said that 
although he knew his chances of overtaking Netanyahu in the party's 
primaries were slim, he felt duty-bound to put the party back on the 
ideological course he says it has strayed from under the current premier's 
two-and-a-half year rule. By Landau's side Sunday was former Prime 
Minister Yitzhak Shamir, who has severely criticized Netanyahu in 
recent interviews for destroying the Likud party. Shamir, who left 
office in 1992 after losing to the late Yitzhak Rabin of Labor, threw 
his weight behind Landau, saying he was the most suitable candidate 
to lead the party and the country. ``Benjamin Netanyahu should be 
replaced,'' Shamir was quoted as saying in an interview with the daily 
Yediot Ahronot. ``This isn't the Likud I knew as prime minister.'' 
Landau, son of one of the founding fathers of the right-wing movement 
that gave birth to the Likud, said ``no one says this party belongs 
to just one man.'' He alluded to criticism that Netanyahu was too 
high-handed and had strayed from traditional party ideology. Likud, 
one of two main parties in Israeli politics, has been splintering. 
Both Landau and Shamir made an appeal to Likud veterans - Dan Meridor 
and Benny Begin who have broken away from the party to form their 
own factions against Netanyahu - to fight from within the fold. Leaving 
a lengthy meeting with Meridor, who announced last week his candidacy 
as head of a new centrist party, Communications Minister Limor Livnat 
refused to state publicly whether or not she has decided to leave 
Netanyahu's coalition for Meridor's camp. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>