<DOC>
<DOCNO> APW19981227.0631 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Death comes easily in Sierra Leone, where rebel fighters randomly 
kill and hack off limbs of unarmed villagers and government forces 
reply with scorched-earth bombing raids. Combine that with disease 
and miserable poverty and the average citizen of Sierra Leone has 
a life expectancy of just 34 years. But while United Nations considers 
the West African country the world's most unlivable, its churches, 
markets and discos are filled with people trying to salvage normal 
lives from the bloody despair. ``Even if there is a rebel fighting 
in my parlor room, I would never live anywhere else,'' says James 
Fulah, a taxi driver who spends his days negotiating the crowded streets 
of the capital of Freetown. A former British colony filled with lush 
forests, fertile fields and bountiful diamond and mineral wealth, 
Sierra Leone should be a land of plenty. No one should go hungry here 
_ mangos, bananas and other fruit grow like weeds and rice used to 
be an export crop. Yet many villagers are unable to tend their fields 
for fear of rebel attacks if they leave their homes. Food aid is brought 
in by the ton. A surprise rebel advance in recent days has once again 
shaken Sierra Leone, and insurgent commanders are vowing to storm 
the capital. Still, the relentless hardships have not dampened a lively 
national spirit. Flag-waving citizens eagerly turn up for rallies 
staged by the elected government, which was restored after the widely-reviled 
rebels and their military allies were deposed in February. Impoverished 
villagers generously give donations to the ragged government-backed 
traditional militiamen who guard countless villages and roadblocks 
throughout the country and are often the only defense against rebel 
attack. Unlike many other war-torn African countries, Sierra Leone 
has managed to retain a veneer of normalcy amid the chaos. Water and 
electricity services continue to operate _ albeit intermittently _ 
in most cities. Even during the worst of the fighting, stiff English 
customs such as afternoon tea are diligently observed by the educated 
class. It is a country where gallows humor and macabre jokes have 
been spawned by the coups, beheadings and rebel atrocities that mark 
Sierra Leone's recent history. Some would say Sierra Leone has little 
to laugh about. For the past three years, the United Nations Development 
Program has ranked Sierra Leone last among 174 countries assessed 
for their quality of life _ a measure of income, education, life expectancy 
and health care. Up to a quarter of Sierra Leone's 4.7 million people 
have fled their homes since the rebels were driven from the capital 
by a Nigerian-led coalition force. Seeking revenge against the government, 
which returned after 10 months in exile, the rebels have randomly 
mutilated, raped and murdered thousands, witnesses and aid workers 
say. And although the government forces enjoy wide popularity, they 
have on occasion indiscriminately bombarded civilians in retaliatory 
raids against the rebels. Partly as a result of the war, Sierra Leoneans 
are forced to cope with a shattered health care system and a burgeoning 
AIDS epidemic. The people have a life expectancy of just 34 years 
and the average person earns the equivalent of dlrs 171 a year. The 
country's economy, formerly dependent on diamond and bauxite mining, 
has been nearly destroyed. This year the government reported a budget 
of less than dlrs 30 million. ``There is no question about Sierra 
Leone being at the bottom of the list in 1998,'' said New York-based 
UNDP analyst Gul Tanghe. ``There are many other countries with serious 
problems, but we believe Sierra Leone is the worst.'' The suffering 
is obvious. People with limbs hacked off in a rebel revenge campaign 
fill hospitals. In the eastern town of Kenema, a children's home in 
a hut covered with plastic sheeting is swollen with abandoned and 
orphaned youngsters, many of whom watched their parents being killed. 
The capital of Freetown, once a charming city of Victorian cottages 
and shops, is now a decaying hulk filled with bullet-scarred British 
architecture and bitter memories of a painful colonial past. The last 
seven years of fighting has prevented people from rebuilding their 
homes and livelihoods. But the veneer of everyday life continues. 
Shops often open early and close late; and until Freetown's 10 p.m. 
curfew was imposed last week, candle-lit stalls lined dark Freetown 
streets until after midnight, the smell of chili and fresh fish wafting 
through the air. Couples bump and grind on the city's crowded dance 
floors. At curfew time, the proprietors lock the doors and those within 
party until dawn. On a typical Sunday, voices of exultation and praise 
boom from the Flaming Bible Church _ one of Freetown's more than 100 
Christian churches and Muslim mosques. ``Feel the fire! The Holy Ghost 
fire!'' Rev. Freddy Abu Sidique shouts during a sermon. His most popular 
services include lessons on exorcising demons and ridding houses of 
ghosts. ``Feel the joy! Increase your business! increase your wages! 
Bring safety and protection to your family! Live and continue living!'' 
Sidique says to a roar of approval. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>