<DOC>
<DOCNO> APW19981227.0165 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Broadening a crackdown on dissent, China swiftly tried and sentenced 
a labor activist Sunday to 10 years imprisonment for giving interviews 
to the U.S. government-funded Radio Free Asia, a human rights group 
said. Zhang Shanguang was the fourth dissident given a lengthy jail 
term in a week. He was sentenced following a 2-hour, 20-minute hearing 
from which his wife and relatives were barred, said Human Rights in 
China, a New York-based group. The harsh sentence underscored a renewed 
determination by the ruling Communist Party to keep a tight grip on 
power as it grapples with mounting unemployment and economic difficulties, 
and heads into a politically charged year. The 10th anniversary of 
the government's crackdown on democracy protests on Tiananmen Square 
falls in June. A few months later, in October, the Communist Party 
will fete the 50th anniversary of its rule over China, and in December 
China takes back control of the Portuguese colony of Macau. Officials 
are anxious to ensure that no one seizes upon these events to push 
for change or vent grievances. In a strident speech last week, President 
Jiang Zemin vowed to crush any challenges to Communist Party rule 
and ordered that threats to stability be ``resolutely nipped in the 
bud.'' Zhang's summary trial follows heavy sentences given last week 
to three of China's most prominent dissidents: Xu Wenli, Qin Yongmin 
and Wang Youcai. They were charged with endangering state security 
and sentenced to 13 years, 12 years and 11 years respectively for 
trying to organize the China Democracy Party. Zhang, however, was 
not a member of the would-be opposition group and his sentence suggested 
a broadening of the government's efforts to crush dissent. The U.S. 
Embassy in Beijing, through its spokesman, Bill Palmer, said Sunday 
it was ``deeply disappointed with the guilty verdicts and the extremely 
harsh sentences'' handed down in the past week. Zhang had been working 
on setting up an association to protect the rights of laid-off workers 
when he was arrested in July, after the visit to China by U.S. President 
Bill Clinton. Millions of workers have been laid-off as state factories 
are shut down or restructured, making officials fearful of labor unrest. 
In convicting Zhang, the court in southern China's Hunan province 
ruled that by telling Radio Free Asia about farmers' protests, he 
violated an article of China's criminal code that bars people from 
providing ``intelligence'' to people overseas, Human Rights in China 
said. The crime carries a maximum penalty of death. Human Rights in 
China said that apart from a 10-year sentence Zhang also was stripped 
of his political rights for five years, meaning he will be under close 
official supervision after his release. A Hong Kong-based group, the 
Information Center of Human Rights and Democratic Movement in China, 
also said Zhang received a 10-year sentence for releasing intelligence 
abroad, although it did not mention Radio Free Asia. Zhang had already 
served a seven-year jail term for labor activism and prosecutors had 
reportedly called on the court to strictly punish him at his trial 
Sunday as a repeat offender. Hunan police mobilized ``a large number'' 
of officers to watch other dissidents at home and prevent them from 
going to the court in Huaihua city to show support for Zhang, Human 
Rights in China said. Despite the tight security, it said some people 
from as far away as Beijing, 1,500 kilometers (930 miles) to the north, 
had given police the slip and were in Huaihua to show their support. 
It also said that 274 people in more than 20 provinces and major cities 
had signed an open letter calling for Zhang's release. The letter 
was addressed to President Jiang Zemin, Premier Zhu Rongji and Mary 
Robinson, the U.N.'s top human rights official who visited China in 
September, it said. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>