<DOC>
<DOCNO> APW19981227.0628 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Angolan state radio blamed UNITA rebels for shooting down a U.N.-chartered 
plane carrying 14 people while the international organization Sunday 
called for a 48-hour cease-fire to allow a search for survivors. RNA 
radio said the C-130 aircraft was shot down Saturday by UNITA troops 
battling the government army in the Huambo area, about 500 kilometers 
(310 miles) southeast of the capital Luanda. UNITA has neither confirmed 
nor denied the accusation. In Luanda, U.N. spokesman Hamadoun Toure 
said the aircraft was painted with the U.N. colors, and that both 
sides were informed of the flight's schedule before takeoff. The 10 
passengers included three Angolans, two Russians, an Australian, one 
Egyptian, one Cameroonian, a Zambian and a Namibian. Eight were members 
of the U.N. Observer Mission in Angola and two were employed by a 
private communications company, Dinacom, which works with the United 
Nations, Toure said. The crew was made up of a South African, an Angolan, 
a Bolivian and a Filipino. Despite the radio claim, Toure said the 
United Nations had no immediate information as to the cause of the 
crash. He cited government sources in the central highland city of 
Huambo as saying they had seen a plane go down in flames shortly after 
takeoff from there and that it had crashed 25 miles (40 kilometers) 
away in Vila Nova. Toure said neither side had responded to the call 
for a halt in the fighting. The Portuguese news agency Lusa cited 
UNITA Secretary-General Paulo Lukamba Gato as saying he knew the plane 
had crashed in a rebel-held area, but that he had not yet spoken to 
UNITA rebels there. Given the resumption of fighting this month, ``No 
one should be flying those areas,'' Lusa quoted Gato as saying. He 
admitted UNITA rebels had shot down a government plane Dec. 14, just 
north of another central highland city, Kuito. All ten people on board 
died. Kuito and Huambo, which lie some 130 kilometers (80 miles) apart, 
have served as a stage for heavy battles between UNITA and the government 
since the beginning of December. Some 200 people were killed and more 
than 400 wounded over the past two weeks in Kuito, the private Radio 
Eclesia reported Sunday from the rebel-targeted city. The World Food 
Program reacted to Saturday's plane crash by suspending food delivery 
flights throughout Angola until Wednesday, pending more information 
on the crash, spokeswoman Brenda Barton said from the Kenyan capital 
of Nairobi. She said, however, that food distribution to approximately 
400,000 Angolans displaced by the conflict would not be interrupted. 
The U.N. observers are in Angola to monitor a 1994 peace accord that 
is severely threatened by latest fighting. On news of the crash, Secretary-General 
Kofi Annan appealed to the government and UNITA to enable observers 
go to the site and assist in search and rescue operations. He also 
asked for their cooperation in the investigation. The plane, owned 
by TransAfric, was headed for Saurimo, about 390 miles (625 kilometers) 
east of Huambo, Toure said. The U.N. Security Council has expressed 
dismay at Angola's apparent slide back to civil war. The country has 
been ravaged by conflict since 1975's independence from Portugal. 
The 1994 accord called for UNITA, a Portuguese acronym for the National 
Union for the Total Independence for Angola, to disarm and hand areas 
under its control to the government. The Security Council last week 
accused rebel leaders of undermining the peace process and demanded 
an immediate end to the fighting. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>