<DOC>
<DOCNO> APW19981227.0338 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Serbian police and ethnic Albanian rebels waged a fierce battle Sunday 
around a guerrilla stronghold, exchanging fire with artillery, mortars 
and grenades in a fourth straight day of fighting in northern Kosovo. 
Police wearing flak jackets and helmets fired from trenches at the 
outskirts of Obranca village toward neighboring Lapastica _ the Kosovo 
Liberation Army stronghold that appears to be the main target of their 
four-day-old offensive. The ethnic Albanians accused police of opening 
fire first on Sunday morning, but rebels were shooting back heavily. 
The crackdown has resulted in the most serious clashes in the secessionist 
province since an October truce, despite the efforts of international 
monitors determined to prevent a return to full-scale war. At least 
10 ethnic Albanians have been reported killed in the latest offensive. 
The body of the latest victim, a 44-year-old man, was discovered Saturday 
night, the Kosovo Information Center said. Teams of international 
monitors were sent to the area of Sunday's shooting in rebel-controlled 
territory between Obranca and Lapastica, some 30 kilometers (20 miles) 
north of Pristina. The unarmed patrols generally keep clear of the 
combat. One verifier near the scene of Sunday's clash characterized 
it as ``serious fighting.'' Efforts by the monitors, led by American 
diplomat William Walker, to talk to both sides and visit the fighting 
areas appear to have helped prevent a complete breakdown of the shaky 
truce. But Serb forces have refused to end their buildup in the rebel-held 
area. International officials, who still hold both the Serbs and the 
ethnic Albanians' Kosovo Liberation Army responsible for worsening 
violence, are aiming increasing criticism at the Serb side for responding 
with dozens of tanks to alleged provocations by the KLA. Serb police 
said they would stay in Obranca, two kilometers (about a mile) from 
Lapastica, until at least after the funeral later Sunday of a 65-year-old 
Serb farmer killed by the KLA the previous day. The police took up 
positions behind his house and were firing from trenches there. The 
farmer, one of the last Serb civilians in the predominantly ethnic 
Albanian village, was shot after he and his family opened fire on 
the KLA, a rebel commander was quoted as saying in the ethnic Albanian 
daily Koha Ditore on Sunday. The top Serb official in Pristina said 
the farmer's death was ``another crime committed by Albanian terrorists 
whose aim is to make Kosovo ethnically'' all-Albanian. ``State authorities 
are prepared to deal with all those jeopardizing the territorial integrity 
of our country,'' Zoran Andjelkovic told reporters. The Kosovo Information 
Center claimed Serb police are passing out weapons to Serb civilians 
in the region. In a separate incident Sunday, the Serb-run Media Center 
said a 62-year-old villager from Velika Reka near Podujevo was shot 
at with automatic weapons and fired back on the ``terrorists.'' The 
rebels have acknowledged they are rearming and preparing for sustained 
fighting in order to gain freedom for Kosovo, an Albanian-dominated 
province in Serbia, the main republic in Yugoslavia. A large group 
of armed ethnic Albanians was prevented from entering Kosovo illegally 
from Albania late Saturday when Yugoslav army border guards fired 
back on the ``attackers'' near the Vrbnica border outpost, the Media 
Center said. No casualties were reported. International diplomacy 
that produced an October peace agreement has failed to achieve an 
agreement on Kosovo's political status aimed at ending the conflict. 
More than 1,000 people have been killed since Yugoslav President Slobodan 
Milosevic began an offensive against the rebels last February, and 
some 300,000 were driven from their homes. Hundreds have fled the 
latest fighting in the Podujevo region, walking for kilometers (miles) 
in sub-freezing temperatures and packing into houses already cramped 
with other refugees, sometimes dozens to the room. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>