<DOC>
<DOCNO> APW19981227.0614 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Serbian police using artillery, mortars and other heavy weapons battled 
ethnic Albanian rebels for hours Sunday in a fourth straight day of 
combat in the snowy fields of northern Kosovo. The U.S. diplomat who 
heads an international monitoring force gained commitments from both 
sides for a temporary truce as darkness fell late Sunday, in order 
to evacuate wounded. William Walker voiced hope the ``sporadic fighting'' 
can be contained without again engulfing the province in full-scale 
war. But both Kosovo Liberation Army guerrillas and Serb troops and 
armor remained entrenched in their standoff near the northern town 
of Podujevo, and there was no indication the worst outbreak of fighting 
in months was over. Sunday's at-times fierce clash put more pressure 
on an already shaky truce that has held through the late fall and 
winter across the secessionist province of Serbia, the dominant republic 
left in Yugoslavia. Despite an October agreement that halted more 
than seven months of fighting, neither side has shown a willingness 
to negotiate a settlement to their differences. The KLA insists on 
independence and on driving Serb police out of the predominantly Albanian 
province, while the Serbian government says it will never let Kosovo 
go. The reported death toll from the Serb crackdown that began last 
Thursday reached 10, all ethnic Albanians, over the weekend with the 
reported discovery of another body late Saturday night. Five people 
were reported wounded Sunday _ four Serbs and an Albanian rebel. As 
many as 10,000 civilians, mostly Albanians, have fled the fighting 
and many remained in nearby woods in sub-freezing temperatures Sunday, 
according to the ethnic Albanians' Kosovo Information Center. After 
three days of intermittent clashes near the KLA stronghold of Lapastica, 
32 kilometers (20 miles) north of Pristina, the ethnic Albanians accused 
police of opening fire Sunday morning in violation of a truce made 
with verifiers the previous night. The Serbs, meanwhile, said they 
acted to protect and evacuate the fast-declining number of Serb civilians 
in the area and to remove the body of a 65-year-old farmer whom the 
rebels killed Saturday. Police wearing flak jackets and helmets fired 
from trenches at the outskirts of Obranca village toward neighboring 
Lapastica. At least one Yugoslav Army tank was involved in the action 
along with numerous police armored personnel carriers, while the rebels 
fought back with machine guns and grenades. Three Serb policemen were 
wounded, two seriously, in neighboring Velika Reka after being ``ambushed'' 
by rebels when they tried to rescue a wounded villager, the Serb-run 
Media Center reported. One international verifier at the scene who 
declined to be named characterized Sunday's developments as ``serious 
fighting.'' But Walker, whose force is gradually building toward 2,000 
unarmed verifiers under the auspices of the Organization for Security 
and Cooperation in Europe, denied the province is inevitably slipping 
back into war. ``It didn't actually break out into all-out fighting,'' 
he said, adding that both sides were being ``relatively cautious'' 
and not using full firepower. ``We're trying to talk to both sides, 
get them to stand down, show some humanity one with the other in terms 
of getting the wounded out,'' the diplomat told CNN after the fighting 
calmed. Jorgen Grunnet, a spokesman for the OSCE-led peace mission, 
said the verifiers mediated the evacuation of two wounded Serbs and 
one ethnic Albanian. A convoy containing some of the Serb armored 
vehicles left Obranca Sunday afternoon bearing the coffin of the killed 
farmer, Milovan Radojevic, who was buried hurriedly in Podujevo. The 
police fired on the rebels for much of the day from trenches behind 
his house. One of the last Serb civilians in the predominantly ethnic 
Albanian village, he was shot after he and his family opened fire 
on the KLA, according to the rebels. The top Serb official in Pristina 
said Radojevic's death was ``another crime committed by Albanian terrorists 
whose aim is to make Kosovo ethnically'' all-Albanian. ``State authorities 
are prepared to deal with all those jeopardizing the territorial integrity 
of our country,'' Zoran Andjelkovic said. The Kosovo Information Center 
claimed Serb police are passing out weapons to Serb civilians in the 
region. It said Serb police were stationed on Podujevo rooftops as 
many of the handful of remaining Serbs left. More than 1,000 people 
have been killed since Yugoslav President Slobodan Milosevic began 
an offensive against the rebels last February, and some 300,000 were 
driven from their homes. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>