<DOC>
<DOCNO> APW19981227.0331 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
The United Nations called for a 48-hour cease-fire between the Angolan 
government and UNITA rebels Sunday to allow an investigation team 
reach the site of a U.N. aircraft that crashed with 14 people on board 
this weekend. The C-130 aircraft went down in an area 500 kilometers 
(310 miles) southeast of the capital Luanda where the government army 
has been fighting UNITA rebels for nearly a month. It was not known 
if there were any survivors. In Luanda, U.N. spokesman Hamadoun Toure 
said so far there had been no reply from either side yet to the call 
for a halt in fighting. The passengers aboard the plane included three 
Angolans, two Russians, an Australian, one Egyptian, one Cameroonian, 
a Zambian and a Namibian. Eight were members of the U.N. Observer 
Mission in Angola and two were employed by a private communications 
company, Dinacom, operating with the U.N., Toure said. The crew included 
a South African, an Angolan, a Bolivian and a Filipino. The World 
Food Program reacted by suspending food delivery flights throughout 
Angola until Wednesday, pending more information on the crash, according 
to Brenda Barton, a spokeswoman for the organization in the Kenyan 
capital of Nairobi. U.N. spokesman Toure said there was no immediate 
information on the cause of the crash. He cited government sources 
in the central highland city of Huambo as saying they had seen a plane 
go down in flames shortly after takeoff from there and that it had 
crashed 25 miles (40 kilometers) away in Vila Nova. The U.N. military 
observers are charged with monitoring a 1994 peace accord that is 
severely threatened by fighting between the government and UNITA rebels 
that flared up again three weeks ago. An Angolan government plane 
was shot down Dec. 14, just north of another central highland city 
of Kuito, killing 10 people. It was not clear who had fired at the 
aircraft. Kuito and Huambo, which lie some 130 kilometers (80 miles) 
apart, have served as a stage for heavy battles between UNITA and 
the government for nearly a month. Secretary-General Kofi Annan appealed 
to the Angolan government and UNITA to enable members of the U.N. 
Observer Mission in Angola to go to the site of Saturday's crash and 
assist in search and rescue operations, and asked for their cooperation 
in the investigation, a spokesman said in a statement. The plane, 
owned by TransAfric and chartered by the United Nations, was headed 
for Saurimo, in the province of Lunda Sul, about 390 miles (625 kilometers) 
east of Huambo, Toure said. The four-engine C-130, one of the most 
widely used military transport planes, can carry up to 92 people. 
The U.N. Security Council has expressed dismay that Angola appears 
headed back to civil war, which has ravaged the southern African nation 
since the country's 1975 independence from Portugal. Diplomats have 
been unable to get both sides to adhere to a 1994 peace accord. It 
called for UNITA, a Portuguese acronym for the National Union for 
the Total Independence for Angola, to disarm and hand areas under 
its control to the government. However, lingering hostility between 
the two sides has hindered implementation of the deal. The council 
on Wednesday again accused Angolan rebel leaders of undermining the 
peace process and demanded an immediate end to the fighting. WFP's 
Barton said that food distribution to approximately 400,000 Angolans 
displaced by the conflict would not be interrupted by the group grounding 
flights. But she said the situation was ``grave'' because air cargo 
is the only way to replenish supplies. Commercial food supplies via 
roads have been shut down by the fighting. As of Tuesday, Huambo's 
refugee population had swollen to 100,000 and WFP officials saw many 
malnourished people seeking protection in the government-held town, 
Barton said. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>