<DOC>
<DOCNO> APW19981227.0214 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
The World Food Program on Sunday said it grounded food delivery flights 
throughout Angola as a precautionary move after a U.N. aircraft crashed 
on Saturday with 14 people on board. The WFP suspended its flights 
until Wednesday, pending more information regarding the plane crash, 
said Brenda Barton, a spokeswoman for the organization in Nairobi. 
The C-130 aircraft reportedly crashed in an area where the government's 
army has been fighting UNITA rebels, a U.N. spokesman said Saturday. 
There was no word on whether any of the four crew members and 10 passengers 
had survived. There also was no immediate information on the cause 
of the crash. Most of the passengers were members of the U.N. Observer 
Mission, said deputy U.N. spokesman Manoel de Almeida E Silva. The 
military observers are charged with monitoring a 1994 peace accord 
that is severely threatened by the current fighting. The Portuguese 
news agency Lusa said the aircraft burst into flames shortly after 
take-off from Huambo, 310 miles southeast of the capital Luanda, and 
crashed 25 miles away in Vila Nova. Barton said that food delivery 
to approximately 400,000 Angolans displaced by the civil war would 
not be interrupted by the grounded flights. But she said the situation 
was ``grave'' because air cargo is the only way to replenish supplies. 
Commercial food supplies via roads have been shut down by the fighting. 
``We wanted to use every day we can to replenish supplies, knowing 
that supplies cannot move by road,'' she said in a telephone interview. 
As of Tuesday, Huambo's refugee population had swollen to 100,000, 
where WFP officials saw many malnourished people seeking protection 
in the government-held town, Barton said. Secretary-General Kofi Annan 
appealed to the Angolan government and UNITA to enable members of 
the U.N. Observer Mission in Angola to go to the crash site and assist 
in search and rescue operations, and asked their cooperation in a 
full investigation of the crash, a spokesman said in a statement. 
According to preliminary information from government sources in Huambo, 
the plane probably went down in an area east of Vila Nova, the spokesman 
said. The plane, owned by TransAfric and chartered by the United Nations, 
was headed for Saurimo, in the province of Lunda Sul, about 390 miles 
east of Huambo, according to the news agency. The four-engine C-130, 
one of the most widely used military transport planes, can carry up 
to 92 people. The U.N. Security Council has expressed dismay that 
Angola appears headed back to civil war, which has ravaged the southern 
African nation for most of its nearly quarter-century of independence. 
Diplomats have been unable to get both sides to adhere to a 1994 peace 
accord. It called for UNITA, a Portuguese acronym for the National 
Union for the Total Independence for Angola, to hand areas under its 
control to the government. However, lingering hostility between the 
two sides has hindered implementation of the deal. The council on 
Wednesday again accused Angolan rebel leaders of undermining the peace 
process and demanded an immediate end to the fighting. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>