<DOC>
<DOCNO> APW19981227.0375 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Visitors to the Angra 2 nuclear plant stroll by posters of Galileo 
and Leonardo da Vinci put up as reminders of the age-old struggle 
between science and skepticism. ``The work you do today will be recognized 
tomorrow,'' the posters proclaim in Portuguese. At least that's what 
the government hopes. So far, the power plant has been a public relations 
nightmare, delayed for more than a decade by cost overruns and safety 
concerns. Now, Angra 2 is being finished and is scheduled to go into 
operation in July. For workers, there is a sense of vindication. ``This 
is the energy of the future,'' Jose Eduardo Brayner Costa Mattos, 
the construction site manager, said while waving a hand at an electricity 
generator stamped with the date 1988. Critics say Brazil is out of 
step in rediscovering nuclear power. They note that no U.S. utility 
has ordered a reactor since the late 1970s and that Germany's new 
government and others in Europe are moving to phase out nuclear power. 
The gray concrete sphere of Angra 2 on Itaorna Beach, 100 miles (160 
kilometers) west of Rio de Janeiro, seems like a relic from another 
age. ``It will be a problem for generations to come,'' said Roberto 
Kishinami, executive director in Brazil for the environmental group 
Greenpeace. ``There's no place to put the waste, and the environmental 
impact report is vague.'' Those weren't big concerns in 1975, when 
President Ernesto Geisel signed an agreement with West Germany's Kraftwerk 
Union, a subsidiary of Siemens, to build as many as eight, 1,300-megawatt 
pressurized-water reactors to generate electricity. For Brazil's ruling 
generals, the deal was part of its ``Big Brazil'' development drive. 
It also gave them a reactor that could produce fuel for an atomic 
weapons program, something they didn't get with Angra 1, a 626-megawatt 
plant then being built by Westinghouse Corp. Right away there were 
problems. Angra 2's first foundation was built on crumbling stone 
instead of bedrock, and almost the entire budget went just to sink 
additional support columns. Residents said it was a mistake to build 
at Itaorna, a Guarani Indian name usually translated as ``rotten rock.'' 
Angra 1 didn't inspire much confidence, either. It broke down so often 
that Brazilians dubbed it ``the lightning bug,'' because it kept going 
off and on. In the 1980s, with Angra 2 way behind schedule, Brazil 
went broke and plunged into recession. With no money and less need 
for energy, the plant was put on the back burner. In 1987, a year 
after the Soviet reactor meltdown at Chernobyl, Ukraine, a Brazilian 
junk dealer found a lead capsule containing radioactive cesium 137 
in the ruins of an abandoned medical clinic and broke it open with 
a sledgehammer. Brazilians panicked after radiation poisoning killed 
four people and sickened 103. So Angra 2 was kept in limbo. It stayed 
there until 1994, when a new government economic plan ended hyperinflation. 
With a strong currency, consumers went on a buying spree _ and suddenly 
needed more energy for new freezers, air conditioners and microwave 
ovens. President Itamar Franco gave go-ahead for Angra 2. Some 4,500 
workers are laboring around the clock to finish the plant. Machinery, 
vacuum-sealed in special foil and warehoused for a decade, is unwrapped 
and installed. ``It's 94 percent done,'' said Costa Mattos, the site 
manager. A ``hot'' test of all systems but without fuel is set for 
April. The final step is to load the reactor core with 236 zircon 
alloy rods containing the uranium oxide fuel. In July, 16 years late 
and at a cost of some dlrs 9 billion, Angra 2 is to go on line. Over 
the years, Brazil's priorities have changed. Civilian rule returned 
in 1985, and the government signed the nuclear nonproliferation treaty 
and scrapped the military's secret nuclear weapons program. Eletronuclear, 
the government nuclear company, knows any slip-up at Angra 2 could 
sink its plans to finish Angra 3, today just a dlrs 1 billion hole 
in the ground. ``The design is old, but it has the same upgrades as 
in Germany. So I would say it is First World,'' said Heini Schroer, 
a Siemens computer technician from Erlangen, Germany. The pressurized-water 
reactor is the safest reactor made and environment-friendly as well, 
Costa Mattos said. Angra 2 won't heat the seawater much or emit methane 
or other ``greenhouse gases,'' and radiation levels will be checked 
periodically on dozens of monitors around the countryside, he said. 
But Kleber Cosenza, the production supervisor, admits there is no 
solution yet for used, but still radioactive, fuel. For now, spent 
rods will be kept in a pool at the plant, but in 20 years it will 
be full. After that, no one knows what will happen. So Greenpeace 
is campaigning to block the licensing of Angra 2. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>