<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981227.0044 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
The crowd does not roar. It screams. ``Sometimes you say you're not 
going to scream, but then you do,'' said Karen Lopez, a 14-year-old 
from Queens, as she angled for a glimpse of a wayward elbow, a Fubu 
jacket or anything else signifying the presence of the group 'N Sync, 
which was at that very moment gracing the MTV studios one story above 
her in Times Square. ``I can't explain it; it's like it's something 
automatic,'' she continued, an eye cocked attentively skyward during 
the group's recent appearance. ``You're there, and then you start 
screaming, and then you scream some more. Your head hurts when you're 
finished, but you don't notice it while you're out here doing it.'' 
So it goes at the MTV studios on Broadway where young fans, most of 
them teen-age girls, regularly line the streets of Times Square hoping 
to glimpse the acts that show up for MTV's ``Total Request Live,'' 
seen on weekdays at 3:30 p.m. On the days when the groups are special 
favorites of the early-teen set, particularly the current trinity 
of the Backstreet Boys, 'N Sync or Hanson, they spend hours exercising 
their lungs in a high-pitched cacophony that sounds from a distance 
like the wind whipping through the urban canyons, and up close like 
a mass audition for a hormonal horror movie. Even from a distance, 
it can be painful, the sound ebbing and spiking for hours. But up 
close, the key apparently is to be so of the moment that noise and 
quiet blend into a blissed-out moment of pop zen. ``When you're screaming, 
you don't hear it,'' said Lauren Licciardi, a 14-year-old from Queens, 
who showed up for an appearance by Hanson last month. ``When you don't 
scream, it's so loud it hurts.'' Others find noise management more 
difficult. ``I love Hanson, but right now I have the biggest headache 
in the world,'' said Catherine Rodriguez of Cuddebackville. The rapturous 
hysterics of teen-age girls have a long and proud history, of course, 
going back to the bobby-soxers who swooned and screamed for Frank 
Sinatra and cresting with the Beatles fans kicking their feet, pounding 
their faces and screaming their brains out in the early '60s. Since 
then, screamworthy teen-age idols have come and gone, from Leif Garrett 
to David Cassidy to Andy Gibb. But there has never been a single place 
that served as a continuing focus for the histrionics. Enter MTV. 
In September 1997 the music channel moved its studio from a private 
site on 57th Street to a concourse-level, 20,000-square-foot fish 
bowl that stretches across a full block on Broadway between 44th and 
45th streets. Fans soon began showing up for live interview shows, 
and the pilgrimage of the faithful to Times Square almost immediately 
became a part of the fan experience. Different acts get different 
crowds, like the metal fans who lumber out in skull-and-crossbones 
T-shirts to greet Metallica or the more diverse crowds that turn out 
for Janet Jackson or Jewel. ``They all make their own noise,'' said 
Van Toffler, MTV's general manager. ``You might get more of a grumbling 
kind of noise for Metallica or Motley Crue, instead of the screaming 
you get for the Backstreet Boys.'' Most of the screamers tend to be 
teen-age girls from the New York metropolitan region, like Michelle 
Greenberg from East Meadow, who showed up for the Hanson appearance 
with her friend Ilana Zuckerman and her parents. ``This is an obligation,'' 
Ms. Greenberg said solemnly between shrieks, like a Republican congressman 
weighing the gravity of impeachment. ``You have to do it. The screaming 
just hypes you up even more.'' Her father, Neil Greenberg, who describes 
his daughter's room as ``a Hanson shrine,'' took a paternal and historical 
view of the festivities. ``It's better than kids doing drugs,'' he 
said. ``Kids are always going to find something to be crazy about, 
so why not this? I was there when the Beatles played Shea Stadium, 
and they screamed a lot louder than this.'' Others come from farther 
away. When 'N Sync appeared, Karen La Plante skipped a day of finals 
at her high school in Westfield, Mass., and took the train to New 
York with her friend Heather Page. ``I'm 18, so I'm not a teeny-bopper,'' 
she said. ``I don't know what it is, but I just love 'N Sync. I've 
taken some pictures of Joey's arm, his head, Lansten's arm. All you 
see is yellow and red and blue, but it's worth it.'' In some ways, 
the essential dynamics of teen-age fans have not changed much since 
the days of the Beatles. The emotions and age groups are about the 
same. The screams partake of the same youthful mix of user-friendly 
music and rampaging early-adolescent hormones. There are comparable 
competing armies with Backstreet Boys and 'N Sync partisans like Beatles 
and Stones ones. And there is the remarkably consistent American cultural 
tradition of sanitized white groups taking the form and content of 
black music and delivering an unthreatening version of it to young 
whites. 'N Sync and the Backstreet Boys, in particular, have reworked 
the sounds, styles, gestures and clothes of rhythm-and-blues into 
a made-for-the-suburbs version. On the other hand, changes in technology 
and marketing have made earlier eras seem prehistoric. Instead of 
scrounging for a few teen-age magazines or instant books, fans now 
keep up with their favorites on dozens of Internet sites like Jill's 
Backstreet Boys Heaven, the Kangarooland's Hanson Web site or God 
Must Have Spent a Little More Time on 'N Sync. MTV regularly announces 
which acts will be appearing, so fans are able to mobilize when needed 
and scream whenever the cameras point their way. And the commercial 
throw-weight of the teen-age industry makes the old days seem comically 
small-time. Ana Agosto, 14, of South Shelton, Conn., showed up for 
the 'N Sync appearance with her mother, Evelyn, and her friend Rachel 
Nunes. She was wearing 'N Sync's favored Fubu jacket and Nike Air 
Max sneakers and figured she had spent about $3,000 over the last 
year or so on 'N Sync and Backstreet Boys CDs, posters, pins, T-shirts, 
key chains, refrigerator magnets, tour tags, books, calendars and 
other essentials. The screaming is pretty much limited to the females, 
but a few males turn up, more interested in the show outside than 
the one in the studios. ``I come here almost every day, but I came 
today because this band, I know them; they're my friends,'' confided 
Angel Betances, 18, of Queens, as the girls around him shrieked for 
'N Sync. ``I met them back in September when they were on MTV. You 
wouldn't see guys yelling the way these girls do. It must be the estrogen, 
I think.'' 
</TEXT>
</DOC>