<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981227.0108 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
The New York Jets took the field before a roaring crowd feeling like 
division champions _ the first time they could say that in 29 years 
_ and then they went out on Sunday and played as if they had been 
doing this sort of thing all their professional lives. The Jets put 
an exclamation point to the regular season with a 31-10 trouncing 
of the New England Patriots, who were undermanned because of injuries 
but still motivated. The motivation didn't help. ``Nothing was redeemable,'' 
said Patriots Coach Pete Carroll, who watched in frustration as Vinny 
Testaverde tossed touchdowns to four different receivers and the Jet 
defense sparkled against an overwhelmed Scott Zolak at quarterback 
and a contained running game. After amassing a franchise-record 12th 
victory, the Jets (12-4) now find themselves home for the next two 
weeks. When they play next, in the divisional round on Jan. 10, they 
will meet either Jacksonville, Buffalo or Miami. Essentially, the 
Jets are now one victory away from going to the American Conference 
championship game, which is 60 minutes away from the Super Bowl. ``They 
made a believer out of me today,'' said Coach Bill Parcells. Each 
week he admits to more admiration for his club, the third he has taken 
to the playoffs. But post-season in a Jets uniform is unknown to all 
the current players except for Mo Lewis, who appeared in the playoffs 
in 1991. What Parcells demanded from his team on Sunday, even though 
it already had clinched a bye week and homefield advantage in their 
first playoff game, was to play like a champion. ``You don't want 
to win a championship one week and lay an egg the next,'' explained 
center Kevin Mawae. Of course, no one knows how far this improbable 
Jets saga can go. It has already come farther in two seasons than 
any team that had a one-victory season has. But all the elements were 
in place on Sunday for success in the playoffs. Testaverde, who now 
boasts a 12-1 record as the Jets' starter, completed 17 of 27 passes 
for 179 yards. He threw scoring passes to Kyle Brady, Curtis Martin, 
Dedric Ward and Keyshawn Johnson. They lifted him beyond the Jets' 
record for touchdowns in a season previously held by Al Dorow and 
Joe Namath. Testaverde now has 29. Martin rambled for 102 yards on 
29 carries. He was helped along the way by left guard Todd Burger, 
who completed a season without being flagged with a holding penalty. 
Strangely, the Patriots were never in the game, either because they 
were overmatched due to injuries that sidelined quarterback Drew Bledsoe, 
wide receiver Terry Glenn and others, or were simply flat. The Jets 
controlled the ball for more than 17 of the first 20 minutes, jumped 
to a 17-0 lead, and then virtually sailed through the rest of the 
way. It was a down performance by a Patriots' team that could have 
had a homefield advantage in the wild-card game by winning. But the 
only touchdown the Jets yielded _ it came with 91 seconds left on 
a Zolak bomb to Tony Simmons _ prevented the Jets from leading the 
league in fewest points allowed. The Jets gave up 266 points, 1 more 
than the Dolphins. Last year's team allowed 454 points. After the 
opening kickoff, the Jets controlled the ball for a remarkable 8 minutes 
39 seconds as Testaverde connected on his first four passes. He also 
scrambled once for 10 yards _ later in the game he was to do it again 
for 25 _ and the Jets went on to open the scoring on John Hall's 36-yard 
field goal. All the Pats could do was three-and-out, and this time 
the Jets took 5:20 off the clock on a drive into the second quarter 
that ended with a wide-open Brady cradling Testaverde's 4-yard toss. 
One drive later, Robert Edwards _ the man the Patriots had drafted 
to replace Martin _ fumbled when Jason Ferguson wrapped him up, and 
Ray Mickens recovered the ball. This time Testaverde took advantage 
of the turnover with a swing pass to Martin, who turned it into an 
8-yard score. The Patriots' response was an Adam Vinatieri field goal 
that provided the only scoring the Patriots managed until the final 
two minutes. What continued to unfold was an aggressive, confident 
Jet team not taking it easy. Suddenly, the Jets are thinking of themselves 
in the bigger picture. So even though most of them knew they would 
not face New England in the divisional game in almost two weeks, there 
is an outside chance they could face the Patriots in the American 
Conference title game. ``We wanted this game for two reasons,'' explained 
linebacker Bryan Cox, one of those players whose career might well 
have ended if Parcells hadn't picked him up. ``One, we wanted to play 
like champions. And two, we wanted to defeat a team who we might have 
to play here again. We wanted them to know they can't come in here 
and beat us.'' This gave the Jets a 6-0 sweep of three divisional 
opponents _ the Patriots, Dolphins and Bills _ who are all playoff-bound. 
The game was virtually clinched in the third quarter, when Testaverde 
lofted a 17-yarder to a diving Ward in the end zone, and the diminutive 
receiver again caught a ball with outstretched arms. He makes up for 
his 5-foot 9-inch-stature with this weekly ability to snare balls 
seemingly beyond his grasp. The rout was complete when Testaverde 
hit Johnson with a 24-yard pass early in the final period. ``I wanted 
to play New England, even in the parking lot,'' said Johnson, who 
again led all receivers with 6 receptions for 75 yards. With such 
an imposing performance, no wonder the Jets' locker room reverberated 
with cheering. They had won their fourth straight game in December, 
which no Jet team had ever done. They were taking a six-game winning 
streak into the playoffs. They seem to have run out of bad history 
to erase. Of course, now they have to win a playoff game. But for 
now, they are the winningest club in Jets history. Certainly, this 
meant something to Parcells? Later, snarling only once when asked 
what that 12th victory meant, Parcells said: ``We've buried all the 
ghosts. If you want to dig them up, you can.'' Clearly, you do so 
at your own peril. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>