<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981227.0148 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
More money than ever is pouring into New York's state and local election 
campaigns, but the system of regulating these funds to curb their 
influence on politics and policy has all but broken down. Porous laws, 
feeble enforcement and a political class increasingly adept at sidestepping 
the rules have left the system with few constraints, even by comparison 
to those of other states and the federal government, according to 
a review of campaign documents and interviews with elected officials 
and others. New York has rejected many of the laws adopted elsewhere, 
from bans on donations by corporations and labor unions to publicly 
financed campaigns. An analysis of this year's contests, the most 
expensive in state history, shows a virtual free-for-all of donating 
and spending. Financier Ronald Perelman channeled more than $200,000 
on two days last August to Gov. George Pataki's campaign, using a 
common loophole to give more than seven times the legal limit for 
an individual donor. A Long Island company, Silverite Construction, 
gave at least $20,000 over the legal limit, just as it was awarded 
a $97 million state contract. The company was not punished. Last spring, 
a Kentucky-based manufacturer of computer printers, Lexmark International, 
donated $45,000 to three Republican committees while it was trying 
to defeat a bill that threatened its business. The legislation died 
in the Republican-controlled state Senate. The money, said company 
spokesman Jim Joseph, ``helps you get someone's attention.'' There 
are even fewer controls on how politicians spend donations. Brooklyn 
Democratic Assemblyman Dov Hikind used $100,000 of campaign contributions 
to pay lawyers who defended him in a criminal bribery case. Assemblyman 
Anthony Seminerio, a Queens Democrat, had his campaign buy a $25,OOO 
Ford Crown Victoria for his full-time use. The campaign of state Senator 
Guy Velella, a Bronx Republican, bought an alarm system for his home. 
And state Senator Serphin Maltese, a Queens Republican, took a two-week 
trip to Italy, paid for with campaign funds. ``The New York state 
campaign finance laws are atrocious,'' said John Feerick, dean of 
the Fordham Law School, who led a state commission in the 1980s that 
recommended more stringent campaign finance laws, only to be rebuffed 
by the legislature. ``And if anything, it seems pretty clear to me 
that things have gotten worse.'' Even Pataki has declared the campaign 
finance laws ``dreadful.'' He made his pronouncement during his re-election 
campaign, in which he set a record by spending nearly $20 million, 
much of it collected from donors with business before the state. Not 
only are New York's laws weaker than many other states have, but so 
is its enforcement. In California, New Jersey and many other states, 
special agencies police campaign financs, but New York gives the job 
to the politically paralyzed State Board of Elections, whose focus 
is overseeing registration and balloting. The board collected roughly 
$20,000 in fines in 1997 for campaign violations. Its counterpart 
in California collected more than $650,000 in fines that year. In 
New York, politicians sometimes seem to mock public-disclosure rules. 
Pataki used to file his contributors listed alphabetically by first 
name, making analysis difficult. This fall, his campaign submitted 
a list of nearly $4 million in expenditures in type so small that 
much of it was, for all practical purposes, unreadable. The state 
plans to put the records in a computer next year, long after other 
states have done so with similar records. Disclosure rules in other 
states require politicians to detail donors' occupations and employers, 
as well as whether the donors do business with the state. New York 
lacks these requirements. New York's race for governor this year cost 
$40 million, up from $32 million in 1994. Legislative campaign committees 
raised more than $8 million, roughly double the total in 1994. Overall, 
candidates and political committees in New York have spent more than 
$200 million on state and local campaigns over the last four years. 
Like many others, Perelman, who controls Revlon, easily skirted the 
limits on donations. By law, a corporation's donations to all state 
and local candidates and political committees can generally not exceed 
a total of $5,000 annually. And a gubernatorial campaign can accept 
no more than $28,000 from an individual contributor in a general election. 
So how can one person give more than $200,000? In Perelman's case, 
he divided it among more than 40 corporations that he controls, each 
of which gave $5,000. In doing so, he also got around a rule that 
limits individuals to an aggregate maximum of $150,000 a year in donations. 
The state has never deemed this practice illegal even though other 
jurisdictions prohibit it. That is not the only way around corporate 
limits: Just like on the federal level, corporations can donate unlimited 
amounts of so-called soft money, which political parties can legally 
use only for ``party building'' activities, like get-out-the-vote 
drives. The Board of Elections, though, does not monitor how the state 
parties handle soft money. In fact, the Republican State Committee 
has raised $7.5 million in soft money since 1995 and transferred most 
of it to a federal political account in Washington, putting it outside 
the jurisdiction of the state board. What's more, corporations are 
able to violate the $5,000 limit without much risk of being caught. 
Board officials concede that they have no idea how many corporations 
break the law because they do not monitor campaign reports for local 
candidates. In addition, the board routinely declines to recommend 
punishment for violators if they say they did not know about the law. 
A small group of states put no limits on contributions. But most of 
those, including Texas, bar all contributions from corporations and 
unions. New York is even more lenient with unions than it is with 
corporations. Unions are held to the same contribution limits as individual 
donors, allowing them to become major players in Albany. Since 1995, 
for example, the state teachers union has donated $1.25 million to 
the committees run by the legislative leaders. Unlike a growing number 
of states, New York allows fund-raising by legislators while they 
are in session. It is common in Albany for lobbyists to attend fund-raisers 
at night where they contribute to the same legislators they buttonhole 
about bills during the day. More than 200 such events were held in 
the state capital this year. The state law governing the spending 
of campaign donations is terse yet expansive. ``Contributions received 
by a candidate or a political committee may be expended for any lawful 
purpose,'' it says. ``Such funds shall not be converted by any person 
to a personal use which is unrelated to a political campaign or the 
holding of a public office or party position.'' With those guidelines, 
politicians can justify virtually any expenditure. Many legislators 
lease cars year-round _ including in non-election years _ then charge 
the cost to their campaigns and drive the vehicles on personal as 
well as political or governmental matters. Seminerio went further 
and spent $25,000 in campaign money last year on the Ford Crown Victoria. 
``As an Assembly person, I'm on like 24 hours,'' he said. When Hikind 
was indicted last year on charges of receiving bribes from a social-services 
group, he hired a prominent defense lawyer, Gustave Newman, and paid 
him with $100,000 in campaign funds. Hikind, who was acquitted on 
all the charges, did not respond to telephone messages seeking comment. 
Velella, the Bronx Republican leader, said he bought a $5,981 alarm 
system for his home this year after a disgruntled Republican candidate 
threatened him and his wife. He said using campaign funds was appropriate 
because the threats were related to his job as senator. In 1994 and 
1995, Velella spent $30,000 in campaign money to hire lawyers to prevent 
the release of a grand jury report on a school board election. He 
said the report was unfair to him and his father, Vincent, an elections 
commissioner in New York City. Neither man faced charges, and the 
report was quashed. The State Board of Elections did not question 
these expenditures or seek more information on them. Nor did it question 
the $2,250 in campaign money that Maltese spent to go to Italy for 
a two-week trip sponsored by the New York Conference of Italian-American 
Legislators. The senator's spokeswoman said Maltese met with Italian 
officials to ``further relations between the United States and Italy.'' 
In New York, the job of overseeing politicians' money is in the hands 
of the politicians themselves. The State Board of Elections is run 
by four commissioners, two Democrats and two Republicans. Because 
it takes a majority to approve an investigation, the board rarely 
examines the conduct of prominent elected or party officials. The 
Republicans have blocked investigations into the propriety of the 
Republican State Committee transferring millions of dollars to the 
Pataki campaign. The Democrats have similarly prevented inquiries 
into party matters. Last year, 30 or so campaign finance complaints 
were filed, and the board investigated only a handful, officials said. 
The board rarely initiates its own inquiries because it does little 
more than insure that candidates and committees have filed on time 
and done their math correctly. Unlike its counterparts in other states, 
it does not conduct rigorous audits. ``We do everything that we can 
do under the law,'' said Thomas Wilkey, the board's executive director. 
In the recent campaign for state attorney general, the eventual winner, 
Eliot Spitzer, a Manhattan Democrat, ran into criticism from his rivals 
over whether he was receiving illegal financial assistance from his 
father. Two Democratic candidates filed complaints with the board 
in the summer. The board has yet to consider the complaints, although 
in the final days of the campaign, Spitzer acknowledged that he had 
failed to disclose help from his father. In many states, election 
authorities can levy fines for a variety of offenses. In New York, 
the law permits fines only for breaking disclosure rules, and the 
board is required to ask a judge to actually impose such penalties. 
Even when the judges do, the fines are routinely ignored. In 1997, 
the board got $27,000 in fines imposed, and collected $7,000. The 
remaining $13,000 or so that it received in 1997 came from fines imposed 
in earlier years that were paid after the board hired a collection 
agency, he said. For other infractions, like violating donation limits, 
the board's only option is to refer cases to local district attorneys. 
The district attorneys rarely if ever follow up, usually saying they 
are too busy with more serious offenses. In the absence of enforcement 
by the state, federal prosecutors have stepped in. The U.S. attorney 
in Brooklyn is conducting at least four investigations of donations 
on the state level. The donations from Silverite Construction are 
a case study in the system's weakness. In 1997, the company gave at 
least $25,000 in donations to state and local candidates, far exceeding 
the $5,000 annual limit. Some of that money ended up in the coffers 
of the Republican State Committee around the time that state transportation 
officials awarded Silverite a $97 million project. Federal prosecutors 
began investigating the donations after The New York Times reported 
on them in March 1998. The Board of Elections later notified Silverite 
that it had made illegal contributions and told the company to have 
the money refunded. Silverite has not complied, but the board cannot 
punish it. Nor can it require the candidates and committees that received 
the money to return it. All the board can do is refer the matter to 
the local district attorney, which it has not yet done. William Fitzpatrick, 
district attorney in the Syracuse area, acknowledged that district 
attorneys have little interest in campaign finance enforcement. Fitzpatrick, 
a Republican, who is president of the New York State District Attorneys 
Association, said he and other district attorneys favored giving the 
Board of Elections more power to do the job on its own. California, 
Maine, Massachusetts and Arizona passed campaign finance reform plans 
through referendums put on the ballot by advocacy groups, but that 
is not an option under the New York Constitution. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>