<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981227.0050 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
New Year's Eve this year may not mark the beginning of the new millennium, 
but it is still a big event for lots of people. Anyone planning a 
celebration may appreciate a little help from inventions that were 
patented earlier in the year. If you are planning a New Year's Eve 
party, for example, music is essential. If you hire a live band, you 
can decide exactly what tunes will be played. But if you rely on recorded 
music, you might have to hear songs you don't like interspersed with 
the ones you prefer. And who wants to spend New Year's Eve changing 
cassette tapes or compact discs? Three inventors have come up with 
a system that allows shoppers in music stores to create custom CDs. 
Gregory Alexander from Carol Stream, Ill., David Volk of Clairton, 
Pa., and Steven Goldenbogen from Pittsburgh patented a vending machine 
that allows customers to choose pieces of music stored in a computer. 
A list of available songs is displayed on a screen. When the customer 
types choices on a keyboard, a microprocessor in the vending machine 
accesses digital music stored on a hard drive. Finally, a list of 
the customer's selections is shown on the screen. The microprocessor 
also controls an imprinting device that ``writes'' the customer's 
choices on a blank CD and then dispenses the customized disc. The 
shopper pays for his new CD by swiping a credit card through the vending 
machine. The invention belongs to Customdisc.com, an Internet company 
that has licensed 185,000 music tracks so that customers of its World 
Wide Web site can create 70-minute CDs with personalized art work, 
titles, and messages to accompany gifts. Customdisc.com plans to market 
the invention by setting up kiosks in music stores. The inventors 
received patent 5,633,839. Strike Up the Body for Party Music Perhaps 
you prefer a one-man band for party music. Two Japanese inventors 
have patented a system of generating music with foot, hand, shoulder 
and elbow movements. Akira Nakada and Hisanori Katou designed a device 
to be worn as a shoe plate, as hand grips, and as elbow and shoulder 
straps. The shoe plate is shaped like a shoe sole and can be reduced 
or expanded in size to fit any shoe. It contains a sensor that the 
inventors say controls the timing of rhythm-section sounds such as 
a snare drum, a bass drum and high-hat cymbals. The shoe plate can 
also be designed to control pitch, tone color or loudness with taps 
of the foot. Squeezing the hand grips manipulates the music's timing, 
while bending and stretching the elbows and shoulders controls pitch 
and loudness through the straps. A wireless transmitter in the shoe 
plate sends signals to a receiver, which passes them to an interface 
unit and then to an electronic instrument that generates the musical 
notes. The patent, 5,714,706, belongs to Yamaha Corp. For Pantyhose, 
a Third Dimension Women know what it's like to put a lot of thought 
and effort into a New Year's Eve outfit only to discover a run in 
their pantyhose halfway through the night. Well, never mind; Annette 
Pappas from Metairie, La., has it covered. Ms. Pappas invented hosiery 
with three legs. The garment, which looks like a conventional pair 
of pantyhose, actually has three legs, each with a pocket above it 
in the panty area. ``In use, the wearer inserts her legs into two 
of the leg openings in the conventional fashion of donning a pair 
of pantyhose,'' Ms. Pappas explains in her patent. ``The remaining 
unused leg portion is then gathered and the toe end tucked into the 
pocket of one of the absorbent crotch members. If a run or hole develops 
in one of the leg portions being worn, the leg of the wearer can be 
easily and rapidly removed from the damaged leg portion and placed 
into the undamaged spare leg portion.'' The stocking with the run 
in it is then folded and tucked away in one of the pockets. Ms. Pappas 
does not say what the wearer should do about the little lump of fabric 
that probably results. She received patent 5,713,081. Cut-and-Scour 
Tool for Facial Wrinkles If looking your best for New Year's includes 
trying to eliminate fine facial lines, you might want to consider 
David McAllister's invention. McAllister, from Lake Mary, Fla., has 
created a hand-held tool with a series of parallel small blades that 
he says can reduce wrinkles. He recommends selecting a wrinkle or 
line you want to reduce and, with his tool, scratching matching lines 
adjacent to and on either side of the wrinkle. The scratches you make 
are then cleaned with anti-bacterial soap, dried and massaged with 
anti-bacterial cream. ``Once the lines scratched in the skin are permitted 
to heal, the skin is found to be tightened,'' McAllister asserts. 
The patent, however, does not discuss how safe this device might be. 
And if you did want to use McAllister's invention, it would be wise 
to start the procedure at least a week before any parties. McAllister 
received patent 5,713,375. Like Having Venice in the Dining Room Tired 
of the same old buffet presentation? This year's celebration could 
be graced instead by a water-borne system patented by two California 
inventors. Yukio and Masako Iwamoto, from Atherton, won two separate 
patents for their design of a ``hydraulic system for serving food.'' 
``Diners sit around a periphery of a water course, and food carriers 
circulate in the water course and carry various types of food,'' they 
write in their first patent. ``The food carriers are removably attached 
to an endless line underneath the water by flexible wires so that 
each food carrier is independently removable from the said water course,'' 
they elaborated in their second patent. ``In addition, the flexible 
wires are positioned along the endless line so as to maintain a predetermined 
spacing between the food carriers in the water course.'' The spacing 
gives guests enough time to choose food and allows hosts time to refill 
the food carriers. The Iwamotos received patents 5,823,329 and 5,813,497. 
Patents are available by number for $3 from the Patent and Trademark 
Office, Washington DC 20231. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>