<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981227.0103 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
The smallest of the week-old octuplets born to a Houston woman died 
early Sunday after the infant's heart and lungs gave out and mechanical 
respiration failed, according to Texas Children's Hospital in Houston. 
The baby, Chijindu Chidera Chukwu, nicknamed Odera, took a sudden 
and critical turn for the worse on Saturday night, after doctors moved 
her from a standard ventilator to a different type known as an oscillator 
in an unsuccessful effort to increase the amount of oxygen-rich blood 
in her body. Odera was the fifth of the octuplets born this month 
to Nkem Chukwu and her husband, Iyke Louis Udobi, who are from Nigeria 
and are U.S. citizens. Odera's condition began to deteriorate about 
the time that her mother visited all eight babies for the first time. 
The surviving seven babies remain in critical condition in a neonatal 
intensive care unit at the hospital. The youngest, Gorom, is recovering 
from abdominal surgery performed on Saturday to repair a hole in her 
intestine. Two of the babies are on mechanical ventilators and the 
remaining four are breathing on their own. Ms. Chukwu's condition 
was reported as stable. Odera's name translated to ``God Has My Life,'' 
the hospital said. Through the hospital, the parents said they were 
``very saddened'' by Odera's death and thanked people for their prayers 
and donations. Odera weighed 10.3 ounces and was 9.75 inches long 
when she was born at Texas Children's Hospital, which describes itself 
as the largest pediatric hospital in the United States. All of the 
babies weighed less than 2 pounds at birth. The largest weighed 1 
pound 11 ounces. The first child was delivered on Dec. 8 and the rest 
on Dec. 17. Last week, The Associated Press reported that doctors 
at the hospital gave the babies an 85 percent chance of survival. 
But that level of optimism has surprised many doctors not connected 
with the octuplets' case. One, Dr. Ayman El-Mohandes, an attending 
neonatologist at George Washington University Hospital in Washington, 
said that he thought the odds were ``less than 50 percent'' and that 
20 percent was a more reasonable figure. ``We do not have very many 
babies in the United States that have survived at a similar weight,'' 
El-Mohandes said in an interview. The odds of such a baby's survival 
depend on many factors. The fact that each of the eight babies weighed 
less than 2 pounds ``showed how retarded growth was from the environment 
they had to endure'' in the womb, El-Mohandes said. Doctors call the 
condition ``in utero growth retardation,'' meaning that the baby weighs 
less than its gestational age would indicate. Yet some such babies 
do better than others who have the same weight but a younger gestational 
age. One theory is that ``the stress of surviving in utero leads to 
increased production of steroids and chemicals known as catecholamines 
that help the lungs mature a little more than the baby's gestation 
would indicate,'' El-Mohandes said. In such babies, El-Mohandes added, 
``we worry about how much nutrition and oxygen the body organs received.'' 
Another variable in the odds of survival is the location of the placenta 
in the womb, because certain parts of the womb have a better blood 
supply. Some of the eight placentae implanted in Nkem Chukwu's uterus 
had a better opportunity to grow, simply because of the overcrowding 
on the uterine wall, El-Mohandes said. After birth, ``lung function 
is the initial stumbling block in survival,'' El-Mohandes said, A 
standard ventilator inflates the lungs a specified number of times 
a minute, but pumps air in under pressure, which can cause lung damage. 
Because Odera failed to respond to a standard ventilator, doctors 
had to switch her to an oscillator. It vibrates air at high frequencies, 
with the aim of increasing the amounts of oxygen in the lungs and 
removing more carbon dioxide. It does this without using the very 
high pressures that are necessary to inflate the lungs completely 
with every breath. Another survival factor is the difficulty that 
small babies have in regulating the amount of fluids and salts, like 
sodium and potassium, that their bodies need. Normally, the kidneys 
automatically regulate such amounts, but those organs are often not 
fully developed in low birth-weight babies. ``The smaller they are, 
the more difficult it is to control their fluid'' and chemical balance, 
El-Mohandes said. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>