<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981227.0168 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Most conductors who come from the early-music movement and use period 
instruments favor fleeter tempos and lighter textures. At least that's 
the general stereotype. The Belgian-born conductor Philippe Herreweghe 
breaks the stereotype. Though his performances are idiomatic and historically 
informed, his musical approach tends to be spacious, unhurried and 
coaxing. Yet in his work musical structure emerges with architectonic 
clarity. He is the Wilhelm Furtwaengler of the early-music movement. 
In 1975, having studied piano at the conservatory in Ghent, Belgium 
(and also having pursued medicine and psychiatry), he founded the 
Collegium Vocale, a choral ensemble to perform music by Bach and his 
forerunners. Later he formed the choir La Chapelle Royale to perform 
music from before and after the baroque periods, including contemporary 
works. His discography on the Harmonia Mundi label exceeds 40 recordings. 
Three of his recent releases are especially rewarding. Bach: Mass 
in B Minor Herreweghe's new recording of Bach's Mass in B minor (HMC 
901614.15, two discs) immediately takes a place among the best currently 
available. The undulant tempo and pacing in the great opening ``Kyrie 
eleison'' chorus are a refreshing break from the pulsating forward 
motion that so often characterizes performances by baroque specialists, 
performances so driven that you would think a ballet mistress, rapping 
a staff on the floor in 4/4 time, had pushed the conductor aside. 
With Herreweghe there is just a quality of natural breathing and inevitability. 
In the ``Christe eleison'' duet for two sopranos, Herreweghe has encouraged 
his singers, Johannette Zomer and Veronique Gens, to bend the phrases 
with unmannered lyricism, and he obviously doesn't scowl, like some 
baroque purists, at a touch of rich vibrato in the voice. Without 
any loss to spirituality, Herreweghe encourages the instrumentalists 
to play with bold musical character. For example, in the bass aria 
``Quoniam tu solus sanctus,'' the low-lying parts for baroque bassoons 
and horn are rendered with a burly playfulness, almost like the music 
of the chiding grandfather in Prokofiev's ``Peter and the Wolf.'' 
The soloists are excellent, especially the tenor Christoph Pregardien. 
This is a distinguished recording. Schuetz: `Musikalische Exequien' 
Herreweghe has been a strong advocate of the under-appreciated German 
master Heinrich Schuetz. Born in 1585, exactly 100 years before Bach, 
Schuetz was primarily a composer of sacred music. If Herreweghe is 
a ``gentle giant'' among conductors, as he has been called, the term 
might equally well be applied to Schuetz's place among composers. 
The ``Musikalische Exequien,'' which Herreweghe performs with La Chapelle 
Royale (HMD 941261, one disc), is a deeply spiritual yet humanely 
direct work, written as a response to horrendous plague, illness and 
war. The toll on Schuetz himself had been devastating: Within a short 
span of time he lost both parents, his young wife, his only brother 
and his two daughters. The work, which, untypical for sacred works 
of the time, is written in the composer's vernacular German, calls 
for a small complement of soloists, chorus and continuo instruments. 
The melancholic, consoling music is consistently subdued in tempo 
and dynamics, yet Herreweghe and his forces beautifully capture the 
intricacy, delicacy and quiet willpower of the score. A remarkable 
recording of a tender masterpiece. Brahms: `Ein Deutsches Requiem' 
Like the Schuetz work, Brahms' ``Deutsches Requiem'' is a subdued 
personal remembrance by a German master. In its pacing, breadth and 
conception, Herreweghe's performance (HMC 901608, one disc) recalls 
those magisterial recordings by Otto Klemperer and Herbert von Karajan. 
But here, the use of period instruments (L'Orchestre des Champs Elysees, 
which Herreweghe founded in 1991), the combined choirs of La Chapelle 
Royale and Collegium Vocale and two fine soloists (the soprano Christiane 
Oelze and the baritone Gerald Finley), bring a wonderful transparency 
to the score. For example, Brahms' bass lines, often doubled by tuba 
and brass, which can sound both muddled and overpowering on modern 
instruments, emerge with presence and nuance. But the main value of 
this recording is, again, the calming beauty of Herreweghe's music 
making. When he conducts the hymnal ``Herr, lehre doch mich'' chorus, 
he captures the same soft-spoken expressivity of the Schuetz. You 
realize that what links these two distant composers is more striking 
than what separates them. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>