<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981227.0094 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
New statistics released Sunday by the Justice Department are helping 
criminologists resolve a contentious mystery _ why violent crime has 
dropped seven straight years after an upsurge in the 1980s. The statistics, 
showing that robbery fell a stunning 17 percent in 1997, suggest that 
while there are many factors behind the decline in crime in the 1990s, 
the crucial ones may be the withering away of the crack market and 
police efforts to seize handguns from criminals and juveniles. The 
two crimes that have fallen the most sharply since 1991 are homicide 
and now robbery, the two most often committed with handguns and most 
associated with the crack cocaine epidemic in the late 1980s, criminologists 
say. ``Homicide and robbery were the two crimes most impacted by crack 
markets, with the biggest increases, and now as crack markets have 
declined, homicide and robbery have led the way down,'' said James 
Alan Fox, dean of the college of criminal justice at Northeastern 
University. The figures on robbery were released Sunday by the Bureau 
of Justice Statistics, a branch of the Justice Department, as part 
of its National Crime Victimization Survey. The annual survey, carried 
out for the Justice Department by the Census Bureau, asks 80,000 people 
ages 12 and older whether they have been victims of a crime in the 
past year. It complements the other major national set of crime statistics, 
the FBI's Uniform Crime Report, which measures crimes reported to 
police. Overall, the Justice Department said, both violent and property 
crimes have fallen to their lowest levels since 1973, when the victimization 
survey was started. In fact, the rate of property crime _ which includes 
burglary, theft and motor vehicle theft _ has fallen by more than 
half, to 248 per 1,000 households in 1997, down from 555 per 1,000 
households in 1973. Property crime, unlike violent crime, has been 
dropping steadily since 1975. Among the reasons, experts say, are 
the aging of the baby boom population beyond its prime years for committing 
crime, the increased use of security alarms and the switch of many 
criminals from burglary to robbery in the 1980s as a quicker way to 
make money and buy the crack they needed. Violent crime surged unexpectedly 
with the crack epidemic starting about 1985, and then began to fall, 
equally unexpectedly, in 1991. Only in retrospect have law-enforcement 
authorities and criminologists been able to theorize about the causes 
of the rise and decline in violent crime. At a conference of leading 
experts in New Orleans this month sponsored by the Harry Frank Guggenheim 
Foundation, Alfred Blumstein, a criminologist at Carnegie Mellon University, 
outlined research on what has come to be the most widely accepted 
view _ that all of the huge increase in homicide in the late 1980s 
and early 1990s was attributable to a rise in killing by juveniles 
and young people ages 24 and under, since homicide by adults ages 
25 and older has fallen since 1980. This increase in killing was driven 
by the sudden spread of crack markets and the growing use of high-powered 
semiautomatic handguns. In fact, Blumstein said, ``The growth in homicides 
by young people, which accounted for all the growth in homicides in 
the post-1985 period, was accounted for totally by the growth in homicides 
committed with handguns.'' Since 1991, homicides have dropped 31 percent, 
from 9.8 per 100,000 to 6.8 per 100,000 in 1997, while robberies have 
fallen 32 percent, from 272 per 100,000 to 185 per 100,000 in 1997, 
according to the FBI. These are the largest declines for any of the 
major violent or property crimes. Bruce Johnson and Andrew Golub, 
scholars at the National Development and Research Institutes in New 
York City, showed the critical role of crack in leading violent crime 
up and then down. When crack arrived in New York in 1985, it created 
a huge new market for users and dealers. Unlike heroin, it was sold 
in small amounts that provided an intense but short-lasting high that 
required users to go on constant ``missions'' to find more. Thousands 
of unskilled, unemployed young men from New York's poor inner city 
neighborhoods jumped into the crack business as sellers, and to protect 
themselves in an unstable business environment, they acquired handguns. 
An explosion in homicides and robberies resulted from the combination 
of impulsive youth, the confused market situation, the paranoia induced 
by crack and the increased firepower of the new handguns. The sharp 
drop in violent crime starting in 1991 can be accounted for by the 
reversal of these same forces, in what Johnson and Golub described 
as ``an indigenous shift,'' as youths who came of age in the 1990s 
turned against smoking or selling crack. ``The primary reason'' these 
young people give for avoiding crack, Johnson and Golub reported, 
``is the negative role models in their lives. They clearly do not 
want to emulate their parents, older siblings, close relatives or 
other associates in their neighborhoods who were enmeshed with crack.'' 
Crack produced ``devastation'' in their lives, and they now shun or 
deride anyone who smokes crack. Among other factors that have played 
a role in the decline in violence, the experts at the New Orleans 
conference pointed in particular to aggressive new actions by the 
police in many cities to stop gun violence, either by frequent searches, 
as has happened in New York, or by improved efforts to trace guns 
used in crimes and arrest gun traffickers, a Boston tactic. The booming 
economy of the 1990s has also helped, the experts agreed, providing 
legitimate jobs to some urban young people who had worked in the drug 
trade. Evidence on the role of imprisonment in curbing crime is less 
clear, the experts said. There is no question that the almost quadrupling 
of the number of people incarcerated since 1970, to 1.8 million, has 
incapacitated many criminals and prevented many crimes. But since 
the prison population has expanded steadily over the past 25 years, 
it does not explain why crime increased sharply in the late 1980s 
or decreased in 1991. Here, said Fox, it may be necessary to look 
separately at the incarceration of adults and juveniles, a study which 
has not yet been done. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>