<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981227.0045 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
The promise of a crisp radio signal that can be heard anywhere in 
the nation, considered a futuristic pipe dream a decade ago, now appears 
to be only about a year from reality. Two companies with government 
licenses to bring satellite-delivered digital broadcasts to radio 
_ CD Radio Inc. and XM Satellite Inc. _ have lined up technology and 
programming partners and plan to roll out their services in 2000. 
Adopting a business model used by pay services like cable and satellite 
television, both would-be satellite radio broadcasters say they can 
build a business from fee-paying listeners who want more than the 
standard AM or FM fare, or who hate to hear their signal fade when 
they drive out of range. Traditional radio broadcasters, enjoying 
a record year in advertising revenue, are skeptical that satellite 
services will ever be serious competition to the free, over-the-air 
industry. They tend to see audio programming over the Internet as 
the more serious threat. But some on Wall Street seem to share the 
view of the trade publication Radio Ink that satellite broadcasters 
will be ``the Marconis of the millennium.'' The investors Sid Bass 
and Leon Black, for instance, recently paid a total of $300 million 
for separate stakes in CD Radio, a publicly held company that expects 
to blanket the nation with signals from its three satellites by early 
2000, a few months ahead of its privately held rival, XM Satellite. 
Both companies say their prime targets will be ethnic audiences, car 
commuters, long-haul truckers and listeners outside big cities _ whom 
they hope are so dissatisfied with local stations that they will pay 
$10 or so a month for national services with up to 100 channels. Listeners 
will need a satellite-radio adapter that will fit into a cassette 
or CD player and a palm-sized antenna that will pick up the signals. 
The receivers, expected to cost $300 or less, will include digital 
displays showing the channel number, the format and the title and 
performer of each piece of music. CD Radio's technology partners include 
Loral Space Communications and Lucent Technologies, while XM's include 
the Hughes Electronics unit of General Motors, STMicroelectronics, 
Pioneer Electronic and Sharp. The groups hope eventually to persuade 
automakers to offer satellite receivers as a standard option for car-audio 
systems. The satellite players' ambitions are a marked contrast to 
the technical conservatism of the conventional radio industry, which 
has seen few innovations in the decades since the FM band was updated 
to deliver stereo sound. Broadcasters, who lobbied against satellite 
radio, are themselves reluctant to pursue digital audio because of 
the expense and a perception that consumers are not dissatisfied with 
the status quo. But that has not deterred the satellite radio companies 
from proceeding with their plans. To obtain exclusive programs for 
African-Americans, XM went to Black Entertainment Television and Radio 
One Inc., a radio station owner that, like XM Satellite, is based 
in Washington. And among its other dozens of channels of music, news 
and talk, XM expects to broadcast the first national Hindu and Mandarin 
Chinese radio programs. XM Satellite is owned by American Mobile Satellite 
Corp., which provides wireless service to business, and World Space 
Inc., which plans to offer satellite radio service outside the United 
States. In March, XM made a deal to buy two satellites from Hughes 
and expects to start broadcasting late in 2000. CD Radio, public since 
1994, has made deals with the Hispanic Radio Network, Sports Byline, 
Bloomberg Radio News and C-Span to provide programming. Half of its 
100 channels are to be commercial-free music in formats that include 
jazz, opera and reggae _ niches that would not survive on many local 
AM or FM stations. ``We see broad-based appeal,'' said Bruce Leichtman, 
a media research director for Yankee Group, a research firm hired 
by CD Radio to study the service's potential market. CD Radio, which 
has tallied $63 million in losses since its founding in 1990, has 
raised nearly all of the $960 million needed for its start-up costs. 
Its shares, following the vicissitudes of a technology start-up company, 
hit a 52-week high of $44 in May, dipped below $15 in October and 
closed the week's trading last Thursday at $34.875. Next November, 
the company expects to launch the first of its three satellites, which 
along with a spare will cost $718 million. An unresolved technical 
issue is the industry's development of a receiver that can accept 
either CD Radio's or XM Satellite's service, a requirement stipulated 
by the Federal Communications Commission when it granted the two companies 
satellite licenses last year. ``The odds are for the first generation, 
we won't get there,'' said David Margolese, chairman and co-founder 
of CD Radio, which is building its studios in Rockefeller Center. 
``Whether we hit it or not, it's not that relevant,'' Margolese said, 
even though failure to find a common receiver would require a regulatory 
waiver. CD Radio executives say the company can break even its first 
year with 1 million subscribers. It is a daunting target for a brand 
new-service, and one analyst cautioned that to stimulate demand, satellite 
broadcasters would probably end up subsidizing subscriber equipment, 
which could cut into potential profits. That is close to the situation 
playing out at DirecTV, a satellite broadcaster owned by GM's Hughes 
Electronics unit that has about 4.3 million subscribers, and has yet 
to break even after four years in business. But ``CD Radio doesn't 
have anywhere near the programming costs'' of DirecTV, Leichtman said. 
CD Radio intends to nearly match what DirecTV spent on advertising 
in its first year, budgeting $60 million. That marketing may be necessary 
to help CD Radio distinguish itself from competitors. A third satellite 
radio rival has recently emerged: WCS Radio Inc., a Menlo Park, Calif., 
consortium that holds licenses for still-to-be-determined wireless 
services. In a hastily arranged FCC auction ordered by Congress in 
1997, a portion of the radio spectrum initially set aside for digital 
audio service was redesignated for general purposes, in the expectation 
that innovative uses would emerge. The 18 winning companies, which 
include some of the regional Bell telephone companies, paid a total 
of $13.5 million for the licenses. Now, after spending a year trying 
to figure out a business plan, the WCS Radio 10-member consortium 
has sought permission to offer digital audio services similar to XM's 
and CD Radio's. ``We believe there is tremendous pent-up demand because 
there is an appalling lack of formats,'' said John Mason, WCS' vice 
president for business development. ``People want more selection.'' 
Hugh Panero, XM's chief executive, contends that listeners are underserved 
by the free programming offered on most ad-supported AM and FM stations, 
which he derided as repetitive and formulaic. He blamed deregulation, 
which has concentrated ownership of the nation's stations into fewer 
hands, intent on using proven money-making formats. ``Radio is risk 
averse,'' he said. ``We're dedicated to bringing back what radio has 
lost.'' The plan calls for most XM channels to carry six minutes of 
advertising an hour, about half the level heard on most stations. 
Revenue is to be split equally with programming partners. Like CD 
Radio, though, XM has not yet disclosed any list of confirmed advertisers. 
Some conventional broadcasters question whether the satellite companies 
will be able to lure advertisers, and point to the services' reliance 
on expensive, unproven technology. ``Even if these services are able 
to attain a substantial number of subscribers, their actual listener 
base won't be anywhere near the size of the audiences of the national 
radio networks,'' predicted David Kantor, president of AM FM Radio 
Networks, a unit of Chancellor Broadcasting, one of the nation's largest 
station owners. ``Advertisers are interested in measured audiences, 
not number of subscribers.'' 
</TEXT>
</DOC>