<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981227.0042 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Had a celebrant dozed off last New Year's Eve and not come to until 
now, he might woozily take a look at the Internet business and conclude 
that it had been an uneventful year. After all, the leading online 
service is still America Online, the most popular site on the World 
Wide Web is still Yahoo, and people are still transacting the most 
electronic commerce through Amazon.com. All these companies are growing 
briskly, as online use increases, just as they were a year ago. But 
what if our Net van Winkle were to groggily dispatch a series of e-mails 
to Internet investors and financiers, asking what he had missed? At 
first, of course, he might be flamed by those incredulous that anyone 
could sleep through all that ruckus. Internet stocks soared early 
this year before stalling and then plunging in a terrifying free fall 
in October, only to pull out and zoom even higher than before. Meanwhile, 
initial public offerings by Internet companies were exploding into 
the firmament like fireworks. For all the bombast, though, a look 
back at the year's events indicate that our sleepy celebrant's initial 
observation might be fairly accurate. In the Internet business, the 
forces propelling the leading companies like America Online, Yahoo 
and Amazon.com remained the same _ even if the pace picked up faster 
than anyone might have expected. And yet the tumultuous year does 
seem to yield at least five lessons about the Internet industry and 
the stocks associated with it: _ The big get bigger and the small 
fade away. At first glance, the Internet seems to favor David over 
Goliath, as any upstart can open an online store or an electronic 
publication. But it appears that the first capable pipsqueak to shoot 
a slingshot in any given area may grow to giant size so quickly than 
any new challengers have been kept at bay. ``Some very powerful franchises 
have been built on the Internet in an incredibly short time,'' said 
Fred Wilson, a principal with Flatiron Partners, a New York venture 
capital firm. ``Some of these companies will be the leaders of the 
economy in the next millennium.'' The best example is Amazon.com, 
which continues to widen the gap between itself and its better-known 
book-selling competitor, Barnes &AMP; Noble. And in the year's third 
quarter, Amazon.com's first full quarter selling compact disks, it 
became the country's leading online music retailer. (It's not an accident 
that the two other leading music stores, CD Now and N2K, have chosen 
to merge in order to attempt a new assault on the emerging Amazon.com 
giant.) ``Being a successful Internet company is not as easy is it 
might appear,'' said Derek brown, an analyst with the investment bank 
of Volpe Brown Whelan &AMP; Co. _ When investors spot a category leader, 
there is no limit to what they will pay to own the stock. The main 
lesson of 1998, said Keith Benjamin, an analyst with BancBoston Robertson 
Stephens, is ``just don't fight the tape.'' It's fruitless, Benjamin 
has concluded, to try to find rational explanations for the astronomical 
Internet stock prices sliding across the ticker. The fact that, in 
the stock market, America Online is worth almost as much as Walt Disney 
and that Yahoo is more valuable than CBS is simply not relevant, he 
said. ``The market opportunity here is big enough that that is what 
we should be focused on for any given segment,'' he said, ``and competitive 
position is the most critical factor in judging these stocks'' Such 
judgment, of course, involves far more forethought than many investors 
may be applying. Yet, while much of the upward pricing pressure has 
come from individual investors, increasingly the big boys have started 
to compete for the relatively small number of shares in circulation 
for the leading Internet companies, which has pushed prices every 
higher. ``Institutional portfolio managers learned to `embrace' Internet 
stocks in the second half, for a simple reason,'' said David Readerman, 
an analyst with Nationsbanc Montgomery Securities. ``The stocks were 
going up, and their relative performance suffered by not owning enough 
of them.'' _ Everybody wants to be an Internet company. Imagine the 
frenzy if someone introduced the anti-gravity diet, where no matter 
how much you ate, the scale would still register you as weightless. 
That is the equivalent of what the stock market has offered to Internet 
companies, which are not penalized for gluttonous spending far in 
excess of their meager incomes. So it's no surprise that all sorts 
of other companies, weary of weighing in every quarter with the traditional 
measure of profits or losses, would want to belly up to this brave 
new training table. Witness the lighter-than-air feat of K-Tel International's 
stock, when the company _ best known for hawking music compilations 
late at night on UHF television stations _ announced it was moving 
onto the Web. K-Tel's stock quadrupled in two weeks, and even now 
is up 80 percent from its pre-Web days, closing last Thursday at $12.5625. 
``The public is in love with the Internet and believes that Internet 
stocks are the way to play the future,'' Wilson said. ``But the public 
is not particularly adept at picking the good ones from the bad ones.'' 
Even old-fashioned companies like Fingerhut, the catalog merchant, 
have hired publicists to convince investors that their various Web 
sites qualifies their stocks for Internet-style valuations. _ Investors 
are very selective in accepting initial public stock offerings (except 
when they'll buy anything.com). After the sharp drop in Internet stocks 
at the end of the summer, when most companies gave up much of their 
gains for the year, there was nearly a month when no initial public 
offerings were bought to the market. Finger-wagging financiers warned 
that it would be very difficult for any but the very best Internet 
companies to go public. Then the market devoured offerings from Broadcast.com, 
the leading Internet audio service, and Ebay, the leading Internet 
flea market. And suddenly, all sorts of companies were going public 
that were hardly leaders in anything. One such offering was for Theglobe.com, 
an online chat service that has many fewer users than many of its 
competitors, but still saw its shares jump from $9 to $97 on the first 
day of trading in October. It now lingers at $38. One sign that the 
death of outrage, much noted in Washington, is equally applicable 
on Wall Street is that Zapata, a fish oil processor, has just resurrected 
its much-ridiculed plan to transform itself into an Internet service 
under the name Zap.Com. Zapata's shares nearly doubled in price last 
Wednesday, when the company issued a press release announcing its 
comeback. The shares closed last Thursday at $12.375, down $1.875. 
_ The power is in the portals. Reading his e-mail, Net van Winkle 
wouldn't know what people meant when they wrote of ``portals.'' A 
year ago, services like Yahoo and Excite were known as search engines, 
although they had already started to offer other portal services like 
news and shopping guides, in order to keep their vast audience on 
their sites longer. This past year, these companies and others doing 
business as portal sites, along with America Online, were the main 
beneficiaries of all the money that was pumped into Internet public 
offerings. How come? Because all of the emerging commerce sites, like 
Ebay, and online communities, like Geocities, spent millions of dollars 
to buy advertising and other promotions on the popular portal sites. 
``It was the Tom Sawyer phenomenon, where all of the neighborhood 
kids paid Tom Sawyer in order to paint the fence for him,'' said Michael 
Parekh, an analyst with Goldman, Sachs &AMP; Co. ``One-third to one-half 
of the money raised by Internet IPOs,'' he said, ``was immediately 
given to the portals.'' So what about next year? Would these lessons 
become all the more evident after another 52-week nap? They could. 
But then again, 1999 might be the year when even some of the Internet 
giants are toppled. Maybe Walt Disney's new Go network will steal 
some of the the thunder of Yahoo. Or the upstart Buy.Com, which sells 
books and computer products at a loss in order to make money on advertising, 
could surge past Amazon. Or maybe Congress will figure out how to 
impose sales taxes on Internet purchases, slowing the growth of electronic 
retailing. With expectations and many Internet stock prices at such 
giddy heights, it might not take much of a disappointment to set off 
a major, negative mood swing. ``Valuation is the risk in 1999,'' Readerman, 
the analyst, said. ``When the stocks stop performing, the herd who 
rushed in could just as easily reverse course, as everyone tries to 
get out first.'' And that kind of a crash could be a little harder 
to sleep through. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>