<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981227.0120 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Just as the Soviet Union was ending its confrontation with the West 
in the late 1980s, the military officers who ran Moscow's secretive 
germ warfare program ordered up new, much deadlier arms. At a remote 
laboratory complex in Kazakhstan, Russian scientists began animal 
testing of the Marburg virus, a highly contagious germ that kills 
by attacking every organ and tissue in the body. This secret testing, 
described recently by several veterans of the Soviet program, went 
undetected at the time by Western intelligence agencies, which knew 
few specifics about the plant's operations. Kazakhstan gave up nuclear, 
biological and chemical weapons soon after it became independent, 
and permitted American experts and a handful of reporters to visit 
the plant. From their observations, and from Soviet defectors, the 
West has finally learned what was unfolding there in the final years 
of the Cold War. The belated discovery of this exotic arms research 
is one of the elements of a fierce dispute in Washington over whether 
the Russian military is heeding President Boris Yeltsin's 1992 order 
to abandon germ warfare. Similar uncertainties loom about Iraq. With 
the apparent end of United Nations inspections, the West is now trying 
to track Baghdad's germ work with satellites and, perhaps, spies _ 
the same methods that failed to unmask the Soviet program. Clinton 
administration officials contend that Russia no longer poses a major 
threat. Western experts have visited most of its key civilian laboratories, 
and officials disclosed that Russia had recently moved closer to allowing 
Western experts to visit its closed military installations, a crucial 
step that could dispel many of the lingering doubts about Moscow's 
activities. Administration officials assert that much of what they 
now understand about the Soviet Union's germ weapons has been gleaned 
through Western aid programs designed to foster peaceful research 
projects. Those projects also pay salaries to former germ scientists, 
fending off what officials say is the gravest danger from the Soviet 
program _ recruitment of scientists by rogue states or terrorists. 
But some administration officials and Republicans in Congress assert 
that Russia is still secretly researching germ weapons, just as it 
did in the Cold War. Congress recently cut spending on the cooperative 
exchanges with Russian germ scientists from $14 million to $7 million, 
both because of persistent doubts about Russian intentions and to 
punish Moscow for selling nuclear and missile technology to Iran. 
The debate turns partly on history. After developing germ weapons 
for several decades, the United States and Russia signed an international 
treaty in 1972 banning such arms. Almost immediately, Soviet defectors 
say, Moscow secretly redoubled its germ research and production. Officials 
and lawmakers acknowledge that there is scant hard evidence to support 
their suspicions that Russia is cheating again, but point to Moscow's 
reluctance to open up its military bases as an ominous sign. That 
may be changing. Two weeks ago, the officials said, a small group 
of Pentagon experts and senior defense scientists met their Russian 
counterparts for the first time at the Military Academy of Radiological, 
Chemical and Biological Defense, a once-closed military training institute 
in Tambov, some 300 miles southeast of Moscow. High on the agenda 
were possible scientific exchanges that may provide direct Western 
access to Russia's biological ``holy of holies,'' as one official 
put it, four military installations at the heart of the Russian germ 
empire _ Sergiyev Posad, Kirov, Yekaterinburg (Sverdlosk), and Strizhi, 
none of which has been visited by the West. Officials said the military 
teams had agreed in principle to a series of military exchanges, starting 
in the United States sometime next year. ``This is the beginning of 
a long process,'' said an official who spoke on condition of anonymity. 
``But the ice has finally been broken, and it's now clear that both 
of us want to do business.'' The breakthrough is potentially significant. 
Iraq's entire germ arsenal contained enough deadly poison at its peak 
to kill all the people on earth many times over, according to U.N. 
weapons inspectors. Yet, the Iraqi program was dwarfed by the amount 
and variety of weapons the Soviet Union had secretly amassed. The 
Soviets, as suggested by their research on the lethality of the Marburg 
virus, were racing ahead in their final days to develop entirely new 
classes of weapons. With more than 60,000 scientists and experts at 
work, they were also developing compounds that could control human 
moods, heart rhythms and sleep patterns and that could be used to 
destroy an enemy army. Among the many unanswered questions, American 
officials say, is where such work stands today. nn Stepnogorsk, in 
Kazakhstan, was the only major Soviet germ installation outside the 
Russian heartland. Called the Scientific Experimental and Production 
Base, it was known only by its post office box, No. 2076. While Western 
intelligence analysts had deduced from the configuration of the buildings 
that it was designed to produce anthrax or other bacteriological agents, 
they never figured out precisely what kind of research was being done, 
what weapons the factory was making or what threat it posed. Built 
on a huge scale on a desolate, wind-blown steppe of Central Asia, 
it is an eerie place to visit. The security fences are no longer electrified. 
Air locks hang open. Plastic floor covers installed to ease decontamination 
are torn and buckling from neglect and the cold. Six stories high 
and two football fields long, the central factory there is filled 
with 10 giant fermentation vats, each meant to brew 5,000 gallons 
of anthrax microbes _ enough to kill every man, woman and child in 
America many times over. Iraq's entire germ production could have 
just about fit into one of these vats. And Stepnogorsk was only one 
of six such Soviet plants. ``As you can see, we haven't made that 
in some time.'' Gennadi L. Lepyoshkin, the base's director, told Pentagon 
experts and a reporter who recently walked through the anthrax plant, 
which is being dismantled with Pentagon aid. ``And we will never do 
it again.'' Russian workers began building the complex in 1982. Former 
Soviet officials say it was a replacement for Sverdlosk (now Yekaterinburg), 
the Russian military installation where, in 1979, an accidental release 
of anthrax microbes killed about 70 people as well as livestock up 
to 30 miles away. Its role in the confrontation between the superpowers 
remains unclear. Kanatjan Alibekov, or Ken Alibek, as he is now known, 
Stepnogorsk's former director who defected to the United States in 
1992, says the plant was to produce up to 330 tons of final ``product'' 
in a 200-day period if the order came to mobilize for war. To this 
day, however, Moscow says Stepnogorsk made only vaccines and other 
defensive germ products. But Russian scientists who worked there in 
Soviet days and now run the place say otherwise. ``This plant was 
an integral part of the Soviet germ weapons program,'' said Lepyoshkin, 
the former Soviet colonel who now heads Kazakhstan's National Center 
on Biotechnology. Moreover, the remaining physical evidence of its 
real purpose is impossible to hide. Next to a concrete bunker is a 
machine that Alibek said was for filling and sealing bomblets. Such 
equipment _ which a Pentagon official called ``a smoking gun'' in 
that it proves the factory produced weapons, not vaccines _ had never 
previously been discovered at a Russian germ installation. Since 1996, 
Washington has been trying to help Kazakhstan convert the installation 
to peaceful work through a low-key, $5 million program. But the effort 
has moved slowly. Financial aid was tied up until last spring when 
Kazakh officials finally stopped demanding that Washington fork up 
$12 million for unpaid utility bills and pay taxes on its assistance. 
Commercial success will not be easy, experts say. Stepnogorsk is extremely 
isolated and, as of last month, had food shortages and little or no 
heat. The city's airport is mothballed, as are the only hotel and 
movie theater. Last March, a well-equipped toxicology lab there opened 
after an infusion of more than $750,000 in American aid. The lab employs 
about 60 former germ scientists who have begun producing, among other 
things, vials of burn ointment. Other former employees are struggling 
to make a living in the impoverished town of 70,000. ``Hope dies last,'' 
said Sergei Antonovitch, a former germ plant scientist who now owns 
a poorly stocked pharmacy in town. While Kazakhstan has dismantled 
its germ program, doubts persist about Russia. Moscow's lies on the 
issue during the Cold War, skeptics in Washington argue, make trust 
and cooperation impossible. Supporters of the Western programs say 
they do not blindly trust Russia, but feel partnership is the best 
chance for verifying Moscow's claim to have renounced germ weapons. 
Skeptics note that Yeltsin has banned Russian experts from discussing 
any aspect of their country's germ history and has retained several 
generals instrumental in the Soviet program. They worry, particularly, 
that research may be quietly proceeding on some of the least known 
of the Soviet advances: ``bio-regulators.'' This work was aimed at 
creating germ agents that could take control of human functions like 
moods, heart rhythms and sleep patterns. Igor V. Domaradskij, a pioneer 
of the Soviet program, said in a recent interview that his scientists 
were searching for compounds that could ``sharply change a person's 
behavior or emotions, such as causing fear or an ultra-rapid heartbeat.'' 
As far as is known, they did not succeed. But Domaradskij said biological 
science had now progressed to the the point where ``it can be done.'' 
Alibek, the former germ scientist who once ran the plant in Kazakhstan, 
is critical of part of the West's approach. The Soviet germ program 
was hidden in a myriad of civilian and military institutes. Even Soviet 
intelligence, the KGB, he disclosed, had its own germ centers, which 
developed agents for assassination under the code name Flayta, or 
Flute. Some of Moscow's former germ scientists, he said, have recently 
published papers that could conceivably aid weapons research, including 
several about cultivating the deadly Marburg virus. Russia, Alibek 
insisted, will never entirely abandon a program in which it had military 
superiority, no matter how many treaties it signs or cooperative programs 
it joins. ``I say, `Guys, don't be so gullible. They're lying to you,'' 
' he said. Rep. Floyd D. Spence, R-S.C., who heads the House Committee 
on National Security, contended that even civilian biology partnerships 
might be dangerous if they helped sustain Russia's germ establishment. 
Administration officials say those exchange programs are already showing 
results. Those who follow the program most closely say that there 
is no evidence of large-scale activity even at the military institutes. 
And one American expert, who spoke on the condition of anonymity, 
said Russia's economic turmoil made large-scale germ work unlikely. 
``Maybe there is a well-lit, well-heated, well-funded military lab 
out there that is just humming along, totally insulated from the cutbacks 
that have slashed funding for military salaries and other critical 
Russian defense needs,'' he said. ``But I don't believe it.'' Top 
Russian scientists deny that Russia still has a germ weapons program. 
``Everything has been destroyed, on our side and yours,'' said Nickolai 
N. Urakov, a former Soviet general who heads a converted germ center 
at Obolensk that now does research for peaceful purposes. Former Sen. 
Sam Nunn, D-Ga., who helped sponsor legislation authorizing the scientific 
exchanges and recently toured Obolensk, said the ambiguity about Russia's 
germ program would persist because much basic biological research 
has both civilian and military applications. ``This is not something 
you see with a satellite,'' he said. ``It all turns on intent. That's 
why this is such a hard intelligence problem.'' But the gamble, he 
said, is worth the risk. ``We still don't know, and won't know for 
many years to come, whether or not we succeeded,'' Nunn said recently 
in Moscow. ``But we do know that while we can argue about whether 
the glass is half full or half empty, we know that the trend is right. 
A decade ago, the glass was all empty.'' 
</TEXT>
</DOC>