<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981227.0107 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
As the truce in Kosovo province continued to disintegrate, rebels 
came down from the hills Sunday and attacked a large police post here 
between the capital of Belgrade and Pristina, the provincial capital. 
Some diplomats questioned whether the international monitors who are 
trying to keep the cease-fire from collapsing will be sufficient in 
number and will learn how to restore peace in time to prevent full-scale 
war in this Balkan region. About 2,000 monitors are expected, but 
fewer than half that number are in place. While the police fought 
ethnic Albanian rebels along the road, other police units tried to 
enter rebel-controlled territory nearby and were caught in ambushes 
that left two armored personnel carriers destroyed and three officers 
wounded, government officials said. The officials said rebels used 
a 120 mm mortar in the ambushes. Diplomats said the rebels conceded 
that this was true, which means the rebels have much larger weaponry 
than had been known. Smaller mortars were used in the combat on the 
main road, though it was unclear which side was using them. Heavy 
machine-gun fire poured from police units that commandeered a motel 
near the road. The police appeared to push back the attackers after 
about a half-hour. Diplomats said that the rebels were in a mood to 
negotiate but remained in their positions. There has been shooting 
in this area of northern Kosovo since Thursday, when government forces 
tried to capture a village and the regional headquarters of the rebel 
Kosovo Liberation Army. International monitors said police have been 
sniping at ethnic Albanian civilians from the motel for several days. 
Ethnic Albanians, who constitute more than 90 percent of Kosovo's 
population, want an independent country. The province is part of Serbia, 
one of two republics remaining in Yugoslavia. The government sent 
in soldiers and police units beginning last spring to put down ethnic 
Albanian rebels. A cease-fire, negotiated with Western aid in the 
hope of allowing villagers who had fled the fighting to return home 
before winter, has been disintegrating into violence recently. After 
the rebels repulsed the government attack on Thursday, international 
monitors brokered a pact in which both sides agreed to pull back their 
troops, but neither side seems to want to stop fighting. On Saturday, 
rebels killed an elderly Serbian man in a village near Podujevo, the 
largest town in the area. He was the father-in-law of a local senior 
police official. The rebels said he had been sniping at them from 
his home. Sunday morning, as local Serbs were gathering for the man's 
funeral, rebels shot and killed another elderly Serb, who they said 
was also firing at them. With tensions growing, the monitors stationed 
in the local headquarters of both rebel and government forces were 
called back to brief senior monitors in Pristina. About 30 minutes 
after they left, the fighting started. Police officials said their 
men were trying to rescue the elderly man shot Sunday when they were 
ambushed. A rebel leader said the police came in to attack them. Some 
foreign officials blamed Sunday's fighting, in part, on the inexperience 
and insufficient number of the monitors. ``There was nobody to tell 
the KLA, `Relax, relax,''' a foreign official said. ``If they go in 
and work the problem, it will calm down.'' As rebel fighters rushed 
into trenches to ambush government forces near villages here, ethnic 
Albanian civilians, many of them children, ran across the snow trying 
to avoid the battle. Villages in the area had been emptying as civilians 
fled to stay with people in Podujevo. But Sunday, both ethnic Albanians 
and Serbs were fleeing Podujevo. Nurije Kopalla, who had taken refugees 
into her home after the fighting on Thursday, was desperately trying 
Sunday to get a ride out of the area. ``Everyone who was in my home 
is gone,'' she said. ``Some of them ran to the mountains, some to 
other towns.'' While trying to flee, she was trapped in the fighting 
on the main road, but finally made it out of the area. During the 
weekend, rebels went to the homes of 13 Serbian villagers and forced 
them to hand over weapons, government officials said. With the conflict 
worsening, a dispute over how much danger the international monitors 
will accept appeared to deepen Sunday. Monitors are here as part of 
the Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe, a group made 
up of 53 countries, including the United States. Senior officials 
of the organization here say if the fighting continues, it will become 
too dangerous for their unarmed monitors to work. The leader of the 
organization, Foreign Minister Bronislaw Geremek of Poland, released 
a statement Sunday that reiterated that position. ``If the bloodshed 
and violence escalate, the OSCE will have to reconsider the forms 
of its activity in Kosovo,'' the statement said . But the United States 
insisted that the monitoring mission must find a way to make conditions 
safe enough to stay. ``Leaving is not American policy in Kosovo,'' 
a U.S. diplomat said late Sunday. ``We're going to stay there and 
finish the job.'' 
</TEXT>
</DOC>