<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981227.0123 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
The New York Times said in an editorial on Monday, Dec. 28: Though 
the Senate has had little more than a week to ponder the articles 
of impeachment against Bill Clinton, it has already done much to restore 
a sense of proportion and reason to the case. Bipartisan sentiment 
seems rapidly to be gathering around the idea of strongly censuring 
Clinton rather than removing him from office, and doing so with dispatch 
when the new Congress convenes next month. Reaching that outcome will 
require the cooperation of the White House and strong leadership in 
the Senate to prevent the impeachment case from being kidnapped by 
conservative Republican senators who would like to drive Clinton from 
the White House against the public will. Sen. Daniel Patrick Moynihan, 
a student of the Constitution, has provided that kind of leadership 
with an astute analysis of the case. He rightly reasons that Clinton's 
misconduct, while deserving condemnation and punishment, does not 
reach the level of high crimes set by the framers for removal of a 
president by Congress. Moynihan also argues wisely that the cavalier 
use of impeachment would destabilize the institution of the presidency, 
an office vital not only to American governance but to world welfare 
as well. Coming from a man who has not hesitated to part company with 
Clinton on numerous occasions and is not seeking re-election, this 
advice ought to carry great weight with the Senate. Managing the unusual 
set of legal and political issues facing the Senate will not be easy. 
Though Sen. Robert Byrd has advised colleagues that the Constitution 
does not require them to conduct a full trial of the charges against 
Clinton, most senators favor opening a trial. That now seems likely 
to happen in January, with other Senate business set aside until the 
case is resolved. A motion to suspend or end the trial can be made 
at any time and approved by a simple majority vote. Conviction and 
removal from office takes 67 votes. Finding the right moment to adjourn 
the trial will be a delicate and critical decision for those who favor 
censuring Clinton, and will require at least six Republican votes 
if the Senate's 45 Democrats are united. At some point Clinton must 
decide whether he wants to press for a full trial, anticipating acquittal 
but risking the possibility that the case would veer out of control, 
as it did in the House. As of now there are not enough votes to convict, 
but nothing about the Lewinsky case has followed a familiar script. 
Tom Daschle, the minority leader, seems to appreciate that danger 
and is urging the White House not to break the momentum toward censure 
by trying to impede Senate consideration of the case. The White House 
can contest the proceedings at every turn, and certainly has a legal 
right to do so. Clinton's aides can seek a month's delay once a trial 
begins, so that the White House can prepare a defense. Once the presentation 
of evidence commences, Clinton will be well within his rights to contest 
the facts and legal theories offered by the prosecution team composed 
of House members. But Clinton's political interests and the country's 
need to resolve this crisis would be ill served by a legal strategy 
of delay and resistance. Daschle said as much on Sunday on NBC's ``Meet 
the Press'' when he noted that many of the facts in the Lewinsky case 
are well established and the White House ought not to try to block 
the start of a Senate trial. It is good advice, and for a change, 
Clinton should take it instead of listening to the lawyers who helped 
get him impeached. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>