<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981227.0140 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
It was a damp, chilly Saturday morning, and like clockwork, the hunters 
began gathering in a grassy lot near the Why Not Farm, surrounded 
by acres of brown pleated fields undulating into the horizon. Quietly, 
assuredly, in crisp jackets of scarlet or black, they got out of their 
Jaguars and Porsches and onto their Irish sport horses. And approaching 
from a distance, in perfect formation, was a pack of three dozen foxhounds, 
anticipating the tremolo sounds of an English hunting horn. It was 
time once again for the Millbrook Hunt, which for 90 years has been 
a fixture of this Dutchess County village as a nod to the traditional 
English sport of fox hunting and a celebration of the good American 
country life. It is a community event, as well _ so much so that the 
hunt now has permission to cross more than 50,000 acres of private 
land, or more than three times the area of Manhattan. ``When you are 
on a horse, hunting foxes, you're back in time, like you're in the 
1700's or 1800's,'' said Shepherd Ellenberg, a 58-year-old real estate 
investor, who was kissing his young horse, New Castle, imported from 
Ireland. ``You're not thinking about the real world. You don't have 
cell phones. You don't see the 20th century.'' The 21st century is 
another matter. If not quite under siege, the Millbrook Hunt is under 
pressure. Its traditions _ largely based on tacit agreements among 
like-minded landowners in this wealthy patch of rural New York _ have 
recently been challenged, not only by a messy property rights lawsuit, 
but also by some animal-rights advocates who have abandoned their 
long-held neutrality and begun siding with the foxes. For the last 
three years, the hunt has been sparring in court with Edgar O. Smith, 
one of the newest neighbors in the area, to gain unfettered access 
to Smith's 285-acre property. Smith, a millionaire businessman, wants 
to keep the hunt off most of his property so that he can develop a 
nature preserve. And in late October, Justice Judith A. Hillery of 
State Supreme Court in Poughkeepsie ruled in Smith's favor. That decision 
is not the final word in this expensive battle among the rich. But 
hunt members and their supporters say they fear the case could establish 
a troubling precedent, not only in Millbrook, but in other fox hunting 
regions around the country, making open space not so open. More than 
that, though, the whole affair has been unsettling, if not bewildering, 
to some. To these people, moving to Millbrook is tantamount to accepting 
the hunt as a part of the community's genetic makeup. To go against 
the hunt, they say, is to disavow the essence of country life and 
miss the point of why so many treasure Millbrook in the first place. 
``Most people pay more to be in hunt country,'' said Barbara Agren, 
who said she moved to the area because of the hunt, shedding her previous 
career as managing director of couture for Saks Fifth Avenue. ``There's 
a certain tradition and lingo, and that's what we want to uphold,'' 
she continued, from her perch atop her horse, Assets, during a recent 
hunt. ``So why would someone want to come up here and ruin it all 
for the people who enjoy it?'' Smith and his supporters, though, say 
fox hunting is a fussy, rigid sport that should be retired to stud. 
They say they couldn't care less about the de rigueur diversions of 
the Town and Country set, and its quaint costumes and solemn traditions 
strike them as anachronistic and silly. (This is a sport, after all, 
whose practitioners insist, with the sternest faces, that foxhounds 
should never, ever, be called dogs.) In the late 1990s, critics of 
the hunt say, property rights and individual freedom count more than 
traditions of the hunt, which they dismiss as hidebound, elitist, 
even brutal. ``These are people who are used to getting what they 
want, but we just can't blindly continue these traditions,'' said 
Smith, 60, a shy, private man whose company buys small manufacturing 
companies for long-term investment. ``Why should this handful of rich 
and privileged people get on their horses with a pack of hounds and 
hunt down these innocent animals and tear them to shreds for their 
own amusement?'' The dispute began in 1995, when Smith bought the 
wooded property, which used to be part of James Cagney's estate, from 
Henry R. Kravis, the financier, for $1.45 million. An easement in 
the deed required Smith to allow the Millbrook Hunt on his property 
for $1 a year _ just as Kravis had done. One clause, though, permitted 
Smith to ``modify'' or ``redirect'' any trails for property improvements. 
To Smith this meant that he could develop his nature preserve, as 
a tribute to his rural upbringing on a Pennsylvania dairy farm. So 
Smith put up wire fences with red streamers. The hunt sued, saying 
that if its members couldn't cut through Smith's land, the entire 
hunt would be severely curbed. Smith then offered to open 77 acres 
to the hunt as a compromise; this was rejected. Eventually, Smith's 
lawyers presented evidence that the hunt had ventured onto Smith's 
property at most about five times a year since 1980 _ making access 
hardly an absolute necessity. So Justice Hillery sided with Smith, 
granting the hunt 77 acres of access and awarding Smith $47,000 in 
damages from the hunt's use of his property. The judgment could still 
be appealed. And Smith is still seeking to recover more than $1 million 
in legal fees. There is more, however, to the Millbrook case than 
the judgment for Smith. Before this case, animal rights groups in 
this country had paid scant attention to the sport, since its practitioners 
in the United States have long insisted that the goal of the hunt 
is the chase, not the kill. But now, advocates for animals say they 
will make it a higher priority. ``This case is a turning point,'' 
said Wayne Pacelle, senior vice president for the Humane Society of 
the United States, the country's biggest animal protection group. 
``It makes fox hunting look like less of a benign social activity, 
and more like an act of deliberate animal cruelty.'' The Millbrook 
Hunt's own diaries of its activities, which emerged during the trial, 
contributed to that new assessment. Written by Betsy Park, who, as 
the huntsman, trains the foxhounds year round, the entries are mostly 
filled with mundane observations about the weather, the hounds, the 
hunt. But several entries also hint at how difficult it can be to 
prevent the hounds from attacking foxes, coyotes, deer, pheasants 
and other animals in their path. Indeed, court records show that in 
late 1987, the hounds maimed a family pet, a dog named Taffy. During 
a tour of the hunt's kennels, Farnham F. Collins, joint-master of 
the Millbrook Hunt since 1978, defended the hunt's record on animal 
welfare. Most of the time, he said, the hounds don't catch the foxes, 
or any other creature. In 20 years, only 13 foxes and 20 coyotes have 
been killed during the hunt, and most of them were diseased, he said. 
Besides, Collins added, the Millbrook area is one in which people 
love their animals. Veterinary clinics abound. One sign says: ``Caution: 
Geese and Quackers.'' And forget ``Ped Xing'' signs; the thing to 
spot around here is ``Horse Xing.'' But it is another sign _ one that 
forbids all riding on a particular property, with the exception of 
the Millbrook Hunt _ that underscores just how ingrained, and influential, 
the sport is in a place that some describe, simply, as hunt country. 
Three times a week, from August to February, the hunt trots out its 
brand of pomp and sport for anywhere from one and one-half to five 
hours. An annual membership costs $3,600; the 70 or so active members 
are split evenly between full-time residents and those who call Millbrook 
a weekend retreat. During the hunt, accomplished male riders wear 
scarlet coats, called Pinks, with brass buttons featuring the inscribed 
initials ``M.H.'' Accomplished female riders wear black coats with 
green collars, with black buttons and white lettering. Everyone else 
usually wears black coats with black buttons. ``We are an old-style, 
traditional hunt,'' said Collins, a stoic, deliberate man whose father 
and grandfather were also joint-masters of the Millbrook Hunt. ``Some 
people may say, `Why don't you go out in a sweater or something?' 
I would be embarrassed in this community to put the hunt out in that 
way.'' Community cooperation has always been the key to the hunt's 
survival, Collins said. While the hunt owns only about 20 acres of 
property in the area, it has oral agreements with 92 out of 100 property 
owners to hunt on their lands. The eight others have easements in 
their deeds allowing the same, Collins said. And regardless of whether 
one is a member or not, the hunt has never had a problem with any 
residents, Collins said. Not with Fred Drasner, chief executive of 
The Daily News; not with Elizabeth Johnson, an heir to the Johnson 
&AMP; Johnson fortune; not with Oakleigh B. Thorne, a businessman 
who is one of the wealthiest men in America. No one, that is, until 
Smith came along. A man who looks more like a genial park ranger than 
a hard-nosed Harvard businessman, Smith said he planned to fight the 
hunt to the end, no matter what the cost. Eventually, he plans to 
donate his estate to animal rights groups. Meanwhile, Smith has been 
working hard on his nature preserve. With the help of Joseph Bridges, 
a biologist and environmental consultant, he has already begun to 
remove weeds and other invasive plants in order to bring back native 
species, like prairie grass and chestnut groves. ``You know, I'm not 
some guy who came up to buy some land and deprive the hunt of a fraction 
of the 60,000 acres they can hunt,'' Smith said on a recent tour of 
his property. ``I just wanted a beautiful piece of land that I can 
celebrate and conserve and walk through.'' He approached a crunchy, 
yellowed field of harvested corn. From that vantage point, all the 
land that one could see belonged to him. And on this day, at least, 
there were no horses or foxhounds in sight. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>