<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981227.0102 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
This was not a life-and-death game. Both the Atlanta Falcons and the 
Miami Dolphins had already wrapped up playoff spots and a game at 
home. The Falcons even drew a first-round bye. About the only things 
on the line were another notch in the victory column, momentum heading 
into the playoffs, the avoidance of key injuries and not looking like 
chumps. With its 38-16 victory Sunday, Atlanta (14-2) was the clear 
winner in most of those categories, although the team received a huge 
scare in the first quarter when quarterback Chris Chandler was dragged 
down from behind and strained his lower back after passing for his 
second touchdown. As a precaution, he did not return, and the Falcons' 
interim coach, Rich Brooks, said Chandler should be fine when the 
Falcons play host to the Dallas Cowboys, San Francisco 49ers or Green 
Bay Packers in two weeks. The Falcons received a pre-game visit from 
Coach Dan Reeves, who is recovering from heart bypass surgery, and 
Chandler said, ``It was definitely a motivating factor for us.'' The 
Dolphins (10-6) will play Buffalo next Saturday afternoon in Miami. 
But they will do so without defensive end Jason Taylor, who is second 
on the team in sacks. Taylor broke his right clavicle in the first 
quarter of the game Sunday and will miss the remainder of the season. 
It was a painful exclamation point to a dismal day for the Dolphins, 
who committed six turnovers and fell behind, 21-0, in the first quarter 
and trailed, 38-6, in the third. ``It's embarrassing the way we played 
in that first quarter,'' said Miami coach Jimmy Johnson. ``To commit 
six turnovers and not have any of our own, that's embarrassing. We 
made a lot of mistakes and once it got out of hand, I don't think 
we played real hard.'' While it was bitter for Johnson and the Dolphins, 
it was sweet for Falcons running back Jamal Anderson, who enhanced 
his personal portfolio and launched a campaign for the league's most 
valuable player. Anderson had 18 carries for 103 yards and a touchdown 
(on a 36-yard run). The 18 carries gave him 410 for the season, an 
NFL record, and his 16 touchdowns this year were a team record. ``When 
you can say that you've carried the ball more times in a season than 
any back in the long history of the game, it's an honor,'' Anderson 
said. ``The good thing is that I feel great. I'm not all banged up.'' 
He added: ``It's not one of those records you want to approach every 
year.'' Even when he does not touch the ball, Anderson proves to be 
an incredible weapon for the team. On the first play of the game, 
Chandler faked a handoff to Anderson. Nine Dolphin defenders ran to 
the left with Anderson, and Chandler bootlegged the ball to the right, 
throwing to tight end O.J. Santiago in the flat. Santiago managed 
to shake off cornerback Terrell Buckley on the way to a 62-yard touchdown 
play. On Atlanta's next possession, Chandler combined with Tony Martin 
on a 53-yard pass, setting up a 3-yard scoring pass to Santiago. Chandler 
hobbled off on that play with his back strain, having been pulled 
down by the Dolphins' Kenny Mixon. After Steve DeBerg took over at 
quarterback, the Falcons went up 21-0 and took the Dolphins completely 
out of their game plan. The Falcons unleashed their early spurt after 
a brief visit from Reeves, who underwent surgery 13 days ago. Reeves 
had gone back into the hospital last week with an irregular heart 
beat, but had been released with a warning from his doctors not to 
attend the game or exert himself. In his pre-game talk to the team, 
he told the Falcons to play this game as if it were as important as 
the others. They followed his prescription. ``The 21-point first quarter 
made his day a little easier,'' Brooks said. ``He was able to relax 
at home and just enjoy the rest of the game.'' It was far from a relaxing 
day for Miami quarterback Dan Marino, who had helped his team engineer 
a splendid victory against the Denver Bronocs last Monday night. Marino 
threw for 320 yards and a touchdown, but his two interceptions were 
killers. One was returned 11 yards for a touchdown by cornerback Ronnie 
Bradford in that first-quarter assault. The Falcons' cornerbacks entered 
the game expecting to see the hot Marino that burned Denver last week. 
So, they had a plan. ``As cornerbacks, we just wanted to run with 
the receivers and let them take us to the ball and not worry about 
Dan,'' said Falcons cornerback Ray Buchanan. Perhaps if the Dolphins 
had an effective running game, they could have made it interesting. 
But the starting running back Karim Abdul Jabbar was out with a concussion 
he suffered two games ago. And fumbles by running backs Ron Moore 
and John Avery in the third quarter helped bury the Dolphins. The 
Falcons managed to convert both turnovers into touchdowns. Moore's 
resulted in a 35-yard touchdown pass from quarterback Steve DeBerg 
to receiver Tony Martin that helped make it 31-6 and Avery's led to 
Anderson's 36-yard touchdown run that helped make it 38-6. ``It just 
didn't seem that we came ready to play today,'' Marino said. ``We 
better play better versus Buffalo next week.'' 
</TEXT>
</DOC>