<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981227.0048 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Largely undistracted by the impeachment of President Clinton and the 
bombing of Iraq, U.S. shoppers appear to have spent freely from wallets 
that still feel pretty fat, giving retailers a muscular, if not stellar, 
holiday season. Though industry figures will not be officially reported 
until early January, retail analysts and merchants themselves are 
predicting that December sales in big-chain stores open at least one 
year will rise for the second year in a row by as much as 4 percent 
to 5 percent. This year's holiday shopping reflected generally buoyant 
consumer spending and an overall economic picture _ rebounding stock 
prices, low inflation and a tight job market _ that remains quite 
rosy. ``As long as consumers continue to get their daily fix from 
the stock market, they will continue to spend,'' said Stephen Roach, 
chief economist at Morgan Stanley Dean Witter &AMP; Co. ``Nothing 
will stop them _ not impeachment, global turmoil or warm weather.'' 
But they waited a while before rushing to the mall. Like Johnny Mathis 
carols and reruns of ``It's a Wonderful Life,'' last-minute and post-Yuletide 
shopping are becoming something of an American Christmas tradition 
these days. In keeping with a trend of recent years, a larger portion 
of holiday sales came in the week just before Christmas and in the 
weekend right after. ``Once again, shoppers procrastinated until the 
last minute, waiting for the biggest bargains,'' said Bruce Van Kleeck, 
president of the National Retail Federation. This year, retailers 
had to ``count on late shopping and after-holiday sales to be the 
savior,'' he said. Department stores that cater to the middle price 
range felt the squeeze as customers split their dollars between high-end 
and low-end merchants. Sales at Sears, Roebuck &AMP; Co. and J.C. 
Penney Co. were expected to be flat, and once final figures are in, 
the entire sector is expected to show modest gains of just 1 percent 
to 2 percent. Almost everyone else, however, appears to have done 
relatively well. Specialty apparel stores _ in particular Ann Taylor; 
Victoria's Secret, which is a unit of Intimate Brands; and The Gap 
chains, Banana Republic, Old Navy and The Gap itself _ sustained their 
strong performance by appealing to consumers with distinctive merchandise 
and effective ad campaigns. These stores even lifted sales at regional 
shopping malls, which came up short of overall estimates last year, 
according to John Konarski, senior vice president of the International 
Council of Shopping Centers. The malls are expected to be in line 
with the sales-growth estimates of 4 percent to 4.5 percent, he said. 
Discount chains like Target _ a division of Dayton Hudson Corp. _ 
and Wal-Mart Stores were the 800-pound gorillas of the season, catering 
to throngs of people determined to get their scented candles, George 
Foreman meat cookers, and Furbys at the lowest possible prices. Some 
80 percent of Americans were expected to buy at least one holiday 
item from the discounters, up from 70 percent last year. At the other 
end of the spectrum, luxury retailers basked in the stock-market comeback. 
Jewelry was particularly popular this year. In Jacksonville, Fla., 
Mike Alexander bought gold bracelets for his mother and sister because 
they already have ``everything else.'' Anything cashmere also had 
people cuddling up to the registers. At Baby Gap Luxe, a miniature 
bubble-gum-pink cardigan with matching pants, both made of the downy 
fabric, were racing out the door for a mere $155 a set. Electronics 
retailers like Circuit City Stores Inc. and Best Buy Co. benefited 
from consumers snapping up personal computers, many of them now to 
be had for less than $1,000. And they enjoyed increased sales from 
new products that are starting to enter the mass market as prices 
drop. These include digital video cameras and DVD players, which use 
compact-disc-sized platters to play movies at home. They now are being 
sold for as little as $400. Martha Stewart loomed as a presiding spirit 
this season as products relating to the home, from chenille throw 
pillows to leather easy chairs, were hot again. ``We've moved past 
apparel as a Christmas item,'' Wendy Liebmann, president of WSL Retail, 
a consulting and consumer research firm, said. ``Upscale consumers 
are saying, `I don't need any more clothing.' In turning to the home, 
people are being both fashionable and practical.'' Plenty of the gifts 
these stores sold, of course, were neither. At Restoration Hardware 
Inc., whose strong sales made it a leader in homewares, the seasonal 
standout was a silver-plated cocktail shaker shaped like a penguin, 
whose beak dispenses martinis. Preholiday markdowns were just as fierce 
as in years past. Consumers have come to expect big discounts early 
in the season, and retailers delivered them earlier than ever. Signs 
enticing consumers to take 20 percent off were abundant around the 
country right after Thanksgiving, as were newspaper coupons. The cuts 
deepened with each passing week, particularly on cold-weather items. 
The weekend before Christmas, the Bloomingdale's flagship store at 
59th Street and Lexington Avenue in New York was decorated like the 
banquet hall in a medieval castle, with red banners hanging from the 
rafters proclaiming an extra 15 percent off, even on many items already 
marked down. The good news, from the standpoint of the retailer's 
bottom line, is that many cuts were premeditated. Battle-hardened 
from years past, many merchants have finally accepted that the intense 
customer appetite for preseason sales cannot be wished away. Merle 
Goldstone, a spokesman for Macy's West in San Francisco, said, ``We 
anticipated a very competitive environment, took it into account for 
our sales strategy, and are happy with the results.'' Still, the diving 
prices were painful for some retailers to absorb, especially those 
who compete mostly on cost. ``This year was an even more promotional 
year than last year,'' said Duncan Muir, a spokesman for J.C. Penney, 
``and that's going to hurt around the margins.'' The Saturday before 
Christmas, which looks as if it will end up as the busiest shopping 
day of the year, collided directly with the House debate and vote 
to impeach Clinton. Shoppers and merchants alike agreed, a little 
shamefacedly, that the moment of high political drama had virtually 
no effect on people's efforts to complete their gift lists. ``Nobody's 
talked about anything but makeup all day. Isn't that scary?'' said 
Joanie Kleinberg, who worked a Bobbi Brown cosmetics counter on impeachment 
day. Asked if the historic events in Washington had affected her plans 
to spend the day hunting for gifts, Chris Schneider, a 45-year-old 
accountant from Denver loaded down with shower gels and lotions from 
Bath and Body Works, replied, ``No, and that's sad, isn't it?'' For 
all retailers' hopes that the remarkably resilient economy would fuel 
a gangbuster season with 6 percent or even 7 percent gains, sales 
during the holiday season were nothing extraordinary, roughly in line 
with sales gains throughout the year. Unseasonably warm weather for 
much of December can be blamed for depressing sales of winter apparel, 
but clearly that was not the whole story. Many analysts pointed to 
a realignment of buying priorities. ``Consumers are still spending 
a lot,'' said Judy Tenzer, a spokeswoman for American Express Co., 
whose Retail Index tracks buying patterns. ``They are just spreading 
it across a lot more activities, like travel and parties.'' Also benefiting 
from shoppers' search to provide a more intimate gift than a sweater 
or bread machine was the spa business. Elizabeth Arden Red Door Salons, 
for example, said purchases of gift certificates for facials, body 
scrubs and the like are up 25 percent over last year. Another warning 
sign, particularly for mall retailers, was the holiday success of 
online merchants. Even before Christmas, online stores had already 
racked up sales that match start-of-the-season predictions of $2.3 
billion, double what they did last year. The question now, as the 
figures on online sales continue to be collected, is whether they 
will manage to go well beyond these expectations. Macy's, a unit of 
Federated Department Stores Inc., reported that its World Wide Web 
site, launched in mid-November, was getting 10 million hits a day, 
far more than anticipated. Nordstrom Inc. also experienced an electronic 
rush. Anna Schryver, spokeswoman for Lands' End Inc., the mail-order 
apparel company, said that its Web traffic ``had broken all records.'' 
Being on the Internet, however, did not immunize Lands' End from pressures 
facing other apparel merchants. The company, which has been troubled 
lately and recently booted its chief executive, started marking prices 
down even before the holiday season to attract the growing number 
of consumers who will not lay down money until they see a bargain. 
And while shopping on the Web remains a tiny fraction of the estimated 
$174 billion in retail sales for the holiday season, that did not 
stop Internet merchants from gloating. Amazon.com Inc., the cyberspace 
book-selling powerhouse, would not release precise numbers, but said 
visitors to its Web site on the day after Thanksgiving quadrupled 
from last year. ``1998 goes down in history,'' Bill Gross, a company 
spokesman, said, ``as the year the Internet became a mainstream alternative.'' 
</TEXT>
</DOC>