<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981227.0099 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
A day after the Palestinian Authority lifted Sheik Ahmed Yassin's 
house arrest, his Land Rover, a gift from the Saudis, plowed through 
the sand at a refugee camp here, headed for a sound stage decorated 
with murals celebrating armed struggle. Bodyguards hoisted Yassin's 
wheelchair onto the stage, and the ephemeral-looking Islamic cleric, 
swathed in flowing white, gazed out at the 10,000 people awaiting 
his first public words in two months. Against a backdrop of painted 
grenades, leaping flames and raised fists, Yassin, 63, the founder 
and spiritual leader of Hamas, delivered a fiery 15-minute speech. 
In his high-pitched, raspy voice, the words sounded as otherworldly 
as they were inflammatory. ``We must continue on our path to holy 
war,'' he said, at this rally marking the 11th anniversary of the 
Hamas movement, which has waged a deadly war of terror against Israel. 
``We celebrate today the uprising that confronted the Israeli occupation 
with stones, with Molotov cocktails and with guns, uniting our people, 
the sons of Palestine, the sons of Jerusalem, the sons of our homeland.'' 
After the American-brokered Wye River agreement between Israel and 
the Palestinians was signed in late October, Yassin was locked in 
his house by the Palestinian Authority, his phone lines cut and his 
daily parade of visitors shut out. When the authority lifted his house 
arrest on Dec. 24, the Israeli government was quick to condemn what 
officials described as a Palestinian retreat from the promise to crack 
down on terrorism. ``Why do you want to interview me?'' Yassin asked 
in his distinctive voice, smiling as if at an inside joke. ``To show 
the world a first-class example of the famous revolving door?'' He 
may appear otherworldly, but he is as engaged as any Middle Eastern 
politician in the terms of debate. He was referring to the Israeli 
coinage for what they see as the circulation of terrorists through 
Palestinian jails. The Palestinians said they had released the sheik, 
a popular figure in much of the Gaza Strip, as a gesture of good will 
at the start of the Muslim holy month of Ramadan. But Yassin agreed 
with the Israelis that the move had probably been made in direct response 
to an Israeli suspension of further withdrawals from the West Bank 
required by the Wye accord. ``I am a card that they play,'' he said, 
referring to the Palestinian leadership. Seated in his brother's humble 
home in Gaza, Yassin, who is paralyzed, nearly blind and very hard 
of hearing, laughed with the relatives and acolytes who surrounded 
him _ and ribbed him _ during an interview. Several times he motioned 
with his head for the conversation to stop because airplanes overhead, 
audible to no one else, were interfering with reception on his hearing 
aid. ``We could use you for radar,'' his brother joked, then grew 
serious. ``We do use you for radar, really.'' Fifteen months ago the 
Israelis released Yassin from their jails in exchange for the release 
from Jordanian prison of two agents of the Mossad, the Israeli intelligence 
agency, who had botched an attempt to assassinate a Hamas leader in 
Jordan. Since then, Yassin has proved a nettlesome presence to the 
Palestinians. That is partly because he preaches against the peace 
effort and assists, even if indirectly, in bringing terror attacks. 
But it is also because he holds as much sway over poor Palestinians 
in the Gaza Strip as Yasser Arafat, the leader of the Palestinian 
Authority _ if not more. Indeed, at the rally on Friday, Yassin's 
words were received as if from an oracle by a worshipful crowd in 
the Shati camp _ a Hamas stronghold that Hillary Rodham Clinton visited 
11 days earlier during President Clinton's ill-fated peacemaking mission. 
``He is a super-leader, larger than life,'' said Rawda Jamal, who 
held her swaddled baby up to see the frail cleric. ``It was a disaster 
that the Palestinian Authority put him under house arrest after all 
those years in Israeli prisons.'' During his house arrest, Yassin 
said, the satellite atop his modest home in the shabby Zeitun section 
of Gaza linked him to the world. He watched Clinton's visit to Gaza 
on television, he said, dismayed to see the U.S. president presiding 
over a meeting of the Palestine National Council in which it revoked 
from its charter clauses calling for Israel's destruction. ``It was 
a sad spectacle,'' Yassin said, ``to see my fellow Palestinians applauding 
and chanting while they were deleting part of our history and their 
charter. That's why our rallies took place in protest: because they 
were turning their back on our common purpose.'' Describing the two 
months of his house arrest, he again smiled his inward smile, while 
a son gently eased the sheik's swollen feet into fleece-lined boots. 
Because Yassin's physical therapists were not allowed to visit during 
that time, the son _ one of his 11 children _ trained at a local hospital 
to nurse his father and to exercise his limbs. ``I was happy,'' Yassin 
said. ``It was excellent. I had time to worship, to read the Koran. 
I was able to finish reading three doctoral dissertations about the 
holy war. I had some time to see my wife and children. Reasonable 
people cannot look on ill fortune as ill fortune. I prefer to see 
the glass as half full.'' Still, he said of the detention, ``I was 
not happy that this order came from my brothers. If it had come from 
the Jews, it would have been natural.'' Yassin's house arrest followed 
a suicide bomb attack on a school bus filled with Jewish settlers' 
children in Gaza. The children escaped harm, but two Israeli soldiers, 
who drove their jeep between the bomber's car and the bus, were killed, 
along with the bomber. At the rally, one speaker thundered, ``Clinton 
is a Jew!'' Schoolchildren read poems extolling holy war. A group 
of young teen-age boys, who sounded like an Islamic Menudo, sang to 
the feedback of bad amplifiers. Iraqi flags were waved, but in deference 
to the conditions in their rally permit, no Israeli or U.S. flags 
were burned and no weapons fired. In his speech, Yassin condemned 
the Palestinian Authority without naming it or Arafat. Directing his 
anger into the two orange microphones held in his face, he called 
it corrupt and spoke out against its attempt to stifle the Palestinian 
news media and what he called its concessions to the Israelis and 
the Americans. As he talked into a chill wind that swirled the sand, 
his bodyguard kept the sheik's white head covering from flapping forward 
and covering his face. Face to face, Yassin transmits an eerie kind 
of serenity, uttering harsh words as gently as if he were talking 
to a small child. The contrast between tone and substance can be chilling. 
``We extended our hand to the world to help us get back our land, 
and nobody cared,'' the sheik said. ``Don't you think it's reasonable, 
then, for us, to carry an ax on our shoulders and make demands?'' 
Asked if that meant that Hamas, which committed no attacks during 
the sheik's house arrest, would strike again soon, he answered indirectly 
and with one of the many metaphors he employs. ``As you have seen 
and will see, for every action there is a reaction,'' he said. ``Our 
Palestinian people are like gold. The more you pressure them, the 
more they shine.'' The men around him nodded, and some stomachs grumbled, 
as it was shortly before the day's fast for Ramadan was to be broken 
with a plate of dates. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>