<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981227.0090 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Ever since its creation on the South Side of Chicago in 1892 with 
a pile of Rockefeller money and a group of top-flight scholars, no 
academic institution has exemplified intellectual seriousness quite 
like the University of Chicago. More Nobel Prizes _ 70 _ have been 
awarded to professors and students here than at any other university; 
its faculty famously declined to grant Queen Elizabeth an honorary 
degree, because of her lack of scholarly credentials; its undergraduates 
take two full years of prescribed core courses, including calculus 
and physics and a tough set of humanities and social-science classes. 
But with today's increasingly common view of colleges as employment-credentialing 
stations, students as customers, and learning for its own sake as 
a quaint idea whose time has passed, the University of Chicago is 
in the midst of a painful identity crisis, closely watched by educators 
across the United States. Partly to make the university more attractive 
to high school seniors, to make it seem less of a grind, it is reducing 
its core curriculum and increasing its recreation and service facilities. 
``I don't know how many students we can attract if we go after those 
who only seek the life of the mind,'' asserted Michael Behnke, a new 
vice president hired to improve marketing and recruitment. ``Kids 
aren't sure they can lead a balanced life here. My job is to convince 
them that they are not joining a monastery.'' Those are fighting words 
to some at Chicago who consider the university's cloistered approach 
to learning and its insistence on a tough common core to be its sources 
of pride and mission in a world of increasingly instant gratification. 
Many colleges have gone through versions of this debate at different 
times. In the late 1960s, a number of colleges greatly reduced their 
core curriculums to make room for less traditional courses and more 
individual tailoring. Brown University, which has no core requirements, 
is among the best-known examples. Columbia University, by contrast, 
has a fairly heavy load of core courses. But Chicago, where Robert 
Maynard Hutchins reinvented undergraduate education in the 1940s, 
likes to think of itself as marching to its own proven drummer rather 
than shifting to accommodate changing fashions. ``Why change Chicago's 
academic fabric, its uniqueness, which is its appeal, and make it 
like any other institution?'' said Bradley Henderson, 19, a second-year 
student from Cincinnati who plans to focus on English and international 
relations. ``Why not market that, accentuate that? They're putting 
their emphasis on issues on which we can't compete.'' The problem 
is that applications and endowments may be skyrocketing at ``hot'' 
universities like Brown and Duke, but Chicago is facing few applicants, 
a relatively high dropout and transfer rate and a crumbling physical 
infrastructure crying out for big expenditures. In the hope of improving 
its finances through tuition payments now and alumni giving in years 
ahead, Chicago is increasing its undergraduate population by 1,000 
students, to 4,500, over 10 years. Some of those who consider Chicago's 
size and curriculum to be appropriate say they worry about the kind 
of college the changes will make it. Bertram Cohler, a professor of 
psychology and education, put it this way: ``This is a dirty, intense 
place in a grubby city. You can only smooth some of its rough edges. 
Of course we want some students who will join the Junior League, but 
also those who don't shave, have bloodshot eyes and read Kierkegaard 
at 3 in the morning.'' Nobody at the university opposes reading Kierkegaard 
at 3 in the morning. Even its most ardent reform advocates say they 
are seeking to ensure Chicago a long and healthy future, to preserve, 
not destroy, its rigor and unique intellectual environment. But to 
do so, they say, requires change. ``Curriculum design at Chicago is 
a contact sport and that is just as it should be,'' observed Hugo 
Sonnenschein, the university's president for the last five years. 
He is a former Princeton provost accused by traditionalists here of 
failing to understand Chicago's history and character. ``Chicago has 
a special role and responsibility because it has a reputation as embodying 
what a great university should be,'' he added. ``But the commodification 
and marketing of higher education are unmistakable today and we can't 
jolly dance along and not pay attention to them. One hears constantly 
from parents and students: `We are the consumer. We pay the tuition.''' 
The increase in the student body and the trimming of the common core 
are emotionally charged issues because they are seen to strike at 
the heart of the university's mission. The outgoing common core includes 
eight quarters of science and math, seven of humanities and civilization, 
three of social sciences and three of a foreign language, for a total 
of 21 courses. This means that the curriculum of a student's first 
two years is essentially predetermined. Some professors and administrators 
urged cutting that number to nine to make room for more electives 
and to better focus on students' majors. After a bruising debate, 
the reduction, to go into effect next September, is relatively minor 
_ down to 15 or 18 courses, depending on how the foreign-language 
requirement gets worked out. The change will mean that instead of 
accounting for half of a student's course work, the core will take 
up a third. This, according to John Boyer, dean of the college, will 
allow time for study abroad, something Chicago has never advocated 
in the past. ``We used to have the notion that there was no greater 
educational experience than to be on the Chicago campus,'' Boyer said. 
``Now, we are hoping to get one-third to one-half of those graduating 
to be fluent in a foreign language by urging them to spend time abroad.'' 
Leora Auslander, a professor of history and director of the new Center 
for Gender Studies, said she would like the core to have been cut 
further so that students would have a chance to examine new fields 
of inquiry, like gender studies. ``There is no danger of the University 
of Chicago becoming less demanding,'' Dr. Auslander said of the notion 
that reducing the core curriculum meant less rigor. ``The danger I 
worry about is it becoming an anachronism.'' She said students wanted 
and should be permitted to make more of their own curricular choices 
and decisions. Chicago's new marketers, like Behnke, the vice president 
in charge of enrollment, agree. ``We are in a culture of choice, of 
doing your own thing,'' Behnke said. Sonnenschein said he had instituted 
a number of other changes to make Chicago more in keeping with students' 
and parents' expectations. He gave as an example his push to improve 
career-placement services. Until recently, he said, the office was 
pitifully inactive, an approach that he said was like ``sticking a 
finger in the eye'' of parents paying thousands yearly for their children's 
education and worrying about their professional futures. He has also 
committed $35 million to the building of a new swimming pool and sports 
center and has renovated the student center, increased the number 
of student clubs and hired two associate deans for student activities 
and volunteerism. One of the most worrisome statistics, he and others 
say, is the low number of children of alumni who choose Chicago. At 
5 percent, it is well below the 10 percent to 20 percent at the top 
Ivy League colleges. Surveys show that alumni view their experience 
here as having been so intensely academic that they are uncertain 
if their children would be happy here. The problem becomes manifest 
in the low number of applicants Chicago attracts _ 5,500 last year, 
compared with 17,000 at Stanford and 13,000 at Princeton. It is true 
that Chicago's applicants are a self-selected group with a keen interest 
in intellectual pursuit. But given that Chicago's faculty is among 
the top four or five in the nation, the low numbers are unsettling 
to administrators. The numbers mean that Chicago's applicant acceptance 
rate _ more than 60 percent _ is far above those of the institutions 
with which it is typically grouped. Harvard's is 13 percent, Yale's 
21 percent and Cornell's 34 percent. Chicago has an equally vexing 
problem of failing to retain its students at the rate of comparable 
institutions. Throughout the Ivy League, the percentage of entering 
freshmen who graduate is well above 90 percent _ 97 percent at Harvard, 
for example, and 96 percent at Yale. At Chicago, it is 83 percent. 
Aaron Schildkraut, 19, of Newton, Mass., is an example of the kind 
of bright, focused student at Chicago who thinks he would be happier 
elsewhere and is planning to transfer. Schildkraut said that Chicago 
had many wonderful qualities but that he wanted greater curricular 
freedom than he had here. ``In looking for a college to transfer to,'' 
he said, ``one thing I am most interested in is finding a place where 
I can play the primary role in designing my own curriculum.'' This 
is a sentiment that has the Chicago faculty divided, partly along 
generational lines. Many older professors insist that the curricular 
common core is vital, that without it a culture can disintegrate and 
fragment into individuals who cannot communicate with one another. 
Younger instructors, by contrast, would rather focus on their specialized 
areas and not have to teach so much in the core. They also tend to 
consider the notion of a common grounding in a set of European books 
or ideas to no longer be so important. Constantin Fasolt, a professor 
of history at Chicago who has favored a reduced core curriculum, offers 
the perspective of his German upbringing to defend the change. When 
he was a student in Germany, he said, nine years of Latin and four 
of Greek were the bare minimum required for any serious scholar of 
the humanities. When he came to the United States 20 years ago, he 
found many first-rate scholars who had neither one. Rigid core curriculums 
have made him suspicious ever since. He acknowledges that drawing 
the line is complex. ``The verdict of what we are doing will come 
in 20 to 30 years,'' he said. ``Either they will say that this is 
when Chicago started going downhill or when it started to come together, 
when people started paying attention to it once again as the leader 
in undergraduate education.'' Kurt White, 21, a fourth-year student 
from Birmingham, Mich., says he fears he knows what that verdict will 
be. ``It may be harder to get into Harvard, but it's harder to get 
out of here and I'm proud of that,'' White said. ``This is one of 
the very last places that has a rigorous curriculum. It's a test case. 
If you lose Chicago, I don't know what you'll have left.'' 
</TEXT>
</DOC>