<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981227.0154 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
A tour bus carrying Chinatown residents home from Atlantic City careered 
out of control Sunday morning and slammed into a tree, injuring all 
31 persons aboard, two critically. The accident came three days after 
eight people were killed when their bus to Atlantic City spun off 
the road five miles from Sunday's crash. Police officers said the 
bus in Sunday's crash appeared to have been traveling too fast as 
it rounded a tight curve on an entrance ramp to the New Jersey Turnpike. 
It struck a curb, climbed a concrete embankment, then shot across 
several lanes of traffic into a wooded median, the officers said. 
The bus struck an oak tree so hard that the tree was uprooted and 
wedged several feet back into the coach. Witnesses said the driver, 
Gerald Jones, 56, of Brooklyn, was pinned for nearly an hour. Jones 
and an unidentified female passenger were flown by helicopter to Robert 
Wood Johnson University Hospital in New Brunswick, where both remained 
in critical condition Sunday night. Jones suffered leg fractures and 
possibly a broken pelvis, said Lieut. Daniel Cosgrove of the New Jersey 
State Police. Information on the woman's injuries was not available. 
Other victims staggered around the roadside in a fog of pain and exhaustion, 
according to turnpike toll collectors who rushed to the bus from their 
posts at the toll plaza at Exit 10, a few hundred yards away. All 
the passengers were ethnic Chinese who spoke Cantonese, the authorities 
said. They were among a group of a few hundred people aboard nine 
buses who had gone to Atlantic City for performances by three singers 
from Hong Kong. Sunday's accident was the fourth serious one in three 
years on the New York-to-Atlantic City route for Academy Bus Tours, 
of Hoboken, which has 200 buses in its fleet and makes 23 scheduled 
runs each day from Manhattan to Atlantic City. On Nov. 10, a bus returning 
to New York veered off the Garden State Parkway into several trees, 
injuring 15 passengers. In June 1997, a bus returning to Chinatown 
collided with a tractor-trailer in Brooklyn, injuring the driver and 
23 passengers. And in May 1996, a bus on its way from Chinatown hit 
a truck on the Garden State Parkway and slid into a ravine, injuring 
18. Officials at Academy Bus Tours declined to discuss the earlier 
accidents, but said the company received the highest safety rating 
during its most recent audit by the U.S. Department of Transportation. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>