<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981227.0105 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
For an aviation buff, the Discovery Wings cable channel is a dream 
come true _ programs about planes and flying all day long. Replace 
the aviation aficionado with a health nut hungry for the latest medical 
news (tuned to Discovery Health), or a do-it-yourselfer immersed in 
home renovations (Discovery Home and Leisure), or a schoolchild exploring 
ancient worlds (Discovery Civilization) _ Discovery has a channel 
for each. Meanwhile, MTV Networks, parent of MTV and VH1, has sprouted 
seven more offspring for different genres _ VH1 Country, VH1 Soul, 
VH1 Smooth (jazz and ``New Age'' music), M2 (regular MTV on a different 
time schedule), MTV Ritmo (Latin music), MTV Rocks (hard rock and 
heavy metal) and MTV Indie (independent music and rap) _ making a 
miniature radio dial on the television set. Fewer than 2 million homes 
can receive these niche-within-a-niche cable channels, but they offer 
a glimpse of a vastly different media universe of the not-too-distant 
future, a world where an American audience already fragmented by myriad 
cable channels will be splintered into even tinier shards, as when 
Fox Family Channel recently announced the creation of separate networks 
for boys and girls. Digital technology _ which enables the television 
signal to be compressed to carry far more information _ is ushering 
in this new age, when perhaps 1,400 or 1,500 choices will be on parade. 
Some of those choices will take forms people now associate with the 
computer rather than the television set, like bringing data to the 
screen, or Internet access, or interactive shopping, banking or video 
games. The first tentative steps into this future are taking place, 
recalling the days when television itself was being created by people 
who, at first, tried simply to re-create popular radio shows on film. 
Television industry leaders today are as uncertain as they were then 
about how to use this new medium, and about what viewers will want 
from it. ``The transition to DTV is the biggest change in television 
history since television began,'' said Sandra Kresch, a partner in 
the entertainment and media division of PricewaterhouseCoopers, the 
giant business consulting firm. ``Everyone has a vague idea of what 
the technology will produce; everyone has a vague idea of what consumers 
will want. But this has the potential to be so different from anything 
that's come before that nobody is really sure how it's going to develop.'' 
Right now, digital cable television is transmitted primarily to cable 
systems around the country owned by Tele-Communications Inc.; since 
it was first offered in late 1997, about 1.4 million cable customers 
have signed up for it. They get a package of 36 extra channels for 
$10 a month, and pay between $3 and $4 a month to rent a set-top box 
required to bring in the digital signal. Digital signals can also 
provide high-definition television, or HDTV _ pictures so crystalline 
and detailed that they look like Hieronymous Bosch paintings come 
to life. Most experts predict that HDTV sets' prices will stay high, 
moving from $7,000-plus now to around $3,000 in three years, and causing 
HDTV to take a decade or more to catch on. But standard-definition 
digital television sets _ with clearer pictures than current sets, 
and the capacity to pull in hundreds of channels _ are a better bet 
for mass consumption. Experts say their prices will come down under 
the $1,000 mark within about three years' time. For the near future, 
the average viewer with a digital television set will begin to see 
three main uses of the greater channel capacity: programs shown in 
high-definition format (HDTV); many more channel choices (multicasting), 
or varied choices of starting times for movies and events (multiplexing). 
``The consumer is being offered a decision,'' said Thomas Rogers, 
president of NBC Cable and executive vice president of NBC, a unit 
of General Electric Co. ``Do they want more choices or prettier pictures? 
My guess is the answer will be a resounding vote for both.'' But because 
the prettier pictures cost more to produce, and fewer people are likely 
to buy those expensive HDTV-ready sets, most experts think the industry 
will concentrate on greater choices _ in programming and in data broadcasting. 
Viewing habits are expected to involve even narrower, more individually 
tailored and, eventually, interactive choices as digital television 
takes hold. Take the example of the home fixer-upper who watches the 
Discovery Home and Leisure channel now. A rival, called the Do-It-Yourself 
Channel, is to start next year, as a spinoff of the Home and Garden 
Television network. And HGTV is developing another digital channel, 
called HGTV Professional, for builders, contractors, plumbers, landscapers 
and the like. Critics worry that this will add more schlock and confusion 
to the television landscape, and that public-affairs programs and 
entrepreneurs with new program ideas will both be frozen out. This 
issue is a question of capacity, and of who puts claims on that capacity. 
Each current broadcast station (like Channel 2 or 4 in New York) and 
each cable network ``owns'' the subdivisions of itself that digitalization 
will create. They will want to hold onto that real estate, so to speak, 
for the day when they find profitable ways to use it. The same is 
true for cable networks. Federal law requires cable systems to carry 
the signals of local broadcast stations (in addition to whatever cable 
networks they carry). Station owners want that requirement extended, 
so that cable has to carry all the subchannels of Channel 2, for example, 
not just the main analog Channel 2. But cable operators argue that 
if they must carry all those channels, nonprofit networks like C-Span 
and community public access channels could get squeezed out _ unless 
government regulations were passed to protect them. Public television, 
too, awaits action from either Congress or the Federal Communications 
Commission on whether cable systems must carry all its channel offerings. 
And while public television programmers have many ideas for new educational 
or public-service uses of the added channels, they need to find ways 
to finance them. Meanwhile, programmers are trying to position themselves 
in the new universe. That is why A&AMP;E Networks (which is jointly 
owned by Walt Disney Co., Hearst Corp. and NBC) has started the Biography 
Channel and the International History Channel, expanding on two of 
its most popular existing program brands. ``It's like rolling the 
dice right now,'' said Nikolas Davatzes, A&AMP;E Networks' president. 
``I said to myself, `I'm not sure where this ship is going, but I'm 
getting on it.' I don't want to be in a position of finding out they 
discovered America and I'm not there because I'm still in Greece tending 
my sheep.'' But in the rush to gain a foothold on cable systems, some 
cable networks have simply devised spinoffs using old programming 
they already own (like Fox's Boyz and Girlz channels), or rearranged 
programs from their libraries on different time schedules. ``I'm afraid 
some people may be establishing digital tiers as the re-run channels, 
and those are not worth paying extra for,'' said Ms. Kresch of PricewaterhouseCoopers. 
She also warns broadcasters and cable networks to be aware of what 
new media providers may offer customers. Telephone and computer companies 
are busily working with manufacturers to transform the television 
set (whether it receives its signal via cable or satellite) into the 
central appliance for all sorts of services _ not only for watching 
programs, but for Internet entry, electronic commerce and even access 
to telephone service. In Rogers' view, the cable industry will focus 
on delivering more channels (a business it has already refined) and 
the broadcast networks will specialize in high-definition transmission 
of important or glamorous events like the Super Bowl, and in upgrading 
some of their library (especially news programs) to digital format. 
But the broadcast networks know that the ultimate decision-making 
lies with the stations, most of which they do not own. Only 43 broadcast 
stations are transmitting digitally now; another 40 to 50 should be 
able to do so by the end of 1999. Will the nation's 400-plus stations 
eventually want high-definition programs provided by their networks, 
to give viewers state-of-the-art pictures? Or will stations want to 
use their subchannels for highly localized programming _ news, weather, 
sports, community affairs or even educational fare _ with plenty of 
spots for local commercials? For now, ABC, which is owned by Disney, 
is focused on transforming theatrical movies like ``101 Dalmations'' 
into high-definition format, and has already broadcast four of them. 
CBS Corp. is experimenting instead with football, sending out four 
National Footbal League games in high-definition format this season. 
NBC has announced no plans beyond converting the ``Tonight'' show 
with Jay Leno to high-definition digital transmission in the spring. 
News Corp.'s Fox says its plans are still in formation, but a company 
executive who insisted on anonymity said the network was likely to 
encourage its stations to go the local-interest route. In general, 
cable networks, as was the case in their earliest years, are the ones 
brainstorming ever more finely tuned channels, this time to offer 
as additional packages to digital-ready consumers. Discovery Networks, 
owned by Discovery Communications Inc., and MTV Networks, which is 
part of Viacom Inc., have been the pioneers, which makes sense, since 
the costs of generating new channels are better amortized by a company 
already well established and already producing shows for many channels. 
In addition to ``the suite'' _ MTV's name for its array of music channels 
_ the children's cable network Nickelodeon, which is also owned by 
MTV Networks, will start Nickelodeon GAS (Games and Sports) and Noggin 
(preschool educational fare) next year, as well as Nick Too, a reprise 
of regular Nickelodeon but with all shows shifted to different time 
slots. The Bravo Network, another Cablevision unit, plans an International 
Film Channel. Its corporate sibling American Movie Classics has started 
American Pop, a channel devoted to the history of popular culture. 
And Lifetime, jointly owned by Hearst and ABC, is developing a 24-hour 
Lifetime Movie Network. ``What we've created from Discovery's channels 
is basically a digital magazine rack full of specialty magazines,'' 
said Charley Humbard, Discovery's vice president and general manager 
for digital networks and advanced television. ``The person who is 
an enthusiast of a particular subject will have continual access to 
that subject, virtually on demand.'' But will enough enthusiasts actually 
buy set-top boxes or subscribe to extra channel packages to make a 
profit for those who produce the new channels? Mark Rosenthal, president 
and chief operating officer of MTV Networks, thinks they will. ``Twenty 
years ago, when cable started, you had four or five options _ ABC, 
CBS, NBC, PBS and maybe an independent station,'' he said. ``You didn't 
sit around thinking, `I wish I had 40 channels.' But when they became 
available, you re-learned how to use your television. The same thing 
will happen again.'' And as consumers become more accustomed to using 
the Internet _ where instead of hundreds of options, there are literally 
millions _ television providers will start linking their programming 
to related sites on the World Wide Web, and so will advertisers. ``People 
sometimes say this is like the transition from black-and-white to 
color television,'' said Tom Tyrer, vice president of corporate communications 
for News Corp.'s Fox Broadcasting unit. ``It's not. It's like the 
transition from radio to television. It's a whole new world.'' 
</TEXT>
</DOC>