<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981227.0061 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
The greatest misfortune that has been visited on 3-year-old Isra Ahmed 
was not contracting leukemia. It was contracting leukemia in Iraq 
at a time when the country's medical system is all but paralyzed as 
a result of economic sanctions imposed by the United Nations eight 
years ago. Since Isra's illness was diagnosed earlier this year, she 
has spent most of her time in the Saddam Central Teaching Hospital 
for Pediatrics in Baghdad. She bleeds profusely from her nose, gums 
and rectum. Her mother has bought her earrings and a colorful clip 
to bind her thinning hair into a ponytail, but whatever diversion 
she has is likely to be only temporary. In developed countries, the 
cure rate for leukemia approaches 70 percent. In Iraq it is near zero. 
``It's still not too late to save this girl's life if we can give 
her a bone-marrow transplant,'' said Dr. Jasim Mazin, the hospital's 
chief resident. ``But we don't have the equipment to perform that 
kind of operation. We're helpless.'' In his five years at Saddam Central, 
virtually all of his leukemia patients have died. Their deaths , coupled 
with those who die of gastrointestinal diseases, diarrhea, dehydration 
and other easily curable ailments, have clearly taken a toll on him. 
He often works 20 hours a day, and although he is just 28, he looks 
nearly twice that age. ``Iraq used to be the best country in the Arab 
world in terms of science and medicine,'' Mazin said as he made his 
rounds on a recent morning. ``Now we can't even read medical journals, 
because they are covered by the embargo.'' ``I can't believe I use 
disposable syringes on one patient after another, or perform operations 
with worn-out instruments in operating theaters that are not even 
disinfected,'' he said. ``It's very difficult to work very hard on 
a patient, try to care for him, and then lose him because you can't 
get some silly thing that you could pick up in a drugstore in any 
other country. ``And this is the best-supplied children's hospital 
in Iraq. If you go out into the provinces, you see that things are 
much worse.'' The coordinator of U.N. relief programs here, Hans von 
Sponeck, toured hospitals outside Baghdad last month and reported 
that much of the equipment he saw ``was fit only for a museum.'' He 
said some of it is actually endangering the health of patients and 
staff, such as X-ray machines that leak radiation and malfunctioning 
incinerators that leave residues of toxic medical waste. Although 
the effect of sanctions is evident in every aspect of Iraqi life, 
there are few places where it is more poignantly visible than at hospitals 
like Saddam Central. According to U.N. figures, government spending 
on medicine and medical equipment has fallen by more than 90 percent 
since the sanctions were imposed after Iraq invaded Kuwait in 1990 
and the country began spiraling into economic collapse. Not a single 
new hospital has been built in that time, although the country's population 
has grown from 15 million to 22 million. Iraqi doctors say conditions 
have improved since 1996, when the U.N. began allowing the government 
to sell limited amounts of oil and use some of the income it earns 
to buy food and medicine. About $450 million worth of drugs and medical 
supplies have entered the country since then, though the United Nations 
says distribution is inadequate owing to ``transport and logistic 
difficulties.'' The Clinton administration defends sanctions as an 
indispensable part of the Western campaign to bring down President 
Saddam Hussein, whom Western powers have accused of threatening the 
Middle East by building weapons of mass destruction. The administration 
has, however, signaled its willingness to consider an expansion of 
the oil-for-food program that could allow Iraq to improve the abysmal 
conditions into which its heath care system has fallen. Any improvement 
would probably come too late for most of the children now lying listlessly 
in their hospital beds here. ``Inside the hospitals is where you have 
to go if you want to see why so much antagonism and resentment is 
building up here,'' said Kathy Kelly, who runs a Chicago-based group 
called Voices in the Wilderness that is campaigning against the sanctions 
and who is making her ninth visit to Iraq since 1990. ``I've seen 
doctors go from super-heroes to almost clinically depressed.'' At 
Saddam Central, Mazin said he maintains his equilibrium by concentrating 
on the children he has been able to save. He said his worst period 
came last April, when he lost about 75 children during a two-week 
epidemic of chest infections and gastroenteritis. Every one of them, 
he believes, could have been saved with antibiotics that are commonly 
available in neighboring countries. Some patients at Saddam Central 
need more than medicine. Among them is 16-month-old Affaf Hussein, 
whose facial irregularities suggest congenital deformity. He suffers 
from recurrent pneumonia, and his mother spends several hours each 
day holding a respirator over his face so he can inhale moist oxygen. 
``This child is very sick,'' Mazin said. ``I believe he has some kind 
of genetic disorder, but we don't have the tools to diagnose what 
it is. We can't do anything for him.'' One of the few bright spots 
at Saddam Central is a beaming 10-year-old named Marua Tariq, who 
comes in for a checkup every month wearing her favorite brightly patterned 
sweater. She has leukemia, but was released from the hospital six 
months ago after her case stabilized, and has shown no symptoms since 
then. If she can stay healthy for another four and a half years, she 
will be considered cured, the first such case since the sanctions 
began. ``I'm feeling good and I'm studying hard at school,'' Marua 
said with a broad smile. ``When I grow up I want to be a doctor who 
treats children.'' 
</TEXT>
</DOC>