<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981227.0039 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
In a country already crowded with museums dedicated to every imaginable 
topic, it was at the very least strange that until now France had 
no Jewish museum worthy of the name. After all, more Jews live in 
France than any other European country except Russia. France also 
has an outstanding moral debt to a Jewish population decimated by 
wartime deportations from occupied France to Nazi death camps. This 
month, France finally made amends when President Jacques Chirac inaugurated 
the new Museum of the Art and History of Judaism in the Marais, the 
old Jewish quarter of Paris. Chirac's presence was not just a formality. 
As the first French president to apologize for the pro-Nazi Vichy 
regime's role in persecuting Jews during World War II, he was all 
too aware of the important symbolism of the occasion. He had also 
helped make it happen. As early as 1980, as mayor of Paris, he backed 
the project, and six years later he designated a 17th-century mansion 
owned by the city to be transformed into the museum. Subsequently, 
the $40 million cost of restoring and expanding the Hotel de Saint-Aignan 
was shared by the national and city governments. Each will also contribute 
$2 million annually toward the operating costs of what is now, no 
less than the Louvre, a national museum. With the general public in 
mind, the museum aims to provide an overview of the history of European 
Jews since the Middle Ages, with sections dedicated to the parallel 
development of the Ashkenazic and Sephardic cultures, respectively 
in Northern and Eastern Europe and in Spain and North Africa. It also 
dwells on the emancipation of Jews initiated by the French Revolution 
and the emergence of nonreligious Jewish art this century. ``I'm incredibly 
impressed with the quality of the objects they have put together,'' 
Norman Kleeblatt, the Susan and Elihu Rose curator of fine arts at 
the Jewish Museum in Manhattan, said after visiting the new museum. 
``I had been afraid that the objects might be swallowed up by the 
architecture. They were not. The quality and beauty of the objects 
is impressive.'' Yet for all the celebration of the new museum at 
71 Rue du Temple in the Fourth Arrondissement, the very choice of 
its name underlines the continuing complexity of the relationship 
between France and its Jewish population. In other words, the Museum 
of the Art and History of Judaism is not a museum of the history of 
Jews in France. More specifically, the fate of France's Jews in World 
War II, when 78,000 were deported, and after which only some 2,000 
returned, is barely addressed. This omission provoked a fiercely critical 
article in the left-leaning daily Liberation. It also prompted expressions 
of surprise from some experts. ``I think that even a Jewish public 
expected that the fate of their French brethren be mentioned more 
explicitly in the museum,'' said Edward van Voolen, curator of the 
Jewish Historical Museum in Amsterdam. The only direct reference to 
the Holocaust is found in an installation by Christian Boltanski that 
includes a wall peppered with plaques that carry the names, birthplaces 
and professions of Jews who lived in the Hotel de Saint-Aignan in 
the late 1930s. At least 13 of these residents were arrested and sent 
to death camps during the German occupation of Paris between May 1940 
and August 1944. Yet the decision not to focus on the Holocaust is 
not accidental. It reflects the continuing reluctance of France as 
a whole and French Jews to confront this painful past, even though 
the subject is no longer ignored as it was for many decades. But it 
also touches on a broader debate over how far the Holocaust should 
be treated as a central event of Judaism and whether it should be 
commemorated in Jewish museums or through separate Holocaust memorials. 
``How prevalent is the Holocaust in Jewish history?'' Kleeblatt asked. 
``It's a real issue, and we struggle with that in the Jewish Museum. 
Does a Jewish museum only become a museum of tragedy? A Jewish museum 
also has an obligation to tell a cultural story.'' These questions 
have become all the more topical as new Jewish museums have sprung 
up across Europe in recent years, among them those of Amsterdam in 
1986, Frankfurt in 1988, Vienna in 1994 and London and the former 
East Berlin in 1995. A new extension to the Berlin Historical Museum, 
which will record the history of Jews in Berlin and is also already 
known as the Jewish Museum, opens next year. In Berlin and Vienna, 
though, separate Holocaust memorials are planned. The point of departure 
in Paris was different. Here, the museum's profile was initially defined 
by the availability of two existing collections: 149 religious objects 
and ancient manuscripts collected by Isaac Strauss in the early 19th 
century and donated to the Musee National du Moyen Age in 1890, and 
the contents of a small Jewish Art Museum founded in 1948 by Jewish 
groups trying to rescue remnants of Jewish culture after the Holocaust. 
For the last 12 years, the new museum has been building on these collections 
through donations, purchases and loans, albeit always maintaining 
the focus on the art and history of Judaism, as with its rooms dealing 
with the presence of Jews in the Italian Renaissance and Jews in 17th-century 
Amsterdam and an exhibit on the Dreyfus Affair, the late- 19th-century 
scandal over a French Jewish army officer unjustly accused of treason. 
While the museum's organizers leave open the question whether Jewish 
art exists as such, they have brought together works by a number of 
Jewish painters, many of whom moved to France early in this century 
and belonged to the so-called Ecole de Paris. One entire room is also 
dedicated to paintings and drawings by Marc Chagall, on loan from 
the Georges Pompidou Center. The Pompidou Center has further loaned 
25 paintings, looted by Nazi occupiers and recovered after the war, 
whose owners, presumed to be Jewish collectors, have not yet been 
identified. These include works by Picasso, Dufy, Leger, Matisse and 
Utrillo, and they are among some 2,000 art objects still held by the 
French government pending identity of the rightful heirs. This loan 
is evidently a political nod to the current heated debate in Europe 
and the United States over the whereabouts and ownership of valuable 
works of art seized by the Germans from Jewish collectors. Otherwise, 
however, the museum takes little account of changing French attitudes 
towards the Holocaust over the past decade. ``In 1988, the Jewish 
question and Jewish culture were being studied in France for the first 
time,'' Laurence Sigal, the museum's director, recalled. ``The Shoah 
still had a very small place in the Jewish and French conscience. 
It was still a private question; now it is a national problem.'' When 
the museum was being planned, Ms. Sigal went on, a more pressing issue 
related to reinforcing the identity of a French Jewish population 
that is anything but homogeneous. Ashkenazic Jews belong to centuries-old 
families that are fully integrated into French life but are also descendants 
of more recent immigrants whose families have been in France for two 
or three generations. Further, some 350,000 Sephardic Jews, perhaps 
half of all French Jews, migrated to France from North Africa in the 
1960s and 1970s. ``Until now, there was nowhere in France where you 
could see Jewish heritage,'' Ms. Sigal said. ``There was no public 
space where Jewish art and culture could be confronted, only synagogues, 
which were religious and private.'' While many objects on display 
are religious, from ancient Torah scrolls to silver Hanukkah menorahs, 
they are presented as art, since by law the French government cannot 
finance religious institutions. Further, given France's ``melting 
pot'' tradition, no thought was given to using the museum to promote 
a separate Jewish political identity. Nonetheless, as public awareness 
has grown of France's shared responsibility for the deportation of 
Jews in World War II, the Jewish question has become intensely political 
here. And in that sense the minimal attention given to the history 
of Jews in France, from their expulsion in 1394 and their deportation 
in the early 1940s, can hardly go unnoticed. Van Voolen, the curator 
in Amsterdam, said that, thanks to the Paris museum, ``Jewish culture 
has come out of the closet in the most grandiose French way.'' But 
he also saw the museum as presenting Jewish art more clearly than 
Jewish history, certainly as it relates to France and the Holocaust. 
``I don't think the Boltanski piece is sufficient,'' he said. ``I 
think it is a negative reflection on the self-confidence of French 
Jews that the museum does not address what is so hotly discussed outside 
the walls of the museum.'' Ms. Sigal said that homage was paid to 
the Holocaust ``by showing everything that has disappeared.'' She 
noted that the Holocaust was specifically remembered in a Memorial 
to the Unknown Jewish Martyr, which was inaugurated in Paris in 1956 
in another building in the Marais that also houses the prestigious 
Center of Contemporary Jewish Documentation. In addition, a monument 
to the deportation stands on the Pont de la Tourelle, across the Seine. 
Still, the museum does have room for temporary exhibitions that can 
tackle more topical issues. ``This is a new museum, and they need 
time to reflect and grow,'' Kleeblatt said in a telephone interview. 
``It's a natural process. You can't expect a museum to arrive fully 
formed.'' Ms. Sigal readily shared this view. ``We have only just 
opened the museum,'' she said. ``Its image will grow with time.'' 
</TEXT>
</DOC>