<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981227.0097 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
At the end of his second year as secretary-general, Kofi Annan offers 
no apologies for going the extra mile to talk with tyrants like Saddam 
Hussein and Col. Moammar Gadhafi, even when a rebuff, or carping in 
Washington, is his only reward. ``We're dealing with issues of war 
and peace,'' Annan said in an interview last week, rounding out the 
year as he began it, with a crisis in Iraq. ``We are operating in 
a world which is quite brutal and there are some very wicked people 
around. Nobody denies that. But in the business that I'm in, we sometimes 
have to shake the hands of the aggressor, to lend them an ear, in 
order to save lives.'' ``I go where I have to go, I talk to those 
I have to talk to,'' Annan said of his trips to Iraq in February and 
to Libya early this month. ``I hope the day will come when the secretary-general 
of the U.N. has to talk only to leaders of countries like Switzerland, 
Sweden, Costa Rica, Botswana. Then our work would be done.'' But a 
different view is sometimes held in Washington. A pall of disappointment 
if not despair has been cast over Annan's relations with an often 
hostile Congress and to some extent the Clinton administration, which 
denied his predecessor, Boutros Boutros-Ghali, a second term in office 
and engineered Annan's election by the Security Council. Annan was 
criticized for going to Baghdad, Iraq, in February and brokering an 
accord over arms inspections that quickly unraveled. Although the 
Clinton White House, then in the early days of the Monica Lewinsky 
scandal, seemed relieved at the time, the secretary-general was later 
accused, especially in Congress, of diplomatic meddling and of drawing 
out the crisis. Annan's journey to meet with Gadhafi on Dec. 5 drew 
still more flak. The Libyan leader left Annan waiting for hours before 
meeting him in a tent at a remote site in the desert, where Annan 
was trying to work out a deal for Libya to turn over two suspects 
wanted in the bombing of Pan Am Flight 103 over Lockerbie, Scotland, 
10 years ago. The attempt proved fruitless. In both cases, Annan's 
aides say, he was essentially promoting American as well as international 
goals: compliance from Iraq on arms inspections, and the turning over 
of two men wanted in a long-delayed trial. Has the secretary-general 
been too willing to take political risks? Has Annan been too quick 
to expend his personal prestige and that of his office? ``I'm here 
to do a job, and self is not involved, because we're dealing with 
much bigger issues, much more at stake,'' he said. ``To put my own 
ego or my own reputation at the center of it, I think, would be unconscionable 
and would be a mistake.'' Events play their part in shaping the reputation 
of any secretary-general. Sir Brian Urquhart, a former undersecretary-general 
who has known every holder of the United Nations' highest office since 
the organization's founding in 1945, said last week that Annan ``couldn't 
have inherited that job at a more difficult time.'' But once the stage 
is set, character and personality take over, Urquhart added. ``I think 
Kofi is a genuinely natural, unpretentious, very serious person,'' 
he said. ``He really believes he's got to do the job, and it's not 
a popularity contest. He's there to do his best, and if it blows back 
on him, that's too bad.'' Danilo Turk, a former professor of international 
law and a human rights advocate who is Slovenia's representative and 
a member of the Security Council, said Annan has to do an already 
ill-defined job ``in an era more chaotic than other periods.'' With 
the end of the Cold War, rogue states are less likely to be held on 
tethers by Moscow or Washington, Turk noted, and today's secretary-general 
faces crises that can quickly spin out of control. He also faces that 
political chaos at a time when the United Nations has been under tremendous 
pressure to reduce its budgets and bureaucracy. Although Annan has 
made significant managerial reforms and has continued to cut the headquarters 
staff, the Republican-led Congress refuses to pay $1.2 billion in 
American debts without attaching riders that U.N. officials say improperly 
attempt to micromanage the organization, which no one nation among 
the 185 members has the right to do. For Annan, a Ghanaian, dealing 
with Africa has been particularly difficult. He began his term in 
January 1997 ready to forge a partnership with Africans moving to 
put conflict behind them. Two years later, Angola is descending into 
civil war again, rebels in Sierra Leone notorious for their extraordinary 
brutality are closing in on the capital less than a year after being 
driven out, and east-central Africa is engulfed in a conflict involving 
nearly a dozen nations. ``What's happening in Africa is a tragedy, 
a real tragedy,'' Annan said. ``It's a deep disappointment.'' He said 
he recently told a meeting of African leaders in Paris that at a time 
when they needed investment and development, they were on a suicidal 
course. ``I told them that compared to other regions we are weak,'' 
he said. ``We are weak even when we are united. Divided and conflict-ridden, 
we don't stand a chance.'' Annan, frequently accompanied by his Swedish 
wife, Nane, travels extensively, more than many U.N. officials and 
diplomats think is necessary, given all the work at headquarters. 
Aides counter that his talks with foreign leaders are important, and 
he has a good stand-in, Deputy Secretary-General Louise Frechette 
of Canada, whose reputation as a manager is formidable. The first 
secretary-general to come from the ranks of the U.N. secretariat, 
Annan has surrounded himself with a loyal staff collected over years, 
who moved with him from the peacekeeping department, which he formerly 
headed, to the organization's isolated 38th floor. Wanting to shield 
him, they have instead cut him off from much of the organization and 
many outside contacts, some other officials say. That seems to be 
a minority view, however. For his part, Annan says he values the widest 
possible contacts. His staff says he also seeks out special friends 
in international affairs whose judgment he trusts, among them president 
Nelson Mandela of South Africa and Richard Holbrooke, the American 
diplomat and Balkans troubleshooter who is in line to become the U.S. 
representative at the United Nations. ``I talk to lots of people,'' 
Annan said in his uniformly soft, melodic voice, which sinks at times 
almost to a whisper. ``I talk to people inside the building, outside 
the building, in different fields, in different walks of life. Men 
and women who understand the human condition and have compassion. 
People who like to do things about the world we live in.'' Urquhart, 
who worked closely with the alternately mercurial and mystical Dag 
Hammarskjold _ the second secretary-general, who died in a plane crash 
during another Congo crisis _ is struck by the way both men have demonstrated 
a willingness to get involved in ``hard cases.'' The difference is 
that whereas Hammarskjold had a fitful temper and could sink into 
obsessive brooding, Annan ``is at ease with himself,'' Urquhart said. 
``He likes people,'' he said of Annan. ``He genuinely enjoys life. 
He doesn't get unduly upset about temporary setbacks. It's just as 
well, because this is a very frustrating time to be the secretary-general.'' 
</TEXT>
</DOC>