<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981227.0075 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
At the end of 1997, boxing was flat on its back, being counted out 
as a sport that mattered. Bickering between a promoter and a cable 
network had scuttled plans for a heavyweight unification bout between 
Evander Holyfield and Lennox Lewis, the only match that the general 
public cared to see. The sport's biggest attraction, Mike Tyson, had 
had his license revoked for biting Holyfield's ears. And no one was 
even talking about matching up the best boxers in their respective 
divisions against each other. At the end of 1998, boxing is back on 
its feet, battered yet still in the fight for viability thanks to 
a flurry of meaningful matches in the last quarter of the year, and 
the promise of more meaningful bouts in the first three months of 
1999. Add to that the latest return of Tyson, the former heavyweight 
champion, and boxing is again in a position to grab the public's attention. 
Boxing will continue to revolve around the way matches unfold on television, 
mainly on cable and pay-per-view. The promoter Don King has ended 
his longtime estrangement from HBO, and together they could forge 
one of the most powerful alliances in boxing in 1999. The fruits of 
that alliance so far are the Felix Trinidad-Pernell Whitaker bout 
on Feb. 20 and Holyfield-Lewis on March 13. On the downside, USA Network 
canceled its ``Tuesday Night Fights'' program in 1998, eliminating 
a showcase for up-and-coming boxers. ESPN shifted its boxing program 
to ESPN2, a smaller outlet with less visibility. Meanwhile, HBO recorded 
its ninth consecutive double-digit rating with its last boxing show 
of the year on Dec. 19. At the top end of the scale, boxing is doing 
well. With emerging stars like Floyd Mayweather Jr., Shane Mosley 
and Michael Grant and established stars like Roy Jones Jr., Oscar 
De La Hoya, Holyfield and Tyson, 1999 promises to be exciting. ``Boxing 
always has a cold,'' said Seth Abraham, president of Time-Warner/HBO 
Sports. ``It's never completely healthy. But it is in as robust health 
now as it has been in a long time. There's a resurgence. If you go 
back three months and go through June 1999, boxing is on a high-octane 
vitamin. The big question is whether the people in the sport are going 
to be able to take advantage of this bull market and make it run longer.'' 
Much of boxing's ill health can be traced to the tangle of competing 
and conflicting interests that have always threatened to strangle 
the life out of the sport. Promoters only want to make matches in 
which they have future options on both fighters, so that whoever wins 
is still tied to the promoter. Managers of world championship boxers 
do not want their clients in the ring with someone capable of beating 
their man and taking his title. The sanctioning organizations, often 
manipulated by boxing promoters and managers, have questionable ranking 
systems. Thus arises a match like Oscar De La Hoya versus Patrick 
Charpentier, the World Boxing Council's No. 1 welterweight contender 
at the time, in a title fight. Charpentier landed five punches before 
De La Hoya knocked him out in the second round. The cable networks, 
mainly HBO, are acting as de facto promoters. HBO has signed several 
boxers to exclusive and lucrative contracts. This practice irritates 
some promoters. But they keep coming back, because there are no other 
outlets that pay as well. Showtime has only one boxer under contract, 
Mike Tyson. But that's enough, because he is a pay-per-view champion 
and is an industry all by himself. The promoter Cedric Kushner has 
started his own television arm called Cedric Kushner Sports Network, 
and syndicates boxing shows around the world. Kushner, however, also 
deals with HBO and has no problem with them signing boxers to exclusive 
contracts. ``Why is that any different than NBC signing a particular 
show for a series?'' Kushner said. ``You go back to the whole concept 
of options. Where does it say that HBO should develop and showcase 
fighters so that they can go someplace else? And look at the terrific 
situation for fighters, knowing they're going to be guaranteed money 
and be very visible. I see it as a positive.'' Tyson did not box at 
all last year because his license was revoked by the Nevada State 
Athletic Commission after he bit both of Holyfield's ears during a 
title bout on June 28, 1997. His license was reinstated on Oct. 19, 
after a battery of psychological tests. The return of Tyson could 
be the tide that raises all of boxing _ or sinks it lower, if there 
is more biting. The sport proved it could survive without a major 
attraction like Tyson, but he definitely brings back the thrill. ``It's 
like having a Super Bowl four times a year,'' Kushner said of Tyson's 
return to boxing. ``He puts a focus on boxing, on the heavyweights 
in particular, and on how much money there is in this sport.'' 
</TEXT>
</DOC>