<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981227.0130 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
More money than ever is pouring into New York's local and state election 
campaigns, but the system of regulating these funds to curb their 
influence on politics and policy has all but broken down. Porous laws, 
feeble enforcement and a political class increasingly adept at sidestepping 
the rules have left the system with few constraints, even by comparison 
to those of other states and the federal government, according to 
a review of campaign documents and interviews with elected officials 
and others. New York has rejected many of the laws adopted elsewhere, 
from bans on donations by corporations and labor unions to publicly 
financed campaigns. And while these changes have not always been effective, 
New York's weakness stands out. An analysis of this year's contests, 
the most expensive in state history, shows a virtual free-for-all 
of donating and spending. Financier Ronald Perelman channeled more 
than $200,000 on two days last August to Gov. George Pataki's campaign, 
using a common loophole to give more than seven times the legal limit 
for an individual donor. A Long Island company, Silverite Construction, 
gave at least $20,000 over the legal limit, just as it was awarded 
a $97 million state contract. The company was not punished. There 
are even fewer controls on how politicians spend donations. Assemblyman 
Dov Hikind, a Brooklyn Democrat, used $100,000 of campaign contributions 
to pay lawyers who defended him in a criminal bribery case. Assemblyman 
Anthony Seminerio, a Queens Democrat, had his campaign buy a $25,OOO 
Ford Crown Victoria for his full-time use. The campaign of State Sen. 
Guy Velella, a Bronx Republican, bought an alarm system for his home. 
And State Sen. Serphin Maltese, a Queens Republican, took a two-week 
trip to Italy, paid for with campaign funds. ``The New York state 
campaign finance laws are atrocious,'' said John Feerick, dean of 
the Fordham Law School, who led a state commission in the 1980s that 
recommended more stringent campaign finance laws, only to be rebuffed 
by the legislature. ``And if anything, it seems pretty clear to me 
that things have gotten worse.'' Even Pataki has declared the campaign 
finance laws ``dreadful.'' He made his pronouncement during his re-election 
campaign, in which he set a record by spending nearly $20 million, 
much of it collected from donors with business before the state. Not 
only are New York's laws weaker than many other states have, but so 
is its enforcement. In California, New Jersey and many other states, 
special agencies police campaign financs, but New York gives the job 
to the politically paralyzed State Board of Elections, whose focus 
is overseeing registration and balloting. The board collected roughly 
$20,000 in fines in 1997 for campaign violations. Its counterpart 
in California collected more than $650,000 in fines that year. In 
New York, politicians sometimes seem to mock public-disclosure rules. 
Pataki used to file his contributors listed alphabetically by first 
name, making analysis difficult. This fall, his campaign submitted 
a list of nearly $4 million in expenditures in type so small that 
much of it was, for all practical purposes, unreadable. The state 
plans to put the records in a computer next year, long after the practice 
in other states. New York's race for governor this year cost $40 million, 
up from $32 million in 1994. Legislative campaign committees raised 
more than $8 million, roughly double the total in 1994. Overall, candidates 
and political committees in New York have spent more than $200 million 
on state and local campaigns over the last four years. Like many others, 
Perelman, who controls Revlon, easily skirted the limits on donations. 
By law, a corporation's donations to all state and local candidates 
and political committees can generally not exceed a total of $5,000 
annually. And a gubernatorial campaign can accept no more than $28,000 
from an individual contributor in a general election. So how can one 
person give more than $200,000? In Perelman's case, he divided it 
among more than 40 corporations that he controls, each of which gave 
$5,000. In doing so, he also got around a rule that limits individuals 
to an aggregate maximum of $150,000 a year in donations. The state 
has never deemed this practice illegal even though other jurisdictions 
prohibit it. That is not the only way around corporate limits: Just 
like on the federal level, corporations can donate unlimited amounts 
of so-called soft money, which political parties can legally use only 
for ``party building'' activities, like get-out-the-vote drives. The 
Board of Elections, though, does not monitor how the state parties 
handle soft money. In fact, the Republican State Committee has raised 
$7.5 million in soft money since 1995 and transferred most of it to 
a federal political account in Washington, putting it outside the 
jurisdiction of the state board. A small group of states put no limits 
on contributions. But most of those, including Texas, bar all contributions 
from corporations and unions. New York is even more lenient with unions 
than it is with corporations. Unions are held to the same contribution 
limits as individual donors, allowing them to become major players 
in Albany. Since 1995, for example, the state teachers union has donated 
$1.25 million to the committees run by the legislative leaders. Unlike 
a growing number of states, New York allows fund-raising by legislators 
while they are in session. It is common in Albany for lobbyists to 
attend fund-raisers at night where they contribute to the same legislators 
they buttonhole about bills during the day. More than 200 such events 
were held in the state capital this year. The state law governing 
the spending of campaign donations is terse yet expansive. ``Contributions 
received by a candidate or a political committee may be expended for 
any lawful purpose,'' it says. ``Such funds shall not be converted 
by any person to a personal use which is unrelated to a political 
campaign or the holding of a public office or party position.'' With 
those guidelines, politicians can justify virtually any expenditure. 
Most campaign money is spent on expenses such as advertising and staff. 
Many legislators lease cars year-round _ including in non-election 
years _ then charge the cost to their campaigns and drive the vehicles 
on personal as well as political or governmental matters. Seminerio 
went further and spent $25,000 in campaign money last year on the 
Ford Crown Victoria. ``As an Assembly person, I'm on like 24 hours,'' 
he said. When Hikind was indicted last year on charges of receiving 
bribes from a social-services group, he hired a prominent defense 
lawyer, Gustave Newman, and paid him with $100,000 in campaign funds. 
Hikind, who was acquitted on all the charges, did not respond to three 
telephone messages seeking comment. The State Board of Elections did 
not question these expenditures or seek more information on them. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>