<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981227.0112 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
South Africa's deputy president, Thabo Mbeki, earned his degree in 
economics from the University of Sussex in England and is rarely seen 
in anything less formal than a double-breasted suit and a silk tie. 
But this weekend, Mbeki, the man who is virtually certain of becoming 
South Africa's next president, traveled to this remote, rural village 
where he was raised and where his mother still runs the local store 
in a room about the size of a garage. Here, where the houses and huts 
are separated by dirt paths _ often clogged with cows and sheep _ 
and the fields stretch unbroken over the hilly horizon, South Africans 
got to see a slightly different Mbeki. He wore a single strand of 
his tribal beads over an open necked shirt. And, as is traditional 
in his Xhosa tribe, he sat with the village elders in his mother's 
cattle pen, drinking home-brewed beer and barbecuing freshly slaughtered 
meat. A question about who Mbeki is still hangs in the air in South 
Africa. In recent months, he has appeared to be making an effort to 
provide an answer. It would be difficult for any man to come out from 
behind President Nelson Mandela's shadow. But it is perhaps even harder 
for Mbeki than it might be for others because he lived in exile for 
more than 30 years and is clearly ill-at-ease in the public eye. This 
weekend's events, including a feast for thousands of villagers, was 
a way of showing South Africans who remain somewhat suspicious of 
him that his roots are indeed here along South Africa's southeast 
coast. ``They will see him in this place,'' said Smuts Ngonyama, the 
director of information for the governing African National Congress, 
``and they will know that he is one of them.'' The expedition to his 
home town also made it possible for Mbeki, 56, to remind South Africans 
of his own credentials in the struggle for South Africa, even if they 
do not reach the stature of Mandela's 27 years in prison. The Mbeki 
family was deeply involved in the anti-apartheid movement, and several 
of Mbeki's family members _ including a brother _ disappeared and 
are presumed to have been killed by the police. By all accounts, the 
deputy president has been running the day-to-day affairs of the country 
for several years now, and last year he became the president of the 
governing party, the African National Congress. Since the party is 
expected to win the next year's elections easily, Mbeki is expected 
to become president of the country. But the party is hoping for a 
very large majority, and so Mbeki's image counts. Despite Mbeki's 
obvious prominence in the party, it is Mandela who is always in the 
headlines. His touch with the people has produced an abundance of 
heart-warming pictures as he hugs children and beauty queens and greets 
celebrities and heads of state. Mbeki, however, appears to have no 
such touch. He is cerebral and stiff _ South Africa's version of Al 
Gore. More and more, however, he has been going public in his own 
way. Earlier this month, a collection of Mbeki's speeches was published, 
called, ``Africa, The Time Has Come.'' Mbeki spent years as a speech 
writer for the African National Congress, and even if his delivery 
tends to be uninspired, some of his speeches have been memorable, 
rising almost into poetry. He is famous throughout South Africa for 
a speech everyone calls the ``I am an African'' speech, which uses 
that line as a refrain. ``I am an African,'' it begins. ``I owe my 
being to the hills and the valleys, the mountains and the glades, 
the rivers, the deserts, the trees, the flowers, the seas and the 
ever changing seasons that define the the face of our native land.'' 
The speech he gave to Parliament on the day South Africa passed its 
new constitution in 1996 ends with, ``Nothing can stop us now.'' Mbeki 
also spoke out last month on a special television broadcast about 
AIDS. Although Mandela had been scheduled to speak, it was Mbeki who 
showed up. His tense demeanor got the better of him, though. Seated 
in a chair surrounded by a group of rambunctious young children, he 
did not move a muscle during his entire 15-minute speech _ even to 
pat a youngster who was hugging his legs and gazing adoringly into 
his face. Most often Mbeki, who is married but has no children, is 
described as a workaholic. Indeed, during the hours of speeches and 
traditional dancing and singing in honor of Mbeki on Sunday, Mandela 
came over from his own rural village where he vacations to say hello 
and to tweak his deputy for working too hard. While Mbeki had entered 
the huge white tent set up in a field with a slight smile and a wave, 
Mandela stopped to shake hands with the crowd, as he usually does. 
Still, Mbeki managed a small dance with a young woman from the choir 
who invited him off the dais. When it was Mbeki's turn at the microphone, 
he told a few small jokes, but quickly got down to business. In the 
briefest speech of the day, he told the crowd that some South Africans 
do not know what to do with their new-found freedom. Some, Mbeki said, 
believe that freedom means they can rape and steal other people's 
property. Some believe that freedom means they do not have to go to 
work. Some teachers, he said, are showing up at school drunk and some 
police officers are corrupt and even ANC officials were lining their 
pockets. ``Something is amiss here,'' he said, before leaving the 
podium. ``We shall note all this next year and change our patterns.'' 
Despite his call at the end for everyone to eat, drink and be merry, 
his speech received a muted response. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>