<DOC>
<DOCNO> ABC19981026.1830.0817 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> CAPTION </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
In politics tonight, you knew we'd get around to the Senate race here 
in New York. It isn't just because it's in our backyard. Republican 
incumbent senator Al D'Amato facing democratic congressman Chuck schumer. 
This is probably the meanest campaign in the country. Here's ABC's 
John Cochran. Autumn in New York -- they write songs about it. It's 
always special -- and this one more than most, with something to cheer 
about, and something to jeer about. Let me just read this. I think 
it's ridiculous. It's a stupid campaign. a gutter-ball race, where 
the defining issue is whether senator d'Amato called the challenger, 
Chuck Schumer, a putzhead. I have absolutely no knowledge of ever 
having made that statement. Hours later, D'Amato fessed up. I'm calling 
on Al D'Amato to explain to New Yorkers how he could say one thing 
in the morning and the exact opposite in the afternoon. In a city 
that prides itself on sophistication, New Yorkers found themselves 
analyzing the meaning of the offending word. It means a small idiot, 
as opposed to a schmuck, which means a big idiot. Schumer used D'Amato's 
original denial to bolster his one-note campaign that the three-term 
senator is a liar. D'Amato, too many lies for too long. Schumer's 
Negative campaign has a crude logic to it. He began the race as a 
Brooklyn congressman, virtually unknown in much of the state. He feels 
he must undermine the credibility of his better-known rival. D'Amato's 
best counterpunch has been an ad blitz detailing Schumer's absences 
from Congress while campaigning. Chuck Schumer has missed more votes 
in the last 12 months than Al D'Amato has in the last 12 years. But 
then D'Amato went a step further, telling a Jewish group that schumer 
failed to support victims of the Nazi Holocaust. He missed the vote 
to make the capitol rotunda available for the magnificent Holocaust 
commemoration ceremony. Schumer, who is Jewish, sensed that this one 
might boomerang on d'Amato. To me, it was simply a below-the-belt 
hit, the likes of which I have never seen before in politics. These 
are actually two veteran legislators with almost 40 years between 
them as major players on big issues. But you'd never know it from 
their ads. Schumer votes for foreign aid for countries like Mongolia, 
but votes against upstate New York. Da motto voted against education 
and Medicare 12 times. Two hours north of Manhattan, the villagers 
of Walden would like to tune out this campaign. At Sam's Barber shop 
we met up with this man. I think they both feel that the audience 
is so stupid that it's glued to television all day long or all night 
long, and you don't have to do anything else. Sal patella thinks it's 
the meanest race he has ever seen. I get the feeling it's a hate campaign. 
Am I right or am I wrong? You're wrong, Sal. They don't hate each 
other. They just think this is what you have to do to get elected. 
If you live in Mongolia, Schumer's your man. Al D'Amato's still lying. 
John Cochran, ABC News, New York. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>