<DOC>
<DOCNO> APW19981026.0796 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
LUXEMBOURG (AP) - European Union countries on Monday struggled to 
rally Spain behind a fund distribution plan for 10 east European applicant 
countries which Madrid fears could threaten the EU support it gets 
for its own poorer regions. EU foreign ministers did agree that when 
one candidate country becomes an EU member, the overall funds for 
this country should be redistributed among the remaining candidates 
who have still not joined the Union. But talks were inconclusive on 
how the 15-nation EU will extend a system of so-called cohesion funds 
for poor EU regions to candidate countries. The EU has pledged 21 
billion European currency units (dlrs 25 billion) for the 10 eastern 
European countries between 2001-2006, to support reforms in areas 
such as industry, agriculture, transport and the environment. This 
represents an annual 3 billion ecu (dlrs 3.6 billion). A third of 
those funds are cohesion funds. Within the EU, a country that qualifies 
for cohesion funds pays out 15 percent of these funds, while the EU 
forks out 85 percent. Fourteen EU countries said the eastern European 
candidates should pay out of their own pockets a larger share - 25 
percent - of the cohesion funds they receive. Spain wants the 15-85 
sharing-out system for the EU also to apply for candidates. EU officials 
say Spain, which benefits greatly from the cohesion funds for less-developed 
regions, is afraid that a more severe system applied to candidate 
countries will end up being extended to EU countries as well. ``The 
Union might end up saying, if applicant countries have to pay 25 percent 
of the funds from their own pocket, why should EU countries pay less?'' 
said an EU official who requested anonymity. To soothe Spain on the 
issue of cohesion funds, ministers sketched a compromise under which 
the EU could, in exceptional circumstances, pay 85 percent of the 
cohesion funds to candidate countries and they will pay only 15. Six 
countries - Hungary, the Czech Republic, Poland, Slovenia, Estonia 
and Cyprus - are expected to join the Union sometime in the middle 
of the next decade. The EU begins membership talks with these countries 
next month. Cyprus has its own financial arrangement with the Union. 
Five other countries - Bulgaria, Romania, Slovakia, Latvia and Lithuania 
- are on a slower track to membership. The EU hopes it can settle 
such finicky issues as fund distribution for applicant nations by 
November 10, when it opens talks with the six fast-track countries. 
EU ministers are also struggling to agree on painful reforms within 
the EU, such as cutting farm subsidies and revamping EU finances that 
are necessary before it can begin integrating new members. At an EU 
summit last weekend in Poertschach, Austria, Germany's new Chancellor 
Gerhard Schroeder stressed the need to accelerate fruitless talks 
about reforming the EU ahead of its enlargement into eastern Europe. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>