<DOC>
<DOCNO> APW19981026.0475 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Doctors ordered President Boris Yeltsin to cancel a trip to Austria 
because of extreme fatigue and recommended he take a vacation, the 
Interfax news agency said Monday. The announcement, two weeks after 
Yeltsin cut short a trip to Central Asia, raises new questions about 
his ability to stay in office. Prime Minister Yevgeny Primakov will 
make the trip to Vienna for talks with the European Union on Tuesday 
instead, Interfax said, quoting presidential spokesman Dmitry Yakushkin. 
Yakushkin said Yeltsin was suffering from an ``asthenic condition,'' 
that made him very weak and tired, both physically and emotionally. 
Asthenia refers to a lack of bodily strength. Yeltsin's blood pressure 
was also unstable, Yakushkin said. The Kremlin refused to confirm 
the reports to The Associated Press. Yeltsin has been weakened by 
recurring health problems in recent years, including heart bypass 
surgery in 1996. The president and his doctors insist that Yeltsin 
will serve out the less than two years that remain of his term, and 
they deny that he has crippling health problems. Yeltsin was forced 
to cut short a trip to Central Asia earlier this month because of 
a respiratory infection. Doctors said last week he had recovered, 
but Yeltsin has still not returned to work at the Kremlin full time. 
The trip to Vienna had been reduced to one day from the originally 
scheduled two days. Yakushkin said a committee of doctors that usually 
meets before Yeltsin travels recommended he cancel his visit to Austria. 
It said Yeltsin had not followed doctors' advice to stay home and 
recuperate from the respiratory infection that curtailed his Central 
Asian trip. This, coupled with work pressures, caused him to become 
extremely tired, he said. ``Doctors unanimously voted for cancelling 
the trip,'' Yakushkin said. He said there were no plans to hospitalize 
Yeltsin. Yakushkin said earlier Monday that the Russian leader was 
working at a country residence outside of Moscow and was preparing 
for the trip to Austria. In Vienna, Yeltsin had been scheduled to 
meet with Austrian Chancellor Viktor Klima, the present holder of 
the rotating European Union chairmanship. The two were expected to 
discuss security issues, including the recent Middle East peace agreement 
and the crackdown on ethnic Albanians in Yugoslavia's Kosovo province, 
and Russia's economic crisis. Yeltsin's itinerary also called for 
him to meet with International Monetary Fund and World Bank officials 
to discuss economic assistance. Russia has said it is counting on 
further disbursements of a dlrs 22.6 billion bailout package to pay 
its bills for the rest of the year. The IMF froze the loan after Russia's 
latest economic crisis erupted in mid-August, and has said it will 
not deliver any more payments until it sees signs that Russia has 
a plan for coping with its troubles. Russian media have speculated 
that Yeltsin will not undertake any more foreign trips, but Interfax 
said Monday that a visit to India in December is still on. Yeltsin 
also plans several meetings in November with foreign guests, including 
Japanese Prime Minister Keijo Obuchi, German Chancellor-elect Gerhard 
Schroeder, Italian president Oscar Luigi Scalfaro and Queen Beatrix 
of The Netherlands, Interfax said, quoting the deputy head of the 
presidential administration, Sergei Prikhodko. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>