<DOC>
<DOCNO> APW19981026.0236 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Tanks and armored vehicles rumbled down Kosovo's roads Monday as the 
government tried to convince NATO it is meeting the deadline for complying 
with the peace deal to avoid airstrikes. In Brussels, Belgium, NATO 
ambassadors were hearing a briefing Monday from the alliance's military 
chief, Gen. Wesley Clark, on his weekend talks in Belgrade, where 
he pressed Yugoslav President Slobodan Milosevic for further troop 
withdrawals from Kosovo. White House spokesman Barry Toiv said in 
Washington that Clark ``made clear the need for significant compliance 
on the ground by Tuesday.'' That is NATO's latest deadline for Milosevic 
to comply with the Oct. 12 agreement to defuse the crisis without 
airstrikes. As the deadline approached, the government's Serb Media 
Center said three military units were returning to their barracks 
Monday in the towns of Urosevac, Pristina and Kosovska Mitrovica. 
Later, a convoy of more than two dozen green Yugoslav tanks, other 
armored vehicles and trucks was seen rolling through the Komorane 
checkpoint toward Pristina. Serb police removed the road signs ordering 
vehicles to halt at the Komorane checkpoint, 20 kilometers (12 miles) 
west of Pristina, but the policemen manning the small house at the 
intersection remained on duty. It was not clear if the checkpoint 
was being fully dismantled, or if police would continue to monitor 
traffic at the intersection. NATO has demanded that forces in Kosovo 
be withdrawn or returned to barracks so that tens of thousands of 
ethnic Albanian refugees who fled the fighting can return to their 
homes safely. The government has repeatedly claimed it is complying 
the with orders. Ethnic Albanian refugees, however, claim Serb-led 
forces withdraw when diplomatic monitors appear and then return after 
they leave to harass civilians. On Sunday, mourners ran away or dived 
for cover when gunfire whistled overhead at the funeral of an 11-year-old 
Albanian boy believed slain by Serbs. Journalists filmed and photographed 
the chaos. But international observers sent to Kosovo to witness such 
violence left before the funeral began. One observer said their presence 
wouldn't protect the mourners from more gunfire. The boy, Shemsi Elshani, 
was killed Saturday while helping his father and cousin chop wood 
behind the mountain village Krajkova, 30 kilometers (18 miles) west 
of Pristina. His father, Rashit Elshani, blamed Serb police, saying 
his son died simply because he's Albanian. Police have been shooting 
in the area every night to try to scare off villagers, he said. Serb 
officials were unavailable for comment. A team of European diplomats 
and an American team of the Kosovo Diplomatic Observer Mission came 
to the house, but all left before the burial. Gunfire from a hill 
about 1,000 meters (yards) away, the same area from where the fatal 
shots came, sounded several times after the diplomats arrived. The 
Europeans eventually drove away, while the American observer team 
questioned Rashit and called its headquarters before leaving. Villagers 
asked team leader Norman Olsen to attend the funeral because they 
believed his presence would stop further shooting, but he declined. 
``Even though we have armored vehicles, if somebody is determined 
to shoot more people, they won't stop for us,'' Olsen said before 
leaving. ``Our presence at the gravesite will not protect you. If 
any diplomat tells you otherwise, he's wrong.'' Scores of people walked 
up the hillside for the burial in a fresh grave next to six others, 
including an uncle of Shemsi killed Sept. 25 during a Serb offensive 
in the area. When mourners started to disperse, more gunfire erupted 
from the far hill. Some people ran down the hill while others lay 
on the ground On Sunday, President Clinton, while on a fund-raising 
trip in California, spoke for about 30 minutes by telephone with British 
Prime Minister Tony Blair about the need to keep the pressure on Milosevic. 
British Foreign Secretary Robin Cook said the threat of NATO airstrikes 
would remain in place until Milosevic reduces forces to pre-conflict 
level. ``He has made progress but he needs to try an awful lot harder,'' 
Cook said in an interview with the British Broadcasting Corp. ``I 
think that when on Tuesday we review this, we may well come to the 
conclusion we cannot yet relax our guard, we cannot stand down the 
planes, we need further progress before we relax that order.'' 
</TEXT>
</DOC>