<DOC>
<DOCNO> APW19981026.1110 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu won a no-confidence motion Monday 
in parliament, getting past the first of several political hurdles 
aimed at challenging a new Mideast peace deal. The threat of early 
elections loomed after legislators decided to present a bill to parliament 
calling for a spring vote. Selling the new land-for-peace deal to 
hard-liners in his coalition government has not been easy. Monday's 
brutal killing of a Jewish settler, apparently by Palestinians, in 
the West Bank city of Hebron was likely to make the process even harder. 
In a demonstration outside the Netanyahu's home later Monday, hundreds 
of right-wing Israelis carried torches and angry signs calling for 
Netanyahu's resignation. Many chanted ``Bibi is a traitor,'' referring 
to the prime minister by his nickname. Some protesters scuffled with 
police and tried to break through a barrier. Police said 21 people 
were arrested. Still, lawmakers from the dovish Labor party and its 
left-wing partners made good on a promise to back the premier in parliament, 
at least until the new accord signed Friday with Palestinian leader 
Yasser Arafat is implemented. ``We believe the prime minister should 
be removed from office and we believe in early elections ... but we 
will not trade our principles for political gain. For the sake of 
peace, we will not allow'' Netanyahu to fall, Labor lawmaker Eli Goldshmidt 
said. The no-confidence motion brought by the tiny, extreme right-wing 
Moledet party failed to pass, with eight votes in favor, 21 against 
and 15 abstentions. A majority of the 120 lawmakers, including Netanyahu, 
did not show up for the vote, which had almost no chance of passing. 
Labor's Knesset support is key to Netanyahu, who faces growing opposition 
to the peace plan from within his own coalition government. Hard-liners 
opposed to the West Bank withdrawal and opposition legislators hoping 
to bring down Netanyahu agreed Monday to join forces for early national 
elections. In a first step toward toppling the Netanyahu government, 
the Knesset Law Committee voted to hold a first reading on a bill 
to disperse parliament and hold new elections within 100 days. A suggested 
date for the elections was March 16, after the current peace accord 
is to be implemented. Committee chairman Hanan Porat said the first 
reading of the bill could be held within two weeks. A bill needs to 
be approved in three readings before it becomes law. The early elections 
bill will need to be backed by 60 of the 120 legislators. Supporters 
of the bill said they were confident they could pass the legislation. 
Meanwhile, Israeli police said they found the body of a Palestinian 
man outside of the Jewish settlement of Itamar in the West Bank. Police 
spokeswoman Linda Menuhin said the body was discovered after an anonymous 
caller speaking in Hebrew said a Palestinian had been killed in revenge 
for the Hebron murder earlier in the day. Israel TV identified the 
man as Mohammed Zalmouk, a Palestinian from a neighboring village 
who works in the olive groves outside of Itamar. Although he was killed, 
Menuhin said it was not yet clear how he died. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>