<DOC>
<DOCNO> APW19981026.0742 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
A day before NATO's latest deadline, tanks and armored vehicles rumbled 
back to barracks Monday in Kosovo, as the Yugoslav government sought 
to convince the Alliance it is complying with demands to avoid airstrikes. 
NATO's military commander, Gen. Wesley Clark, briefed Alliance ambassadors 
Monday in Brussels, Belgium, on his weekend talks in Belgrade, where 
he insisted Yugoslav President Slobodan Milosevic remove more troops 
from front lines. In an apparent sign of compliance, a NATO official, 
speaking to reporters on condition of anonymity, said intelligence 
reports show ``some indication some units are regrouping for withdrawal.'' 
Still, he said, NATO remains was ready to use military force once 
a deadline for compliance runs out at 1900 gmt Tuesday. The deadline 
was already been extended once since Milosevic agreed on a peace plan 
Oct. 12 with U.S. envoy Richard Holbrooke. NATO has demanded that 
forces in Kosovo be withdrawn or returned to barracks so that hundreds 
of thousands of ethnic Albanian refugees who fled the fighting can 
return safely to their homes. Hundreds of people have died since Milosevic 
launched his crackdown in February on ethnic Albanian separatists 
in the province, part of Serbia, the main Yugoslav republic. About 
90 percent of Kosovo's 2 million residents are ethnic Albanian, and 
most favor independence. In Kosovo, a convoy of more than two dozen 
Yugoslav tanks, trucks and other armored vehicles was seen Monday 
rolling through the Komorane checkpoint toward Pristina, the provincial 
capital. Serb police removed the road signs ordering vehicles to halt 
at the checkpoint 20 kilometers (12 miles) west of Pristina, but the 
policemen manning the small house at the intersection remained on 
duty. It was not clear if the checkpoint was being fully dismantled, 
or if police would continue to monitor traffic there. The government's 
Serb Media Center said three military units were returning to their 
barracks in Urosevac, Pristina and Kosovska Mitrovica. British Foreign 
Secretary Robin Cook said if the Serbs follow through with pledges 
to withdraw weaponry and troops, ``that will certainly be a significant 
advance. But we want to see the evidence first.'' NATO's ``planes 
are still on the runway,'' ready for airstrikes, Cook said in Luxembourg. 
``If Milosevic does not want them to take off, then it is up to him 
to comply. He knows what he has got to do.'' NATO and the U.N. Security 
Council also demanded that Milosevic allow international organizations 
to deliver humanitarian aid to refugees without interference. On Monday, 
a planeload of American medicine and blankets arrived in Prsitina 
with the first direct shipment of international humanitarian aid, 
including medicine and blankets. Up to now, all international aid 
deliveries had to pass through the Yugoslav capital Belgrade before 
proceeding overland to Kosovo. Serb security forces have hindered 
several aid convoys from delivering supplies. U.S. officials described 
the aid flight as a test case for compliance with the aid portion 
of the Oct. 12 accord. The government has repeatedly claimed it is 
complying with terms of the agreement. Ethnic Albanians, however, 
claim that Serb-led forces withdraw when diplomatic monitors appear 
and then return after they leave to harass refugees. On Monday, the 
ethnic Albanian-run Kosovo Information Center claimed Serb forces 
shelled four villages in the Klina area, 50 kilometers (30 miles) 
west of the capital. The center claimed the same villages were shelled 
Sunday evening for 90 minutes. The reports could not be independently 
confirmed. On Sunday, mourners dived for cover when gunfire whistled 
overhead at the funeral of an 11-year-old ethnic Albanian boy believed 
slain by Serbs. Journalists filmed and photographed the chaos. But 
international observers sent to Kosovo to witness such violence left 
before the funeral began. One observer said their presence would not 
protect the mourners from more gunfire. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>