<DOC>
<DOCNO> APW19981026.1087 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
The body of the young Israeli settler lay sprawled in a pool of blood 
on the dusty street, one foot clad only in a sock. Angry Jewish settlers 
and grim-faced Israeli soldiers milled about nearby. Monday's execution-style 
killing in the divided town of Hebron was the first slaying of an 
Israeli in the West Bank since the signing of the new land-for-security 
agreement. And it also marked a key first test of the accord. Hard-line 
Jewish settlers, who say ceding more West Bank land to the Palestinians 
endangers their very existence, reacted with fury, staging a noisy 
demonstration Monday night outside Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu's 
residence. Chillingly, the Hebron killing might also have led to tit-for-tat 
reprisal: Hours later, a Palestinian olive farmer was found slain 
under mysterious circumstances in the northern West Bank. Netanyahu 
condemned the killing of 29-year-old settler Danny Vargas and said 
it showed the need for an all-out war on terror by Yasser Arafat's 
Palestinian Authority. Under the accord signed last week at the White 
House, Palestinian police are to actively hunt Islamic militants who 
stage attacks on Israelis. In this case, early signs were that they 
were trying hard to do so. Recent months have seen at least half a 
dozen attacks involving assailants who slipped into Israel or Israeli-controlled 
areas and then fled into Palestinian-run territory. That was the pattern 
again Monday. Gunmen pumped at least three shots into Vargas, a security 
guard, leaving his bleeding body in an Israeli-controlled neighborhood 
not far from the Jewish settlement of Kiryat Arba, where he lived, 
and the power station where he worked. Both Israeli and Palestinian 
forces launched an immediate manhunt. Palestinian police found Vargas' 
white Mitsubishi abandoned in an arid field, its passenger seat soaked 
with blood and the dead man's missing sneaker inside. The car was 
in a Palestinian-run area, where Israeli troops are not allowed to 
go under existing agreements. But Palestinian officials quickly escorted 
them to the scene. Together, a knot of officials from both sides _ 
Israeli police officers, plainclothes agents, Palestinian intelligence 
officers, Israeli soldiers _ inspected the car, searching it and taking 
photographs. During the past year and a half, such a scene would have 
been almost unthinkable. As a deadlock in the peace talks dragged 
on, Palestinian security forces had suspended such cooperation with 
Israeli counterparts. Mohammed Dahlan, head of Palestinian preventive 
security in the Gaza Strip, acknowledged it would take time for the 
two sides to re-establish the kind of working partnership envisioned 
under the accord. ``Seventeen months of no security relationship between 
us and the Israelis is not an easy thing,'' he told the Palestinian 
newspaper al-Ayyam. ``We committed to start this process with a positive 
attitude _ but if this is not met with a positive attitude by the 
Israelis, we shall return to the period before the agreement.'' One 
of the testing grounds will likely be Hebron. With 500 Jewish settlers 
living in the center of a city of 130,000 Palestinians, it is a frequent 
flashpoint for violence. In August, an elderly rabbi was slain in 
a Hebron settler enclave, and the city center was put under curfew 
for 12 days earlier this month after grenades were tossed at a military 
jeep. The curfew was re-imposed on parts of Hebron Monday night. It 
remains to be seen whether even a show of good faith on the part of 
Palestinian police _ cooperating with Israel, arresting and convicting 
killers, putting them behind bars and keeping them there _ will do 
much to mollify the settlers, particularly the ones living in and 
around Hebron, who have a reputation for militancy. Hours after the 
killing, about 200 settlers, many from Kiryat Arba, staged a raucous 
demonstration outside the prime minister's residence. They scuffled 
with the police, who detained at least 16 of them. Many demonstrators 
planned to attend Vargas' funeral the next day. ``I don't want to 
be next!'' some screamed. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>