<DOC>
<DOCNO> APW19981124.1189 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Environmentalists and government ministers from 130 countries Tuesday 
called for boosting global efforts to reverse the destruction of the 
earth's protective ozone layer. Ending a six-day meeting, the participants 
issued a statement that also called on developing countries to speed 
up preparation, approval and completion of projects to phase out environmentally 
harmful substances. The Cairo meeting comes just weeks after scientists 
reported the largest ever recorded ozone hole over Antarctic _ covering 
26 million square kilometers (10.4 million square miles) at its widest, 
an area larger than North America. The high-altitude natural ozone 
forms a barrier against ultraviolet radiation from the sun. Excessive 
levels of UV radiation cause skin cancer in humans and can damage 
many plants and animals. Fears that severe ozone depletion could spread 
to populated areas of the world led to the 1989 Montreal Protocol 
under which 168 countries have so far agreed to reduce or eliminate 
ozone-damaging chemicals. The Cairo meeting, organized by the United 
Nations Environment Program, was aimed at tracking the progress of 
the Montreal Protocol, which according to experts is beginning to 
have a positive effect. ``For the first time we are seeing the emergence 
of an integrated approach to the global atmosphere,'' Klaus Toepfer, 
UNEP executive director was quoted as saying by the statement issued 
after the Cairo meeting. A U.N. assessment earlier this year said 
gases and other chemicals are now entering the atmosphere at a slower 
rate, but it could be 20 years before ozone levels recover noticeably. 
It said they should return to their pre-1980s levels around the middle 
of the next century. One of the main chemicals that is damaging the 
ozone layer is CFC-12, a chlorofluorocarbon once commonly used in 
refrigerators and air conditioning systems. The Montreal Protocol 
bans the production and import of CFCs in developed countries, and 
has given developing nations until 2010 to phase them out. They must 
start doing so next year. Although CFC concentrations in the atmosphere 
have started to decline, levels are rising for halon, which are no 
longer produced but are still used to fight fires. The Cairo statement 
called on all parties to develop and submit a national or regional 
strategy for the management of halons, including emissions reduction 
and ultimate elimination of their use. At the meeting, 10 donors pledged 
a special contribution of dlrs 19 million to shut down Russian CFC 
and halon production factories by the year 2000, the statement said. 
The production capacity of the Russian Federation accounts for nearly 
half of the CFC capacity in the world. The statement called for steps 
against dumping of used CFC products in developing countries and requested 
pledges from companies not to manufacture or sell any new CFC using 
equipment or technology in developing countries. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>