<DOC>
<DOCNO> APW19981124.0548 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
South Africa on Tuesday hit its first major snag on the road to next 
year's landmark elections when officials postponed registration for 
half the country. Just three days before registration was to start, 
the Independent Electoral Commission said it wasn't ready to sign 
up all 25 million eligible voters. Next year's election will be the 
first since the African National Congress swept to power in the balloting 
that ended apartheid. No date has been set. People were supposed to 
register Friday, Saturday and Sunday. Now, registration will be held 
in only five northern provinces, including Johannesburg's Gauteng 
Province, which account for about half the eligible voter pool. The 
other four provinces, including Cape Town's province, will hold registration 
Dec. 3-5. Two more three-day periods will be added on in January and 
February for any overflow, said the chief electoral officer, Mandla 
Mchunu. Commission officials told reporters that the southern provinces 
needed more time to train the 72,000 civil servants nationwide offered 
by the African National Congress government to staff the registration. 
The commission had to turn to the public employees because it did 
not receive enough government funds to hire its own workers. The military 
said 8,200 soldiers will take part. Controversy over the registration 
has been brewing for weeks. More than 5 million people are estimated 
to lack updated identification documents, which contain a bar-code 
to ensure accuracy, that are needed to register and vote. Red tape 
and confusion have hindered many from acquiring the ID or temporary 
piece of paper that also can be used to register. Most of those lacking 
the new document are whites because blacks rushed to replace their 
restrictive apartheid-era IDs after the fall of white minority rule. 
The ANC has insisted on the bar-coded IDS as the only entry into the 
voting booth, causing an outcry from the mainly white-supported opposition 
parties. The opposition National Party, which denied the vote to blacks 
for decades as rulers under apartheid, immediately denounced the registration 
postponement. It ``has confirmed that our country is at present being 
governed by a bunch of incompetent people,'' said party leader Marthinus 
van Schalkwyk. News reports also cite a low rate in some provinces 
of civil servant volunteers -- particularly the southern provinces. 
In a nationally broadcast speech Tuesday, President Nelson Mandela 
said difficulties were to be expected given the scope of the first-time 
exercise. ``But the work that has been done so far and the goodwill 
that has been shown gives me the confidence that we will succeed,'' 
he said. The vast majority of people don't even know where to register. 
Elections officials on Wednesday and Thursday plan a ``knock and drop'' 
campaign of visiting every home in each election district and dropping 
off pamphlets with the information. Mchunu said the commission was 
urging Mandela to settle on May election date, before the weather 
worsened and days shortened in the southern hemisphere fall. Mandela 
called a May 19 date mentioned in news reports Tuesday ``speculation 
by journalists.'' The first all-race elections, in 1994, were held 
without registration. But the new constitution of post-apartheid South 
Africa requires a complete, national voters roll. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>