<DOC>
<DOCNO> APW19981124.1241 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Every Monday morning, Tony Greer arrives at his London office and 
spends the next two hours crunching numbers for a ranking system that 
can be even more baffling than the Bowl Championship Series. Not everyone 
agrees with the Official World Golf Ranking. A safe bet is that even 
fewer understand it. ``It is complicated,'' Greer said Tuesday. ``But 
it really isn't, once you know how it works.'' It may be time for 
players to take a crash course. Because as golf becomes more global, 
and as more major tournaments start relying on the rankings to issue 
invitations or exemptions, the OWGR will become as meaningful to them 
as the BCS has become to Kansas State. For the first time this year, 
the U.S. Golf Association created a new exemption for the U.S. Open 
by taking the top 20 in the world rankings. That's how Tom Watson 
made it back to The Olympic Club, even if he didn't make it to the 
weekend. On Monday, Augusta National gave the rankings even more credibility 
when it announced the top 50 in the world at the end of the year would 
be invited to the Masters. ``Excellent idea,'' said Greer. Greg Norman 
(No. 15) couldn't agree more. The Masters was the final piece to Greer's 
own Grand Slam. The British Open has exempted the top 50 in the rankings 
for years, and Greer suspects the PGA Championship has been using 
the rankings to invite international players for the past five years. 
``It's amazing how many use them at the moment,'' Greer said. It probably 
is no coincidence, either, considering that representatives of all 
major championships and the five PGA tours endorsed the Official World 
Golf Ranking at a meeting in Turnberry, Scotland in the summer of 
1997. When the World Golf Championships start next year, the ranking 
will largely determine which players get a crack at the dlrs 1 million 
winner's check in the three world events. That series starts in February 
with the Andersen Consulting Match Play Championship at La Costa Resort 
in Carlsbad, California, where the field of 64 will be based solely 
on the world ranking. ``I'm already having queries from players who 
are around the 64 mark, wanting to know what they've got to do,'' 
Greer said. One call came from Andrew Coltart of Scotland, who wanted 
to take the winter off because he's getting married. Because he's 
No. 63 by the slimmest of margins, a less elaborate honeymoon may 
be in order if he wants to be at La Costa. Twice this year, Greer 
has explained to Nick Faldo's manager exactly what the three-time 
Masters and British Open champion has to do to get back into the top 
64. Faldo is currently No. 66, although he can improve by the end 
of the year even without playing another event. Greer is the manager 
of the Official World Golf Ranking for International Management Group, 
which developed the formula in 1968, went public in 1986 with Sony 
as the sponsor, then sold the golfing powers on it during the Turnberry 
meeting. It has been tweaked over the years _ the biggest change was 
rating performance over two years instead of three _ but is no less 
complicated. Points count in a rolling, 52-week cycle and count double 
for the current year. The four majors are worth 50 points for the 
winner, 30 for second place, 20 for third, on down to one point for 
43rd place and everyone who makes the cut. Points for other tournaments 
are decided by how many of the top 100 players are in the field. So 
a tournament like the Bay Hill Invitational, traditionally one of 
the stronger fields on the strongest tour in golf, will be worth substantially 
more than the Portuguese Open. And if a field is particularly weak, 
points may only be awarded to the top 10 finishers. Bonus points are 
awarded to a tournament that has the top 30 money-winners on its respective 
tour in the field. Also, each tour has its own flagship event worth 
a minimum amount of points: The Players Championship (40), the Volvo 
Masters (32), the Australian and Japan Open (16). Those are simply 
the guidelines. Leave the calculations to Greer. He can explain why 
Jumbo Ozaki (No. 13), who rarely plays outside of Japan, is still 
ranked higher than Justin Leonard (No. 16), and why Norman is still 
in the top 15 without having played golf for seven months. No matter. 
The Masters invitation will be in the mail. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>