<DOC>
<DOCNO> APW19981124.0846 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Iraq poured hundreds into the streets Tuesday to protest eight years 
of U.N. sanctions, and its leaders promised not to relent to pressure 
in its standoff with the United Nations over documents on its weapons 
programs. The tough words came a day after the government acknowledged 
an assassination attempt on one of its most powerful officials. Hundreds 
of Iraqis, many of them elderly women clad in black, arrived by bus 
outside the U.N. headquarters to protest their plight under sanctions 
imposed after Iraq invaded Kuwait in 1990. Women cried, and others 
beat their chests in anguish. ``There is no god but God, America is 
the enemy of God,'' the crowd shouted. ``Down USA,'' others chanted 
in the government-orchestrated demonstration. A convoy of cars drove 
along the street carrying wood coffins meant to symbolize children 
who died during the hardships. At the heart of Iraq's dispute with 
the United Nations is the sanctions, which have wrecked a country 
once one of the Arab world's most prosperous. Iraq claims 5,000 children 
die every month, and U.N. officials acknowledge one in three suffer 
from malnutrition. The U.N. Security Council cannot lift the sanctions 
until U.N. inspectors verify that Iraq has destroyed its chemical, 
biological and nuclear weapons, long-range missiles and programs to 
build them. Last week, the chief weapons inspector, Richard Butler, 
asked for more documents _ from personal diaries to a log of weapons 
used in the 1980-88 Iran-Iraq war _ as part of that search. But Iraq 
has repeatedly insisted that the documents had been destroyed, were 
already turned over to inspectors or irrelevant to their searches. 
Failing to cooperate could delay a U.N. review of progress on dismantling 
the weapons that Iraq hopes will ease the sanctions, and the United 
States has warned it is still willing to attack Iraq if it does not 
do everything the U.N. inspectors ask. The aircraft carrier USS Enterprise 
and five escort ships joined the American naval fleet in the Gulf, 
U.S. military officials said Tuesday. Its arrival brought to 19 the 
number of warships in the region, in all carrying 17,000 sailors and 
marines. Deputy Prime Minister Tariq Aziz declared Tuesday that Iraqis 
would not submit to the demands, ``regardless of the dangers.'' ``Surrendering 
to their will ... is death itself,'' he told a poetry festival in 
the capital Baghdad. Iraq averted what appeared to be an imminent 
U.S. and British attack by agreeing to resume the work of U.N. inspectors 
on Nov. 14. Since then, inspectors have made daily visits to suspected 
weapons sites, and Iraqi officials have provided full cooperation. 
Still, anger remains at Butler, whom the Iraqi government views as 
instrumental in prolonging the sanctions. Al-Iraq, an official newspaper, 
called Butler on Tuesday a ``cursed devil and mad bull.'' The assassination 
attempt on Izzat Ibrahim, President Saddam Hussein's deputy on the 
powerful Revolutionary Command Council, startled Iraqis, accustomed 
to the iron-fist security that reigns in the country. Official media 
said an assailant threw two grenades at Ibrahim as he got out of his 
car in the Shiite Muslim holy city of Kerbala in southern Iraq. He 
escaped but several bodyguards and bystanders were wounded. The assailant 
was reportedly shot in the neck and killed. The assassination attempt 
was the first known attack on a senior official since December 1996, 
when gunmen shot Saddam's eldest son, Odai, about 10 times while he 
waited in his car in an upscale Baghdad neighborhood. Odai survived 
with grievous injuries. Southern Iraq was the site of fierce fighting 
in the aftermath of the 1991 Gulf War when the Iraqi military crushed 
an uprising by Shiite Muslim rebels. Iraqi opposition groups in London 
have said fighting has flared again there in recent months, and that 
Ibrahim even commanded some units sent to fight the rebels. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>