<DOC>
<DOCNO> MNB19981124.2100.0083 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> CAPTION </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
But first, Al Gore and the news he had been hoping for. There will 
be no independent counsel investigation of the vice president. That's 
the decision by attorney general Janet Reno, a decision that was quickly 
denounced by many republicans. It's just another milepost in what 
has become an ugly Washington atmosphere these days. First, we begin 
tonight at the White House and David Bloom. Jody, the attorney general 
says there's "clear and convincing evidence" vice President Al Gore 
did not lie about his past fundraising activities. Gore says he's 
pleased. Republicans are seething. At issue, did Gore tell the truth 
when he denied knowing that this 1996 democratic ad campaign was paid 
for in part by so-called hard money donations which Gore helped raise 
and which is tightly regulated. Today in her 19-page ruling the attorney 
general said there is only weak circumstantial evidence against Gore, 
which fails to provide any reasonable sup -- support for a conclusion 
that the vice president may have lied. The president welcomes that 
news as he has always believed the vice president acted completely 
properly during the campaign in 1996. A key republican lashed out 
at Reno, saying she is either corrupt, stupid, wrong or incompetent. 
And it's beginning to look really smelly. I hate to say it. I think 
the republicans hoped that they could use democratic fundraising as 
the issue to destroy Al Gore. I think they can Nick him with it but 
now that Janet Reno has taken this off the table he's much better 
off. But having cleared the vice president, attorney general Janet 
Reno must decide whether in the next two weeks to seek independent 
counsels to investigate not only President Clinton but his former 
deputy chief of staff Harold Ickes. Our next guest has been very outspoken 
on the issue of campaign finance reform and the allegations surrounding 
the vice president. Senator Arlen specter of Pennsylvania joins us 
tonight. Good evening, jodi, nice to be with you. We heard some of 
the strong words there that senator Hatch had for the attorney general 
and Steve Forbes today questioned her fitness for office. Do you think 
she is fit to remain attorney general? I think it would not be fruitful 
to have President Clinton appoint a replacement. I prefer not to ebb 
gauge in hyperbole but simply to say that the evidence here satisfied 
the standards for independent counsel and there is a clear-cut conflict 
of interest as recognized in the statute when you have the attorney 
general of this administration and high-ranking officials of this 
administration and again she has not applied the same standard which 
she did, say, to secretary of labor Alexis Herman where there was 
much less and independent counsel was appointed and we now have a 
real pattern where attorney general Janet Reno simply will not face 
up to the facts and will not apply the law. Isn't this a case where 
honest people can disagree though? Two legal experts can read the 
same law and interpret it differently? I think that this is possible 
up to a point and I used to be a district attorney myself and I prosecutor 
has a lot of discretion but you come to a point where you abuse the 
discretion. Jodi that's why I have contended for some time that we 
ought to go to the federal court in Washington where there is precedent 
and compel on an act of man dame Russ -- mandamus for the attorney 
general to appoint an independent counsel. I think now where it has 
happened again and again and again, let's let an impartial judge decide. 
I'm not going to question her motivation or call her any names. I 
just want an impartial Jung -- judge to make this determination. What 
would have to happen for you to essentially take Janet Reno to court 
like this? We need to get the Senate Judiciary committee to file the 
papers because there is a technical question of standing and then 
it is a matter of showing that there has been an abuse of discretion, 
which I think can be established. We not only have the matter today 
but the matter coming utch as to Harold Ickes, the matter as to President 
Clinton. We questioned attorney general Reno, I did personally, in 
the Judiciary committee oversight hearings, where you have a commitment 
by a president, not to raise any additional money and then he does 
raise money and they have what they try to pretend are issue ads but 
they are really very hard-hitting commercials and the president himself 
said on one of the tapes when he did not know he was being taped that 
they made the difference in giving him a very large lead in the presidential 
campaign. The attorney general in our Judiciary committee hearing 
tried to slough it off, saying it was a matter for the federal election 
commission, which really was not sensible because the attorney general 
is the chief law enforcement officer and there are criminal provisions 
but she backed it to the federal election commission. They came back 
and said there was a problem and she still refuses to act. So it's 
hard ton a sound bite to give you all the details that we developed 
on the governmental affairs committee which investigated for months 
last year but the case has been made out and for myself I'd like to 
let an impartial judge decide it. All right. Senator specter, thank 
you very much for talking with us tonight. Nice being with you, jodi, 
thank you. For the democratic view of attorney general Janet Reno's 
decision today we turn to Alan baron, who was the chief democratic 
counsel on the Senate governmental affairs committee during its probe 
of case of irregularities and he joins us tonight from Washington, 
D.C. Janet Reno not only has to be fair, but she has to be seen to 
be fair. Why not avoid this kind of criticism such as we've just heard 
from senator specter and others and hand the matter off to somebody 
else? That would be shirking her responsibility under the statute. 
She is the one to call this shot, not Louis freeh, not Chuck La Bella. 
She has not shrunk in appointing independent counsels. She has appointed 
six so far. The criticism is she goes after the smaller fish and leaves 
the big fish alone. It seems to me cabinet level fish are pretty big 
fish. But the president and the vice president? I've had a chance 
to study this 129- -- 19-page opinion she submitted. On the merits, 
the fact is she's right. One of the things that's been lost in here 
is the issue did the vice president lie when he said that he did not 
understand he was raising hard money, that he understood he was raising 
soft money? The evidence is clear and I recall this from the time 
we were investigating this very issue that there was document after 
document saying that the democrats did not want hard money. They needed 
soft money for the media campaign. The fact that there was a hard 
money component when you paid it out is irrelevant. He believed it 
was soft money when he was raising it. There's no credible evidence 
here that suggests he had reason to believe anything to the contrary. 
She called it right. Republicans may not like that but she made the 
right call on that. But she can't know he didn't know something, in 
other words she can't prove a Negative, right? She has to sift through 
it and say is there any specific credible evidence here that would 
warrant me appointing an independent counsel? It's just not here. 
Just a few scribbled notes on a piece of paper. The guy who wrote 
the notes was not a lawyer and did not understand that there was a 
hard money component when he bought the TV ads. Alan baron, thank 
you very much for talking with us tonight. Appreciate your time, sir. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>