<DOC>
<DOCNO> MNB19981124.2100.1809 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> CAPTION </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Today it became official. A $4.2 billion merger of two of the most 
powerful forces on the Internet, America online and Netscape. A.O.L. 
is already the world's largest Internet access and online service 
provider and together with Netscape's browsing software they hope 
to dominate Internet sites where people get information and bye buy 
goods and services. Mike Jensen now on the prospects and consequences. 
It's a merger of giants. America online with 14 million subscribers, 
30 million visitors every month, biggest of the companies that connect 
people to the nint. -- Internet. Netscape, one of the biggest companies 
that steer people to specific web sites once they get on the Internet. 
The announcements made, of course on the Internet. The step creates 
a company big enough to compete head to head with Microsoft in a high 
stakes game -- millions of web sites that sell almost every product 
made. $7 billion worth of merchandise this year alone. All so much 
a part of the mainstream that a new Hollywood movie called "you've 
got mail," isn't about the post office. It's about the Internet. With 
the Internet part entertainment, part commerce, it's not surprising 
that A.O.L., which is capitalizing on both, is run by the creator 
of MTV and the man who used to run pizza hut, trying to make A.O.L. 
the one place people will go when they turn on their computer. You 
can do all that in better ways on the Internet. The new merged company 
with revenues of more than $3 billion will have enormous clout. America 
online is becoming the General Motors of the Internet. Consumer groups 
say that's bad -- too much power in the hands of one company. But 
at the Internet cafe in New York no one seemed concerned. I think 
it will allow Netscape to compete more effectively with Microsoft. 
Analysts say there are dozens of major companies now but in five years 
there may be only three or four powerhouses dominating the industry. 
So what difference does this make to the other superpower in the computer 
industry, Microsoft, part owner -- owner of MSNBC, now on trial in 
federal court in Washington? The company says the government should 
drop its antitrust sufmente here's Pete Williams. For Microsoft lawyers 
the merger is the first big break in the federal antitrust trial. 
They say the government should now drop the lawsuit and let competition 
police the market instead. They say it's just like 25 years ago when 
computer advances eroded the case against I.B.M This shose that the 
government will always be five steps behind our industry. The government 
says the merger proves just the opposite, that Microsoft's practices 
are unfair, insisting on unfair deals with Netscape, reducing it to 
a take overtarget. Because of the blanket that Microsoft was able 
to put over it, it was simply not able to continue its pattern of 
innovation and give computers the choice. Legal experts say they doubt 
the merger will hand Microsoft a court victory, noting that the judge 
in the trial is not Microsoft friendly and has described Bill Gates 
as unresponsive in his videotaped testimony. One exsempt shows Gates 
having trouble remembering defails about one of his own senior officers. 
Did he have a title that went with that? Senior vice president, systems? 
But insiders say the deal means na even if the judge rules against 
Microsoft, he won't be as harsh. This increases the likelihood that 
any punishment he imposes will be relatively mild, that he will not 
insist on a breakup of the company or forced sharing of nellectule 
property. Pete Williams, NBC news, Washington. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>