<DOC>
<DOCNO> MNB19981124.2100.3227 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> CAPTION </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
We will have a look at tomorrow mornings headlines in just a moment 
but one story that's been making headlines in your morning paper for 
147 days if not more is the NBA lockout. The players and owners are 
not scheduled to meet again until after Thanksgiving and at this point 
the earliest the season could start is December 22. But the players 
are not the only ones suffering financially. Others are losing plenty. 
CNBC's Allan Chernoff has more. Check out the brand-new $150 air jordans. 
They usually make a fast break for the cash Register. Not now. They're 
signature on the retail bench. Same for Michael Jordan photos, books, 
and sleep wear. You know there's trouble when retailers can't sell 
the shirt Michael Jordan wears on his back. Truth is the retailers 
don't want to buy NBA merchandise because they know it won't sell 
when there are no games. Manufacturers have seen orders chopped in 
half. In essence what happens is you have some retailers trying to 
either cancel orders for the first months of the season or push them 
back. In Michael Jordan's Mecca of Chicago where a home game generates 
an estimated $10 million to the local commem, restaurantures are weeping. 
A couple hours over the game we get popped over here. So it affects 
us, no doubt about it. The first postponement in league history is 
even making it a tough Rookie season for NBA Barbie. It's still early 
in the lockout, but with nearly one out of every five games already 
cancelled, the cost could easily run into the hundreds of millions 
of dollars for the many companies and their employees whose lively 
-- livelihoods depend on the national basketball association. This 
lockout affects an awful lot of people in kissing -- addition in the 
players and the observers. It's fantastic! For athletic shoe companies, 
the timing couldn't have been worse. Nike has been laying off workers 
in a business that's been slipping for two years. The NBA license 
division has been soft for a while now and retailers have been cautious 
because of that. The optimism or expectation that NBA basketball will 
be back holds for everybody. We're in a wait and see. In new commercials 
Nike is trying to align itself with fans rather than players. Whether 
or not teams play, broadcasters NBC and TNT are obligated to make 
payments in their $2.6 billion contract. Even refunds if the season 
were cancelled would be little comfort to Bob Wright. NBA is a big 
part of our programming in the spring so that would not be an attractive 
situation. It would definitely be difficult for us if that were to 
happen. The lockout's impact could be long-lasting. Three years ago 
after baseball's strike, major league ticket sales plunged 20%. It's 
too soon to tell a story of total gloom and dominant If they do start 
the season in December or January I think they can pick up some of 
that slack. I don't think they pick it all up. There are potential 
winners from the lockout because people are going to spend entertainment 
dollars elsewhere. Hockey has a chance to attract new fans and Hollywood's 
boffings could cash in. That could offset damage to municipal economies. 
It's all incentive to the NBA to start playing ball because as professional 
baseball learned, the worst that can happen to an entertainment business 
is letting the public see how well they can get along without you. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>