<DOC>
<DOCNO> MNB19981124.2100.2454 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> CAPTION </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
It's been more than 3 1/2 years since the Oklahoma City bombing and 
many who were there that day are still reliving the horror. It's not 
just the people who were wounded in the blast or who lost loved ones. 
It's the rescuers who pulled victims from the debris and saw unimaginable 
carnage. Many are finding it impossible to deal with now. Here's Jim 
Cummins. The authorities in Oklahoma City have discovered something 
alarming -- the bomb that killed 168 people is claiming new victims 
now, almost every day. Police, firefighters, and others who were part 
of the rescue operation in the first hours after the bombing have 
begun to suffer life-threatening emotional problems. Two-thirds of 
the reeskers report handling bodies or body parts. Those early officers 
who went into that building were impacted by the sights, sounds, and 
smells of that event and those are the triggers. We have defused many, 
many suicides. Police chaplain jock poe says the psychological effects 
of trying to rescue broken bodies of women, -- men, women, children, 
even babies under twisted steel are devastating. One of the officers 
said he said to a co-worker behind a big cement block, turn the water 
off, we need to get the water turned off in the building and the officer 
on the other side saying to him, that's not water, that's blood. That 
sound is forever imprinted on that officer's mind. "It's not water, 
it's blood." In fact, many mental health professionals have now concluded 
that prolonged exposure to the rescue site by bomb -- rescue workers 
may prove as damaging as exposure to the bomb itself. The only difference 
is they don't feel the effects until three, four shall fifes years 
after the bomb. In other words, now. People are saying it's been three 
years and I still hurt just as much today as I hurt three years ago, 
and is this going to get better? Because if it's not going to get 
any better I don't know if I can go another month or six months. And 
there are other warning signs. That same government report obtained 
by NBC news says there has been an increase in family violence within 
the Oklahoma City police department and the traumatic effects on fire 
personnel have been extensive. The divorce rate in the police department 
is up 25% to 30%. In the fire department, it's up almost 300%. Poe 
says among all rescue worgers -- We've had five suicides since the 
bombing that there's some connection to the bombing. Police sergeant 
Terry yeakey was among the first of the new victims. I was in desert 
storm and seen things there and I thought well, you know, it doesn't 
get much worse than that but I guess when it's at home it's a lot 
worse. Little more than a year after the bombing, yeakey committed 
suicide. We're control people. We want things to be orderly and when 
we come into a situation that's chaotic the first thing we want to 
do is bring order to it. Well, you couldn't quite bring any kind of 
order into this. About all you could do is manage the chaos that was 
there. Gwen Allen oversees counseling for the rescue worse workers. 
Fire department chaplain Ted Wilson knows why more rescue workers 
don't seek therapy. When you show vulnerability, to them that translates 
into weakness and you can't be weak in this kind of work and still 
survive. Mental health experts expect more victims of psychological 
trauma will be found in the ranks of bomb rescue workers. They only 
hope these new victims seek hope before it's too lamente 
</TEXT>
</DOC>