<DOC>
<DOCNO> MNB19981124.2100.1090 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> CAPTION </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
More than two weeks after Iraq narrowly avoided a U.S. military strike, 
Iraq is defying U.N. arms inspectors again, refusing to hand over 
documents about their weapons program. But they are allowing the inspectors 
access to sensitive sites -- cooperating just enough, apparently for 
now. Earlier today I spoke to nizar Hamdoon, Iraq's ambassador to 
the U.N. who will be leaving his post in a diplomatic shakeup. It's 
the regular routine shifting of posts. I've been here for over six 
years and many other ambassadors, Iraqi ambassadors abroad are also 
being transferred between different capitals or back to Baghdad so 
it's about time for me to leave back home. We're learning more about 
an assassination attempt in the last few days on one of Saddam Hussein's 
deputies. Given that and the open nature of the U.S. government's 
desire to see a new regime in your country, do you think it's a good 
idea for Iraq to be ruled by a group of people who are seemingly under 
fire from both without and within now? These are things that could 
have happened anywhere in the world. I don't think that this is connected 
to the stability of the government. You don't think the government 
of Saddam Hussein is any less stable than it has been in the past? 
No, I don't think so. Why not, given the examples I have cited? Well 
these examples, again, could happen anywhere else. It happened in 
the United States during Reagan, it happened in many other European 
and Asian countries. Any group of people could try to disrupt the 
security order in a country but this is very isolated. I don't think 
it should be taken out of context or even out of scale. Do you suspect 
the U.S. of having played any role in this assassination attempt? 
I don't know. That's premature, of course. Given the declared American 
policy of destabilizing the government there always could be a possibility 
of some linkages. Also the security council has voted now to extend 
the oil for food deal for another six months. I take it you feel that 
that's not nearly enough in terms of lifting and easing the sanctions? 
No, it's not. I don't think it's a substitute for the lifting or easing 
of the sanctions and the nature of of this package from the beginning 
as stated by the security council is very temporary. Once sanctions 
are lifted the whole package is null and void. The state department 
has once again accused Iraq of dodging its obligation. The expression 
Jamie Rubin used today was the "the dog ate the homework" excuse. 
What's your response to that accusation? No, I think we don't, if 
we just read carefully the 19-page letter that we sent yesterday to 
the security council explaining our position recording -- regarding 
the so-called documentation issues and we explain in detail on each 
and every one of the documents that were required whether this document 
is available or not. And I think if you look into that, it proves 
that Iraq is not really in any effect trying to Dodge its obligations. 
Doesn't Iraq have a credibility problem though? It seems like we've 
been down this road before of Iraq promising to cooperate and before 
the ink is dry even on the deal it seems the rules of the game are 
changing once again. Iraq has kept its word. We are still cooperating, 
receiving inspectors on a daily basis with the different UNSCOM team. 
But the credibility is more on the UNSCOM's part given what was leaked 
about the different inspectors' connection with the Israeli intelligence 
and trying to reach out to political ends rather than to technical 
ends. In the long run, what do you see happening? Do you think these 
sanctions will evering lifted as you would like them to be as long 
as Saddam Hussein is in power in Iraq? Well, as long as the U.S. keeps 
pushing the same direction, the same policy and as long as there is 
no reconsideration of that policy I only foresee more crises in the 
future. That was nizar Hamdoon, Iraqi ambassador to the United Nations. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>