<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981124.0405 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
In a series of decisions, New York state's highest court Tuesday expanded 
the opportunity for tenants to obtain damages from landlords when 
they are attacked by intruders who gain access to buildings because 
of broken or nonexistent locks. The Court of Appeals issued three 
decisions, involving five cases, that tried to broaden the circumstances 
under which landlords _ including the New York City Housing Authority 
_ can be held liable for damages when faulty building security contributes 
to criminal assaults. To collect damages in such cases under New York 
law, a tenant must convince a jury that the landlord was negligent 
in maintaining building security and that the assailants were outsiders 
who got into the building specifically because the door locks were 
broken or nonexistent. It is often difficult, if not impossible, to 
prove that a broken lock was directly responsible for an assault, 
that it was the ``proximate cause,'' as the principle is known in 
the law. An assailant's identity is often unknown; he might have lived 
in the building or been visiting someone, or he might have followed 
a tenant through a locked door. State appeals courts in recent years 
have generally limited landlords' liability in such cases. But the 
thrust of most of the court's rulings Tuesday was to make it easier 
for tenants to collect damages from landlords, even when the identity 
of an assailant is unknown. The most significant case involved Norma 
Burgos, who lived in a privately owned building on West 182nd Street 
in Manhattan. Ms. Burgos was robbed and beaten by two men who pushed 
into her apartment when she opened her door to go out one afternoon. 
Ms. Burgos said that locks on the front and back doors of her building 
were broken and that she had not known her assailants. The owners 
of the building, Aqueduct Realty Corp., moved to have the case dismissed 
because Ms. Burgos could not prove conclusively that her assailants 
were strangers who had entered the building uninvited. The trial court 
denied the landlord's motion to dismiss, but a state appeals court 
reversed the ruling, throwing out the case. In a unanimous decision, 
the Court of Appeals reversed the appellate decision, reinstating 
Ms. Burgos' case. While the court did not decide whether the landlord 
was liable, it said Ms. Burgos had offered enough information to enable 
that decision to be made by a jury. Ms. Burgos' assertions ``are sufficient 
to raise a triable issue of fact as to whether the assailants were 
intruders who entered the building through a negligently maintained 
door,'' Chief Justice Judith Kaye wrote. A related case was brought 
on behalf of a 12-year-old girl from the Bronx, who was raped and 
sodomized by an unidentified man who had entered her building in a 
city housing project by walking through a back door that could not 
be closed or locked. A jury found that the New York City Housing Authority 
was liable for damages, but the judge dismissed the case because the 
girl could not prove that her assailant was an intruder. A state appeals 
court affirmed the decision, saying that just because the victim did 
not know the rapist was insufficient proof that he was an intruder. 
The Court of Appeals reversed the appellate decision Tuesday, and 
ordered the case returned to state Supreme Court. Kaye said there 
was significant evidence that the rapist was an intruder. He was seen 
entering the building through the broken and unlocked door, she wrote. 
He made no attempt to conceal his identity when he rode on an elevator 
with the victim and other residents, and he did not select a floor. 
He simply followed the young woman when she exited at her floor. Even 
if an assailant is not identified, Kaye wrote, a tenant can successfully 
sue a landlord for negligence over an assault ``if the evidence renders 
it more likely or more reasonable than not that the assailant was 
an intruder who gained access to the premises through a negligently 
maintained entrance.'' But in another case decided Tuesday, the court 
upheld lower court rulings that found that the Housing Authority was 
not responsible for the sexual assault and robbery of a Manhattan 
girl, 17. Even though the front door of the girl's building in a city 
housing project had no lock _ and even though her attacker was clearly 
an intruder _ the court found that the Housing Authority's negligence 
had not caused the assault. The attacker was a serial rapist who had 
assaulted women in many buildings, including some that had been locked, 
the court said in a 5-1 ruling. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>