<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981124.0247 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
It took nerve for Moby Grape to start with ``Hey Grandma'' at Wetlands 
on Thursday night. When Moby Grape recorded the song in 1967, it was 
a come-on to a hippie girl in granny glasses. But now, with gray in 
the musicians' hair, Moby Grape could be chasing a real grandma. The 
song declares, ``This time 'round, everything's upside-down'' and 
so it was. The music created by brash young men three decades ago 
sounded almost as eccentric and vital now as it did when it was written. 
The weekend was bracketed by two long-lost bands from the psychedelic 
era: Moby Grape on Thursday and Friday at Wetlands and the Pretty 
Things at Coney Island High on Sunday, where the band concluded the 
three-day Cave Stomp '98, a celebration of 1960s-style garage rock. 
Both bands left behind half-forgotten psychedelic masterpieces: Moby 
Grape's 1967 debut album, ``Moby Grape'' (Columbia) and the Pretty 
Things' 1968 ``S.F. Sorrow'' (Snapper), the first full-length rock 
opera. And as fate would have it, both bands showed how fragile the 
psychedelic moment was. The songs that were left behind _ with their 
fractured logic, sonic experiments and airborne whimsy _ now seem 
as inspired and preposterous as hallucinations. Moby Grape was the 
ill-starred band among the Summer of Love hopefuls. It held five songwriters 
who were also first-rate instrumentalists and singers. Like the Grateful 
Dead, the band dipped into country, blues and soul; like the Jefferson 
Airplane, which included Skip Spence before he joined Moby Grape, 
it had a folky side, too. Moby Grape also had a bungling record label, 
a manager who tied the band in legal knots and a penchant for trashed 
hotel rooms and prodigious drug use. The band fell apart after its 
third album, ``Moby Grape '69,'' though it regrouped sporadically 
afterward. In 1995, the original members wrested control of the Moby 
Grape name from the band's former manager. By then, Moby Grape's two 
most innovative songwriters, Spence and Bob Mosley, had descended 
into schizophrenia. Spence is still under residential care, unable 
to perform, while Mosley was homeless in the mid-1990s. But he rejoined 
the band for its previous New York show in August 1997. At Wetlands, 
the band included Mosley on bass and two of Moby Grape's original 
guitarists, Jerry Miller and Peter Lewis, joined by two other San 
Francisco stalwarts, Sam Andrews (from Big Brother and the Holding 
Company) on guitar and James Preston (from the Sons of Champlin) on 
drums. It started with a short set of the band's most familiar songs, 
then returned for obscurities and jams. Many of the songs have the 
easygoing, countryish tone and fanned-out harmonies that the Grateful 
Dead would arrive at on ``Workingman's Dead''; others, like Spence's 
``Omaha,'' have the dance-party exuberance that current jam bands 
try to reconstitute. The songs tend to extremes: either utterly optimistic 
or bitter and desolate. While some of Moby Grape's songs, like the 
tender ballad ``8:05,'' are perfect examples of standard genres, Spence 
and Mosley often skewed ordinary structures, as Mosley did in ``Sitting 
and Watching,'' which moves in and out of waltz time as the singer 
tries to fight off hopelessness. Mosley was stone-faced most of his 
time onstage, but with that song, he unleashed the dramatic tenor 
he brought to Moby Grape in the 1960s. The singers' voices aren't 
as clear as they were, but the music has kept its instrumental spark. 
With the guitarists in charge, songs that were condensed to three 
minutes for LPs made room for solos that reveal Miller as one of San 
Francisco's outstanding, uncelebrated lead guitarists. Moving from 
the jabs of Chicago blues to the bends and curls of country to jazzy 
parallel-octave lines to the quivering high leads of psychedelia, 
he gave his solos a clear narrative line; Lewis engaged him with finger-picking 
and wiry lead phrases. Their byplay was pure San Francisco, now unconnected 
to youthful excesses; the songs were enduring period pieces. The Pretty 
Things' psychedelic phase was brief but lofty. The band was founded 
in 1963 by the singer Phil May and Dick Taylor, a guitarist who left 
the early Rolling Stones. Like the Stones, the Pretty Things found 
in American blues and rhythm-and-blues an outlet for all the raunchy, 
aggressive impulses that English culture repressed. The band still 
boasts of its members' 61 convictions for offenses like assault with 
a deadly weapon, inciting to riot and setting fire to an airplane. 
They detoured into psychedelia; a 1965 single, ``L.S.D.,'' was banned 
by the BBC. Suddenly, they revealed that they could write more than 
three chords and offer more than threats and come-ons. And then after 
``S.F. Sorrow'' flopped commercially they moved back into blues-rock 
with slicker flourishes before disbanding in 1976. They have had frequent 
reunions, but had not appeared in New York since the mid-1970s. At 
Coney Island High, the Pretty Things' psychedelia and blues-rock converged. 
The band's 1966 lineup _ five men in their 50s wearing jackets and 
ties _ tore into its old boogies and blues, with slicing solos from 
Taylor, honky-tonk keyboards and wailing harmonica from John Povey 
and reedy, melodic growls from May. They could easily challenge the 
current Rolling Stones for rowdy energy. They still drove the riffs 
hard when they turned to four songs from ``S.F. Sorrow'': odd tunes 
with glimpses of Indian modality, Beatles harmonies and elaborate 
suitelike structures and antecedents for bands like Led Zeppelin and 
Jethro Tull, which would turn psychedelic impulses into exacting structures. 
And when the Pretty Things charged into ``L.S.D.,'' based on a one-chord 
garage-blues riff, they stretched it into a furious, surging acid-rocker, 
an urgent amalgam of the Stones, early Pink Floyd and late-1960s Who. 
``It's all I want/It's all I need!'' May proclaimed, over whooshing 
organ and a tidal-wave crescendo. He was invoking an era of audacity 
and innocent innovation that not even pharmaceuticals could bring 
back. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>