<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981124.0201 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
In ``Savior,'' Dennis Quaid has the role of his career as a hard-bitten 
American mercenary fighting for the Serbian side in the Bosnian war. 
The actor's familiar rakish smile has faded into the hollow-eyed gaze 
of a weather-beaten soldier who long ago discarded his humanity in 
the muck of some forgotten battlefield. Although the movie, directed 
by Serbian filmmaker Peter Antonijevic, is set in the former Yugoslavia, 
it has no interest in exploring the history of conflict in the Balkans, 
and it refuses to take sides, or even to name sides. As Quaid's character, 
Guy, perilously makes his way through the war-torn countryside, the 
film portrays a land whose people, regardless of ethnicity, have been 
reduced to animalistic survival tactics by the violence that has devastated 
the region. The war has turned seemingly ordinary people into potential 
murderers, rapists and torturers. And the movie's unblinking scenes 
of atrocities are among the most graphic and upsetting ever shown 
in a commercial film. In one scene, a woman in her final weeks of 
pregnancy is thrown to the ground and repeatedly kicked in the stomach 
by a sadistic young soldier. In another, a group of civilians rounded 
up by a troop of soldiers are lined up one by one and clobbered over 
the head with a mallet while the commanding officer calmly shaves 
in a mirror. Prolonged just enough to make you wish the camera would 
turn away, these scenes rub your face in the horror to a degree that 
few movies have dared. The battle scenes in ``Saving Private Ryan'' 
may be gorier, but they don't convey anything close to the intensity 
of cruelty and hatred that are so palpable in the scenes of torture 
and butchery in ``Savior.'' If these scenes build into a powerful 
antiwar statement, in other ways the movie feels dramatically strained. 
That's because ``Savior,'' for all its surface realism, is essentially 
an allegory of dehumanization and redemption. It wants more than anything 
to counteract the horror with nobility. As Guy awakens by degrees 
to his own capacity for compassion, the fable of a killer turned humanitarian 
often feels like a sentimental contrivance. The opening scene finds 
Guy in Paris where he is working in some unspecified military capacity. 
At a hasty meeting in a restaurant with his wife and young son, he 
is distracted and neglectful. Minutes after he leaves them, a terrorist 
explosion destroys the restaurant. Guy rushes back to find his wife 
and child dead in the street. In a cold, blind fury, Guy enters a 
nearby Islamic temple and shoots all the Muslims praying inside. After 
committing mass murder, he has no choice but to disappear, and he 
and his best friend, Dominic (Stellan Skarsgard), who witnessed the 
killings, escape into the French Foreign Legion. The story jumps ahead 
again. Guy is in Bosnia fighting for the Serbs. One day while witnessing 
a fellow soldier (Sergej Trifunovic) viciously brutalizing a pregnant 
Serbian woman who was raped in a prison camp, he is suddenly overcome 
with revulsion. When the woman, Vera (Natasa Ninkovic), goes into 
labor, he helps her deliver a baby girl whom she initially rejects. 
The remainder of the movie follows the threesome's journey to a safe 
harbor. ``Savior'' is the story of two people who have been dehumanized 
by war reaffirming the basic human connections without which civilization 
couldn't continue. Guy, who has spent years devoured by bitterness, 
finds a reason to live in trying to save the baby. Vera, who turns 
out to speak fluent English, also emerges from unspeakable trauma 
with a tentative will to survive. Robert Orr's biting dialogue and 
Quaid's stoic, dry-eyed performance do their best to undercut the 
more maudlin aspects of this redemptive fable. And despite its lurking 
sentimentality, the movie does its excruciating job. It conveys the 
nihilistic essence of war with the force of a kick in the gut. PRODUCTION 
NOTES: `SAVIOR' Directed by Peter Antonijevic; written by Robert Orr; 
director of photography, Ian Wilson; edited by Gabriella Cristiani 
and Ian Crafford; music by David Robbins; produced by Oliver Stone 
and Janet Yang; released by Lions Gate Films. Running time: 116 minutes. 
Rating: ``Savior'' is rated R (Under 17 requires accompanying parent 
or adult guardian). It has several scenes of extreme violence and 
cruelty. CAST: Dennis Quaid (Guy), Nastassja Kinski (Maria), Stellan 
Skarsgard (Dominic), Natasa Ninkovic (Vera), Sergej Trifunovic (Goran), 
Neboisa Glogovac (Vera's Brother) and Vesna Trivalic (Woman on Bus). 
</TEXT>
</DOC>