<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981124.0277 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Flailing his arms was the only sign of distress that 9-year-old James 
William Tellasmon was able to send before he disappeared under the 
ocean waters Saturday while on an outing with his mother and a family 
friend at Vero Beach. Monday, the Medical Examiner's office had uncovered 
the reason for the mysterious disappearance of the boy: James was 
killed by ``a large shark'' in an attack that experts say is the first 
such fatality on the United States shoreline in more than 20 years. 
Twenty minutes after James, of Vero Beach, disappeared, police and 
Coast Guard units began searching for him. It was not until 7:22 a.m. 
Sunday that the boy's body, headless and armless, was found by a team 
of fire rescue divers. The authorities have not yet determined what 
type of shark attacked the boy and it was not clear whether the boy 
drowned after the shark pulled him under water or whether the decapitation 
occurred while he was still alive. More damage to the body may have 
come from other fish scavenging off the shark's prey. `'`The body 
was in poor shape and had considerable damage,'' said Vero Beach Police 
Chief Jim Gabbard. `'All we recovered were the legs and torso of the 
boy.'' In his report, Dr. Frederick Hobin, the district medical examiner, 
said that the body was identified based on the circumstances in which 
it was found and because several witnesses were present at the time 
of the attack. James was found close to where he was last seen, in 
shallow water, police said. The last recorded death attributed to 
a shark took place in Florida's Panhandle in 1988 and it involved 
a swimmer diving off a boat in deep waters far from shore. A recorded 
shoreline fatality such as James' had not occurred in the U.S. since 
1976, said George Burgess, the director of the International Shark 
Attack File at the Florida Museum of Natural History in Gainesville. 
Florida leads the nation in the number of shark attacks per year, 
between 15 and 25, but the state also has the highest estimated number 
of swimmers, so the statistical probability of getting attacked by 
a shark is minute, Burgess said. Between 1959 and 1988, 12 people 
were killed from shark attacks in 23 states, compared with 1,505 who 
died after being struck by lightning, according to statistics compiled 
by Shark Attack File. The attack came at a time of year when small 
fish fleeing the cooling northern waters migrate south and, in a Darwinian 
chain of survival, are followed by their predators, larger fish, who 
in turn are closely shadowed by several species of shark. Yet an attack 
this vicious is still rare, Burgess said, since in most encounters 
between sharks and humans, the fish that bite a limb normally release 
it once they find they have not targeted their usual prey. Two weeks 
ago, Andy Capak, a 13-year-old who was surfing not far from where 
last week's fatality occurred, was bitten on his right leg by a shark. 
The shark immediately released his leg, but the boy's wound required 
20 stitches, police said. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>