<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981124.0209 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
For an intellectual never to have written a major book, a magisterial 
treatment of some large subject, would normally be a disqualification 
for the Great Thinkers' Hall of Fame, measured by things like frequency 
of mention in The New York Review of Books. But when Isaiah Berlin 
died last year at 88, it was clear from the testimonials, his knighthood, 
his long list of prizes and the endurance of his influence that a 
major figure had passed from the scene; this despite the fact that 
Berlin wrote mostly essays and gave lectures, leaving behind a rather 
meager production of books. In this admirable, clearheaded and readable 
biography, Michael Ignatieff explains not only why Berlin is celebrated, 
but also why the celebration is justified. Berlin's best-known essay 
was probably ``The Hedgehog and the Fox,'' in which he breaks down 
writers and thinkers into two categories: those who know many things 
(foxes) and those who know one big thing (hedgehogs). Berlin, Ignatieff 
writes, seemed at first glance to be ``an archfox _ nimble, cunning, 
quick-witted, darting from subject to subject, eluding pursuit.'' 
In fact, Ignatieff continues, Berlin's contribution involved his mastery 
of one big thing, namely ``the theme of freedom and its betrayal.'' 
His place in the 20th-century pantheon of political philosophers came 
from the clarity and the narrowness of his concept of freedom, forged 
in the experience of freedom's battle with fascism and communism. 
The most important of Berlin's essays in this sense is ``Two Concepts 
of Liberty,'' delivered first as a lecture at Oxford in 1958. That 
essay distinguished between ``negative liberty,'' which is letting 
people alone, and ``positive liberty,'' which, while theoretically 
aimed at emancipating human potential, has ended up putting coercive 
power into the hands of despots. In describing Berlin's contribution, 
Ignatieff has produced a model biography of the man of ideas. He lucidly 
explicates Berlin's work even as he draws a lively and vivid portrait 
of a major figure whose crooked path from Russian obscurity to Oxfordian 
fame was full of events, encounters with interesting others and even 
a bit of skulduggery. Berlin was born in Riga, Latvia, in 1909 to 
a family of prosperous timber merchants, and while he experienced 
at close hand the upheavals of war and revolution, he escaped almost 
all terrible personal hardship. After a short time in St. Petersburg 
following the Bolshevik seizure of power in Russia in 1917, the Berlin 
family emigrated to England. Berlin, who was 12 at the time, was overweight 
and Jewish and spoke no English: problems in the England of that era. 
Soon, however, he had become a charmer, a talker with a knack for 
epigrams and an ability to insinuate himself into powerful circles. 
``He became a master at fitting in,'' Ignatieff writes, ``at the price 
of lingering self-dislike.'' Berlin went on to a brilliant career 
at Oxford, election to a prestigious fellowship at All Souls College 
(the first Jew to be so honored), and friendships with a glittering 
cast of characters. Ignatieff describes revealing meetings and exchanges 
with, among many others, Victor Rothschild, Virginia Woolf, T.S. Eliot, 
David Ben-Gurion, Ludwig Wittgenstein, Sigmund Freud, John Maynard 
Keynes, Boris Pasternak, John F. Kennedy and Winston Churchill. Some 
of Berlin's friendships and encounters came out of his rapid rise 
into the British intellectual stratosphere. He was not only a popular 
teacher and lecturer at Oxford but also a regular on the British Broadcasting 
Corp., which broadcast many of his speeches. He also came to the attention 
of the British-U.S. political elite by spending World War II in Washington, 
reporting to London on U.S. politics and public opinion while, in 
semi-clandestine, near double-agent fashion, advancing the cause of 
Zionism. The most moving encounter recounted by Ignatieff was that 
between Berlin and the great Russian poet Anna Akhmatova. Berlin, 
who had the advantage of speaking Russian, was sent to Moscow in 1945 
to write a report on Soviet foreign policy. Instead, he wrote the 
first detailed report on Stalin's war against Russian culture, one 
infused with a tragic understanding of the terrible fate of the Russian 
literati under Stalin. He met three times with Akhmatova, who lived 
under constant surveillance in a ``bare and denuded room'' in Leningrad 
and was ``consigned to darkness and purgatory'' by Stalin and his 
henchmen, partly as a result of those meetings. Berlin's experience 
with Akhmatova and the other Russian poets, who always ``remained 
the gold standard, the touchstone of moral integrity'' for him, stayed 
with him and became the essential element in his formulation of the 
two concepts of liberty. A wise restraint is central to Berlin's thinking, 
an acceptance of the fact that tragedy inheres in all choice, because 
there is no choice that leads to the solution of all problems. An 
anti-utopian point of view, in other words, required a certain resignation 
to social imperfection and the conviction that the first task of government 
is similar to the first task of physicians, to do no harm. What the 
age calls for, Berlin wrote, ``is not (as we are often told) more 
faith, or stronger leadership, or more scientific organization.'' 
He continued, ``Rather it is the opposite _ less Messianic ardor, 
more enlightened skepticism, more toleration of idiosyncrasies.'' 
Or, as Ignatieff summarizes, ``It was individual freedom, to choose 
well or ill, which had to be defended, not some ultimate vision of 
the human good.'' This basic idea, this one big thing, was attacked 
on all sides for justifying a kind of right-wing laissez-faire, for 
failing to condemn harshly enough the atrocities of communism. But 
it would be difficult in light of the experience of the century to 
come up with a clearer and more humane political credo than the one 
we owe to Isaiah Berlin. PUBLICATION NOTES ``ISAIAH BERLIN: A Life'' 
By Michael Ignatieff Illustrated. 356 pages. Metropolitan Books/Henry 
Holt &AMP; Co. $30. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>