<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981124.0049 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Onstage between songs during a recent concert at the Civic Center 
here, Lyle Lovett was seeking a way to explain to the audience why 
he likes coming to Madison. It's friendly, he said. Accommodating. 
That afternoon, he said, he and his girlfriend were walking along 
State Street, the main thoroughfare connecting the University of Wisconsin 
campus and the State Capitol. ``We met a nice gentleman,'' Lovett 
said in his familiar deadpan. ``And he agreed to stop reciting a poem 
to us for five bucks.'' It was a good line, capturing Madison's wry 
and lively street life. And in a backhand, unintended way, it was 
also an apt characterization of the cultural life of this city of 
some 200,000 people, which is bursting with arts groups that need 
a home and have their hands out. And though, unlike the street poet, 
the groups are generally not so willing to sell their silence, they 
have, like him, recently had a windfall. In July a local businessman, 
W. Jerome Frautschi, announced that he would donate $50 million for 
the construction of an arts district downtown. The extraordinary gift 
_ equal to about one-third of Madison's annual tax revenue, not to 
mention more than half of the annual budget of the National Endowment 
for the Arts _ is to be used for renovation and building. It immediately 
brought forth wish lists from dozens of local arts groups: for exhibition 
spaces to concert halls to dance studios to a reading room for poets 
to a state-of-the-art movie theater for archival films. ``When we 
heard about the gift, we immediately started dreaming,'' said Sandra 
Madden, executive director of the Madison Symphony Orchestra, which 
plays 16 concerts a year in the 2,200-seat Oscar Mayer Theater, a 
hall, in the city-owned Civic Center, that is acknowledged to have 
poor acoustics. Indeed, it is more than evident that new performance 
spaces are needed here. The Oscar Mayer is booked nearly every night 
of the year for the local symphony, the opera, occasionally the ballet 
and a myriad of traveling musicals, dance troupes and road shows by 
the likes of Lovett and his band. The 330-seat Isthmus Playhouse, 
the Civic Center's other theater, can barely contain the yearly schedule 
of the Madison Repertory Theater, the city's only Equity company, 
whose production of ``How I Learned to Drive'' ran through Nov. 22, 
and CTM, a community troupe that produces mostly for children. The 
troupe is getting less than a week of stage rehearsals before its 
``Christmas Carol'' opens on Nov. 27. There is no theater in town 
between the two in size, and a house of 500 to 1,000 seats is hungrily 
anticipated. Responding to the squeeze, six other theater groups recently 
leased a decaying movie house, the Esquire Theater, across Capitol 
Square from the Civic Center and began raising the money to renovate 
it. The city considered, then rejected as architecturally unfeasible, 
a proposal to turn another theater, the Orpheum, into a music hall; 
now a stir has arisen over the proposal of a private group to turn 
it into an Imax house. There are theaters and performance spaces on 
campus, rentable on occasion, but the university keeps them pretty 
busy. Of the city's two art museums, the Elvehjem on campus, with 
its eclectic collection, is planning a much needed expansion, and 
the Madison Art Center, also housed in the Civic Center, recently 
had to remove paintings from an upstairs gallery in order to hold 
a dinner for trustees. Even commercial sites for rock-and-roll are 
scarce these days, odd for a university town. But one place burned 
down in 1996, and a handful of others have been shut for noise and 
liquor ordinance violations. Coffeehouses, more than clubs, now engage 
bands. Frautschi (rhymes with grouchy, the family likes to say), 67, 
recently retired as vice chairman of Webcrafters, an educational printing 
company, but the money for his gift came from his investment in the 
Pleasant Co., the makers of the American Girl doll collection. Frautschi's 
wife, Pleasant Rowland, founded the company, which was bought in June 
by Mattel, the toymaker, for $700 million. An affable man with a direct 
and modest manner, Frautschi is an admittedly middle-brow arts appreciator, 
with a fondness for the symphony and the melodies of Andrew Lloyd 
Webber. His family settled in Madison in the 1860s, and he is unabashed 
in his loyalty to the city. Asked the obvious question _ why the arts? 
_ he responded that hospitals and other social services should be 
the focus of government. ``I've felt all along that the public sector, 
the taxpayer, has the responsibility to take care of those in need,'' 
he said. ``The arts shouldn't necessarily be a priority for the taxpayer, 
so it behooves the private sector to step in. To have real quality 
of life in a city, the arts have to be part of it.'' Two years ago, 
he paid for a study of the arts in Madison; the recommendations were 
unambiguous. ``The need for new, improved or expanded cultural space 
in the city of Madison is real and profound,'' the study said. And 
this dovetailed with Frautschi's belief that downtown Madison, particularly 
the State Street area, ``could use a face lift.'' In 1997, he started 
the Overture Foundation, to be dedicated to local philanthropy, and 
when his wife's company was sold, he took $50 million and earmarked 
it for the new arts district. Then he hired the city's planning and 
development director, George E. Austin, to direct what has come to 
be known as the Overture project. What is most remarkable about the 
project is how open-ended it is. At the very least, the gift has created 
an opportunity for the city and its arts community that is unusual, 
if not unique. In most cities, after all, development plans are in 
place before the money is. Here, the challenge is the reverse. The 
money is there; how should it be spent? ``I don't believe if we waited 
for the public sector to do something like this, it would ever happen,'' 
said Sue Bauman, the Mayor. ``It's going to be a catalyst for a new, 
sparkling _ I don't know what.'' Downtown Madison has never been exactly 
downtrodden, but it has long been sluggish and undistinguished, its 
architecture dominated by the dome of the Capitol, a magnificent building 
dating from 1909, now 10 years into a 14-year, $130 million renovation. 
Recently, redevelopment has been creeping like kudzu along ``the isthmus,'' 
the strip of land that connects the Capitol and the university and 
separates the city's two large lakes. New building has been spurred 
by two prominent projects: the Kohl Center, a campus arena, and Monona 
Terrace, a lakeside convention center based on a Frank Lloyd Wright 
design. (A plaque on the roof commemorates the singer Otis Redding, 
who died on Dec. 10, 1967, when his plane, arriving for a Madison 
gig, went down in Lake Monona.) Now, with the Frautschi gift, city 
leaders anticipate new theaters and gallery spaces that will generate 
stores and restaurants and increase tourism. The entire block on which 
the Civic Center sits has been designated for the project. ``It should 
go way beyond the arts, affecting housing and commerce in the area,'' 
said Lynn Eich, executive director of the Dane County Cultural Affairs 
Commission, which, with both public and private foundation money, 
makes grants to local arts groups of more than $300,000 a year. ``I'm 
hoping the whole profile of downtown will change, and we'll see some 
exciting architecture in the mix.'' (Government financing for the 
arts in Madison is relatively poor. The city supports the operation 
of the Civic Center with about $1 million a year but otherwise does 
not include arts support in the budget; the State of Wisconsin ranks 
40th in per capita dollars appropriated for the arts.) Of course, 
to change a city profile is to court controversy, and though no one 
can actually criticize a gift of $50 million, there is some interesting 
grumbling going on. This city has, after all, been known as a home 
for counterculture as much as culture. ``When I hear `$50 million,' 
I think `synthetic art implant,''' said Scott Dikkers, the editor 
of The Onion, a satirical newspaper with a growing national reputation. 
``It seems like it's going to be art for 40- and 50-year-olds.'' Dikkers, 
who is 33, and others made the point that Madison's cultural life 
has long been fed by students and recent graduates, and that the new 
arts district would swivel the city away from its nature. ``This town 
is always trying to be bigger than it is,'' said John Krewson, a writer 
for The Onion. ``I've lived here all my life, and giving $50 million 
to Madison for the arts is like giving $50,000 to a student for a 
car. He'll go out and buy a Camaro. The town doesn't know what to 
do with that much money.'' And then there are those who are anticipating 
being left out, particularly easy to find among the city's many rock 
musicians. ``I wonder how much this has to do with the arts,'' said 
John Davis, 54, who has been playing guitar in Madison blues bands 
for 30 years and who was among many in town who wondered whether the 
Frautschi money would be better spent on artists rather than buildings. 
``It has to do with improving the city. I'm not against concerts and 
theater, but the art I'm interested in is produced in smoky clubs.'' 
Another inevitable question is what will happen when it is decided 
how the money will be spent. As it turns out, $50 million is not that 
much; proposals made to the Overture board would already cost out 
at more than twice that, said Robert B. D'Angelo, director of the 
city's Department of Public Facilities, who runs the Civic Center 
and is chairman of Overture's advisory committee. This has engendered 
partnerships among arts groups that would ordinarily fend for themselves 
but are now trying to figure out how, say, one new theater might accommodate 
audiences for dance, theater and music. Indeed, the mantra among arts 
officials is that the Overture project is not about arts organizations: 
``It's about audiences.'' On the other hand, everyone is aware that 
many groups will not get what they ask for, and disappointment is 
bound to be rampant. Privately, many arts officials say they expect 
Frautschi to give even more money after the plans for the district 
are formalized. Even if true, this seems at least as audacious as 
Lyle Lovett's street poet, proof of the adage that no good deed goes 
unpunished. Frautschi said he meant the gift almost as a challenge 
grant, to encourage local arts groups to step up their programming, 
and other local donors to step up their giving; new quarters mean 
greater audience expectations, after all. And he acknowledged that 
his main worry is that too many demands will be placed on his gift. 
D'Angelo put it more succinctly. ``Right now, we're in the honeymoon 
phase,'' he said. ``People can look at the gift and still say, `It's 
for me.' We haven't ticked anyone off yet.'' 
</TEXT>
</DOC>