<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981124.0447 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Following is the text of Attorney General Janet Reno's notification 
to a special federal court Tuesday that she had decided against seeking 
appointment of an independent counsel to investigate the campaign 
fund-raising activities of Vice President Al Gore: On. Aug. 26, 1998, 
I notified this court of the initiation of a preliminary investigation 
of Vice President of the United States Albert Gore Jr. The preliminary 
investigation has now been concluded, and I have determined that there 
are no reasonable grounds to believe that further investigation is 
warranted of the matters that were under investigation. Therefore, 
appointment of an independent counsel is not being sought. In accordance 
with the requirements of 28 U.S.C. (SS) 592 (b), this notification 
will summarize the information received and the results of the preliminary 
investigation. This preliminary investigation explored the question 
of whether there is sufficient evidence to warrant further investigation 
into whether the Vice President violated Federal law, 18 U.S.C. (SS) 
1001, when he told attorneys and investigators last fall that he did 
not know, at the time he made fund-raising telephone calls from his 
West Wing office, that the beneficiary of the solicitations, the media 
campaign run by the Democratic National Committee, was funded in part 
with Federal money, and that he believed at the time of his telephone 
calls that Federal money contributions to the D.N.C. were limited 
to $2,000. INFORMATION RECEIVED a. The 1997 Investigation In the fall 
of 1997, the department conducted a preliminary investigation into 
the question of whether the Vice President may have violated 18 U.S.C. 
(SS) 607 when he made fund-raising telephone calls from his White 
House office (hereinafter, 1997 investigation). The 1997 investigation 
led to my conclusion that there were no grounds to seek appointment 
of an independent counsel for two independent reasons: first, the 
overwhelming weight of the evidence supported the Vice President's 
statement that he was soliciting soft-money contributions, outside 
the scope of Section 607's ban on political fund-raising from the 
Federal workplace, when he made the telephone calls, and second, established 
departmental policy precluded prosecutions under Section 607 in the 
absence of aggravating circumstances, such as coercion, that were 
absent there. In the course of the 1997 investigation, we interviewed 
the Vice President. The Vice President explained that he believed 
he was soliciting soft money when he was making the telephone calls. 
The Vice President further explained that the telephone solicitations 
were intended to raise funds for the D.N.C.'s media fund, which financed 
a series of so-called ``issue advertisements'' that ran during late 
1995 and 1996. He further explained that he believed at the time he 
made the calls that the D.N.C. media campaign was financed entirely 
with soft money, and that donors were limited to $2,000 in hard-money 
contributions. This belief was erroneous, but as a result, when he 
requested large contributions to the media fund, he believed that 
he could only have been requesting soft-money contributions. The Vice 
President understood that there was a hard-money component to the 
D.N.C.'s overall budget and that some of its activities had to be 
financed with hard money, but believed that because the media fund 
involved so-called ``issue ads,'' it could be financed entirely with 
soft money. We explored this question further with the Vice President 
at the time, because we had obtained a number of memoranda addressed 
to the Vice President, among others, that mentioned the fact that 
the media campaign was funded with both hard and soft money, and we 
knew that a Nov. 21, 1995, D.N.C. budget meeting focused on the budget 
for the media fund. The agenda for the Nov. 21 meeting suggested that 
the amount of funding for the media campaign and how to raise it was 
to have been a topic of discussion at the meeting, which we knew was 
attended by the Vice President . The Vice President stated that he 
did not recall a discussion at this or any other meeting about the 
D.N.C.'s specific need for both hard and soft money in late 1995 to 
keep the advertisements on the air. The Vice President said that he 
believed that the fund-raising phone calls probably were discussed 
during the meeting and that the general topic of the media fund budget 
being increased was raised and discussed. As for the memoranda that 
reflected a hard-money component to the media fund, the Vice President 
said that as a rule he did not read memoranda on these topics, particularly 
from this author. This general practice was corroborated in the course 
of separate interviews with members of the Vice President's staff. 
The Vice President's statements about his beliefs and intentions were 
a factor in my final conclusion in 1997 with respect to the alleged 
violations of 18 U.S.C. (SS) 607, although a relatively minor one. 
Far more weighty was the substantial evidence derived from interviews 
of the donors themselves which substantiated my conclusion that they 
were in fact solicited for large soft-money contributions to the D.N.C., 
to support the DNC's media campaign. b. The New Information On July 
27, 1998, long after the conclusion of the 1997 investigation, the 
Vice President's counsel provided the department with a six-page set 
of newly discovered documents, responsive to document requests we 
had made during the 1997 investigation. The documents were a copy 
of a set of documents already in our possession, which were distributed 
at the November 1995 meeting referenced above. The copies provided 
by the Vice President's counsel, however, included handwritten notes 
by a member of the Vice President's staff that suggested that the 
hard-money component to the media fund may have been expressly mentioned 
during the November 1995 meeting, which was attended by the Vice President. 
Specifically, the notes _ which set forth ``65 percent soft/35 percent 
hard'' opposite the term ``media fund'' _ appear to reflect a phrase 
that may have been used at the meeting to describe the approximate 
proportions of hard and soft money used by the D.N.C. to purchase 
television ads during this period. The notes also include what may 
be a statement of the hard-money limit for gifts to the D.N.C. Specifically, 
the note just below the ``65 percent/35 percent'' includes what appears 
to be an attempt to explain that soft-money contributions are ``corporate 
or anything over $20K from an individual.'' In addition, while not 
clearly written, a second notation that appears to say ``hard limit 
$20K'' appears on page 2 of the set of documents. These new documents, 
then, raised some new questions concerning the Vice President's statements 
about his understanding of the D.N.C.'s efforts to fund the media 
campaign. The notes suggested that during the November 1995 meeting, 
both the fact that the hard-money limit on donations to the D.N.C. 
was $20,000 and that the media campaign was funded by a mix of hard 
and soft money may have been discussed in the Vice President's presence. 
This could give rise to an inference that his subsequent statements 
that he believed at the time that hard-money donations to the D.N.C. 
were limited to $2,000 and that the media campaign was funded only 
by soft money may have been false. I therefore initiated a preliminary 
investigation of this matter to fully explore the evidence concerning 
the Vice President's knowledge and intent. APPLICABLE LAW The false-statement 
statute provides, in pertinent part: (W)hoever, in any matter within 
the jurisdiction of the executive, legislative or judicial branch 
of the Government of the United States, knowingly and willfully . 
. . makes any materially false, fictitious, or fraudulent statement 
or representation shall be (guilty of a felony). _ 18 U.S.C. 1001. 
To obtain a conviction under Section 1001, the Government must prove 
(1) a statement, (2) falsity, (3) materiality, (4) specific intent 
and (5) agency jurisdiction. United States v. Herring 916 F. 2d 1543, 
1546 (11th Cir. 1990), cert. denied, 500 U.S. 946 (1991). The elements 
in issue here are falsity and criminal intent; the other elements 
of the offense are not in dispute. SCOPE OF THE INVESTIGATION The 
handwritten notes alone are not sufficient to warrant a conclusion 
that the Vice President made a false statement. In an effort to determine 
whether the apparent disparity between what the Vice President told 
us he believed at the time he made the calls and what the notes indicate 
may have been said at a meeting he attended on these topics warrants 
further investigation, we interviewed the attendees of the meeting 
and others involved with these topics. These witnesses included the 
Vice President, current and former members of his staff, other current 
and former White House officials, officials of the Clinton-Gore '96 
Committee and various officers and employees of the D.N.C. Documents 
were also obtained from the White House, the D.N.C., Clinton-Gore 
'96 and others, including an affidavit from the Vice President's counsel. 
We also reviewed depositions and testimony provided by various witnesses 
in the course of previous Congressional and task force inquiries into 
various campaign fund-raising matters. Finally, we reviewed all other 
documents and evidence that might support an inference that the Vice 
President's statements were false. We were seeking to determine whether 
there was any evidence from which one might reasonably infer that 
the Vice President actually knew about the hard-money component of 
the media campaign or the $20,000 contribution limit at the time he 
made the telephone calls seeking contributions. Such an inference 
might be supported, for example, by information that these facts were 
discussed in sufficient detail and focus at the meeting that many 
other attendees specifically recall them, that the Vice President 
made comments or asked questions in the course of the discussion that 
would seem to reflect an active understanding of the details, that 
the participants recall any affirmative discussion of a need to raise 
hard money for the media fund, that the Vice President read memoranda 
that made these points or that anyone spoke directly to the Vice President 
on any occasion about the need to raise hard money for the media campaign. 
RESULTS OF INVESTIGATION As a threshold matter, the evidence we gathered 
during these interviews does support a conclusion that the Vice President 
attended a D.N.C. budget meeting on Nov. 21, 1995, and that at some 
point in the course of the meeting, the D.N.C. media fund was discussed. 
The evidence also supports a conclusion that some reference was made 
in the course of the meeting to the fact that there was a hard-money 
component to the financing of the media campaign. Fifteen individuals, 
including the President and Vice President, attended the meeting. 
All 15 were interviewed, with two exceptions: one who testified under 
oath in the course of a Congressional investigation that he had no 
recollection of the meeting, and that if he attended at all, he likely 
would have left after just a few minutes; and the President, who provided 
us with a statement that he had no independent recollection of the 
meeting. No attendees recall any particular questions or comments 
by the Vice President. No one who arrived at the meeting without a 
working knowledge of the D.N.C. financing issues left with an accurate 
understanding of the fact that both hard and soft money were necessary 
to pay for the media campaign. Only 2 of the 15 attendees at the meeting 
even recall the topic of a hard-money component to the media fund 
being raised during the meeting. While the author of the notes had 
no specific recollection of the meeting, he did confirm, based on 
his habit and practice, his belief that the words noted in his handwriting 
were things said during the meeting that he recorded as they were 
said. Reviewing his notes, this attendee could not recall who might 
have uttered the words ``65 percent soft/35 percent hard''; ``corporate 
or anything over $20K from an individual''; or ``hard-money limit 
$20K''during the meeting. He was also unable to provide an explanation 
about what each of the phrases might have meant within the context 
of the meeting. He did not recall the issue of ``hard''and ``soft''money 
being discussed by those attending but noted that these issues were 
often discussed at D.N.C. budget meetings. He was also unable to say 
whether the words were used with regard to the media fund, the D.N.C.'s 
operating budget or something else. Notably, this individual, who 
attended the meeting and was paying enough attention to what was being 
said to take verbatim notes of some points, also told us during his 
interview that he believed that the media campaign was financed entirely 
with soft money. Two attendees specifically recall references to hard 
money in connection with the media fund being made at the meeting. 
The first, a White House official, recalls that the hard-money component 
to the media fund was discussed. He also recalls a discussion of how 
much would have to be raised both in hard and in soft dollars for 
the media fund during the meeting. However, he has no specific recollection 
of any of the statements recorded in the notes. The other, a D.N.C. 
official, was the individual who made one of the quoted statements. 
He recalls answering a question about the ``spending side''of the 
media campaign by noting that the expenses were generally averaging 
``65 percent soft/35 percent hard.'' The answer, according to this 
attendee, was one sentence without any elaboration. He does not remember 
who asked the question but volunteered that he did not think it was 
the Vice President, since the Vice President did not often get into 
``that level of detail.'' He had no memory of anyone else mentioning 
hard or Federal money during this preliminary discussion of the ``spending 
side''of the media campaign. He does not recall a specific use of 
the terms hard, soft, Federal or non-Federal money during the discussion 
that centered around the ``spending side'' of the D.N.C. He did remember 
some discussion about the fact that the D.N.C. had sufficient funds 
available to borrow on their hard-money line of credit but no borrowing 
capacity on the soft-money side. There was a discussion about direct-mail 
contributions to the D.N.C. operating budget _ all in hard money _ 
that were available, if needed, for the media purchases. He recalled 
that both of these facts were mentioned as reasons why there was sufficient 
hard money on hand to keep the advertisements on the air through the 
end of the year, but that soft money would need to be raised. According 
to this witness, after these points were made at the meeting the ensuing 
conversation about the funding of the media campaign and the money 
needed to be raised by the President and Vice President would have 
been focused on the need for soft money. There is thus only weak circumstantial 
evidence of the Vice President's knowledge _ his presence at a meeting 
where the subject was briefly discussed _ which I do not believe provides 
reasonable grounds to believe that further investigation of this matter 
is warranted. Notably, others attending the meeting also left it with 
an inaccurate understanding of the funding of the media campaign. 
The range of impressions and vague misunderstandings among all the 
meeting attendees is striking, and undercuts any reasonable inference 
that mere attendance at the meeting should have served to communicate 
to the Vice President an accurate understanding of the facts. In addition 
to the total lack of direct evidence suggesting that the Vice President 
was aware of the hard-money component to the media fund, and the insubstantial 
nature of even the indirect evidence, I also find a lack of evidence 
to reasonably support a conclusion that he may have had a motive to 
falsely deny that he knew about the hard-money component. The documentary 
evidence and the testimony from involved witnesses clearly establish 
that at the time, the D.N.C. did not need to find ways of raising 
hard money in order to continue to run the advertisements. However, 
it was critically short of soft money and had used up its soft-money 
line of credit. Thus, when the Vice President was asked to help raise 
money by making telephone solicitations, the D.N.C.'s specific need 
was for soft money. In other words, the Vice President did not need 
to deny knowledge of the fact that there was a hard-money component 
to the fund in order to provide an innocent explanation for his telephone 
calls. His explanation would have been just as innocent if he had 
stated that while he knew there was a hard-money component to the 
media campaign, soft money was what was needed at the time and therefore 
that was what he was raising. In fact, such an account, unlike the 
one he gave, would have been corroborated by the documentary evidence 
that was brought to the Vice President's attention. It is also significant 
that there is evidence that this issue was specifically brought to 
the Vice President's attention before his interview with us during 
the 1997 investigation. The Vice President's attorneys have provided 
us with their sworn statement that in the course of preparing him 
for his interview, the Vice President also told them that at the time 
he made the calls he believed that the media campaign was funded entirely 
with soft money. They explained to him that this belief was not accurate, 
and pointed out to him that there were documents, addressed to him, 
in conflict with his statement. Nevertheless, they averred, he stated 
that he would have to tell us that he believed the media fund was 
all soft money because it was the truth. To summarize, it appears 
that at the time of his interview during the 1997 investigation, the 
Vice President was expressly aware that he had little to gain and 
much to lose in admitting his misconception of the true facts. In 
fact, his explanation not only led to additional inquiries during 
the 1997 investigation, because it was at odds with known documents, 
but led directly to this investigation as well. I can see no reasonable 
basis for concluding that he had a motive to tell this story if it 
were not true. As mentioned above, the Vice President also told us 
in the course of the 1997 investigation that he believed that the 
limit on hard-money contributions was $2,000, and some of the handwritten 
notes suggest that topic too may have been discussed at the November 
1995 meeting. However, while some of the 15 meeting attendees had 
a vague recollection of some of the topics of discussion, no one interviewed 
could remember the use of the note's terms ``hard limit $20K'' and 
``corporate or anything over $20K from an individual'' in this meeting. 
We thus have no evidence of what, if anything, was said, or in what 
context. Thus, with the exception of the notes themselves, the meaning 
of which is unclear, we are left with no evidence that the Vice President's 
statement that he believed the legal limit for hard money gifts to 
the D.N.C. was the same as the limit for individual candidates _ $2,000 
per election cycle _ is false. We found no independent evidence to 
suggest that the Vice President did not in fact believe that hard-money 
contributions were so limited, and his belief is plausible in light 
of his previous experience with Congressional campaigns. While it 
appears from the handwritten notes that some reference to the higher 
limit on hard-money contributions to the D.N.C. may have been made 
during the meeting, the fact that no one who attended the meeting 
recalled the statement _ and a number of other attendees reported 
the same or similar mistaken belief about the limitation on the size 
of hard-money contributions _ leads me to the conclusion that I have 
insufficient evidence to warrant further investigation as to whether 
the Vice President made a false statement on this point. As mentioned 
above, in the course of the 1997 investigation we obtained several 
memoranda addressed to the Vice President as one of several recipients, 
which contain brief internal references to the hard-money component 
to the media fund. However, as we noted at the conclusion of the 1997 
investigation, the Vice President has stated, and several members 
of his staff have confirmed, that he did not read these types of memoranda 
that dealt with D.N.C. budgetary issues. We discovered no new evidence 
during this investigation which contradicts this evidence or would 
lead me to revisit my previous conclusion that the mere existence 
of these memoranda, without any evidence that the Vice President actually 
read them, was not sufficient grounds to conclude that the Vice President 
might have been making a false statement about his knowledge of the 
hard-money component to the media fund. We were unable to establish 
whether the Vice President attended these particular meetings; indeed, 
we have been unable to establish that those two meetings were even 
held. They do not appear on either the President's or the Vice President's 
daily calendars, while other residence meetings do appear. Regular 
attendees of the residence meetings who were interviewed do not recall 
whether these particular meetings were held or, if they were held, 
whether the Vice President attended or whether these particular agenda 
items were actually discussed. Many of the attendees specifically 
stated that they do not recall the hard-money component to the media 
fund ever being discussed at the residence meetings. Given this state 
of the evidence, T conclude that there is insufficient evidence to 
reasonably conclude that the Vice President was put on notice as to 
the hard-money component to the media fund during or because of any 
discussion that may have been held on the topic in the course of the 
residence meetings. I considered with care the reasonable implications 
that might be drawn from all of this evidence _ the Vice President's 
attendance at the November 1995 meeting, the memoranda addressed to 
him and the residence meetings _ along with all other evidence and 
information available to us concerning the Vice President's understanding 
of the media fund and how it was financed, including the affidavit 
of the Vice President's counsel. Taken altogether, I find the evidence 
fails to provide any reasonable support for a conclusion that the 
Vice President may have lied. As explained above, there are no reasonable 
grounds to conclude that the November 1995 meeting would have put 
the Vice President on notice of the hard-money component of the media 
fund, there is no evidence that the Vice President actually read the 
memoranda in which the topic is mentioned (and considerable evidence 
that he did not), and there is insufficient evidence that the topic 
was addressed at the residence meetings or that the Vice President 
attended the meetings where the topic might have been raised. As a 
result, I conclude that there is no reasonable prospect that these 
facts could support a successful prosecution. Furthermore, I am unable 
to identify any additional investigation that might reasonably be 
expected to provide sufficient evidence to support a successful prosecution. 
CONCLUSION I conclude that the evidence supporting a conclusion that 
the Vice President may have provided false statements to investigators 
and attorneys during an interview in the 1997 investigation is so 
insubstantial that there are no reasonable grounds for further investigation. 
Therefore, based on the results of the above-described investigation, 
I hereby notify this court that no independent counsel should be appointed. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>