<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981124.0348 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
After engaging in one of the slowest-moving courtships ever between 
two companies, the French drug maker Rhone-Poulenc SA and Hoechst 
AG of Germany are expected to announce their merger as early as next 
week. The two drug giants have spent much of the last year discussing 
a possible deal, but have only recently begun to complete the details. 
One executive involved in the negotiations confirmed Tuesday that 
Rhone-Poulenc and Hoechst had agreed on a management team for the 
new company but remained stumped on how to structure a merger of equals. 
The problem appears to be twofold. There is a large difference in 
the market capitalizations of the two companies. If Rhone-Poulenc 
and Hoechst were to merge, the German company would control 59 percent 
of the new entity. Further complicating matters, executives at both 
companies believe the French government will reject a deal that allows 
Rhone-Poulenc's pharmaceutical holdings to be controlled by a foreign 
company. Rhone-Poulenc officials have traveled to Frankfurt, where 
Hoechst has its headquarters, to complete the negotiations, according 
to the executive, who spoke on the condition of anonymity. Once the 
structure of the deal is completed, it will be presented to both companies' 
boards. Rhone-Poulenc and Hoechst executives hope their boards will 
begin deliberations on the merger as early next week. Both companies 
declined to comment. When the deal is announced, it will rival in 
scope the three failed drug-industry mergers earlier this year. Many 
drug makers are scrambling to become life-sciences companies, with 
holdings in biotechnology, agriculture and pharmaceuticals, and a 
combination of Rhone-Poulenc and Hoechst would be the world leader. 
More important, the two companies would vault themselves to the top 
of two industries simultaneously. After being second-tier drug makers 
for years, Hoechst and Rhone-Poulenc would have $11.25 billion in 
global drug sales, a narrow second to Merck &AMP; Co., according to 
IMS Health, a consulting firm. Hoechst and Rhone-Poulenc would also 
knock off Novartis as the world's leading seller of agricultural products. 
While analysts appear irritated at the slow progress of the merger 
discussions, the companies' investors have seldom enjoyed such a robust 
ride. Even though Hoechst's American depository receipts closed yesterday 
at $45.9375, down $1.125, the company's ADRs have jumped 26 percent 
since Oct. 13. Rhone-Poulenc's ADRs, which rose 56.25 cents Tuesday 
to close at $50.9375, have increased 38 percent over the same period. 
While many analysts have been skeptical that a deal would ever be 
completed, many have begun to change their minds, given the progress 
Rhone Poulenc and Hoechst have made in the negotiations. The industry's 
three other megadeals _ involving American Home Products, SmithKline 
Beecham and Glaxo Wellcome _ failed largely because the companies 
could not agree on who should run the merged entities. Hoechst and 
Rhone-Poulenc have already agreed on several key issues. Richard Markham, 
who heads Hoechst's pharmaceuticals unit, will head the merged company's 
drug division, while Alain Godard, Rhone-Poulenc's top agribusiness 
executive, will manage the combined agrochemicals business, according 
to the executive involved in the negotiations. The combined company 
will have a management board led by Hoechst chief executive Juergen 
Dormann and a supervisory board headed by Rhone-Poulenc chief Jean-Rene 
Fourtou. It is not clear how Hoechst and Rhone-Poulenc will structure 
a merger of equals. The executives have discussed forming a holding 
company, in which Rhone-Poulenc and Hoechst would each own a 50 percent 
stake. While that will make both companies equal, it is certain to 
spark criticism among Hoechst's investors, who may feel short-changed 
by their 50 percent take. With the extended negotiations, analysts 
have been given plenty of time to scrutinize the companies' balance 
sheets. While many European and American analysts never liked the 
pairing of Hoechst with Rhone-Poulenc, they now have a growing list 
of reasons. One major concern is the heady amount of debt on both 
companies' balance sheets. Viren Mehta, a partner at Mehta Partners, 
a biopharmaceutical investment research firm in New York, calculated 
that debt minus cash and its equivalents of a combined Hoechst with 
Rhone-Poulenc would total 75 percent of its market value. European 
analysts say levels of 30 percent to 40 percent are generally acceptable. 
``Our analysis about this deal is not to do it,'' Mehta said. ``The 
two companies can't change their fundamentals. They can't seem to 
agree on the basics; that's why they're considering all these structures. 
If they decide on a holding company, that structure is just inherently 
inefficient.'' Even though a combined Hoechst and Rhone-Poulenc will 
be the world's second-leading drug seller, many analysts doubt the 
company will remain there. Hoechst and Rhone-Poulenc each need a stronger 
U.S. presence, and their merger does little to accomplish that. In 
fact, if Hoechst and Rhone-Poulenc complete their merger, the two 
companies would still be Munchkins in a land of American giants. Despite 
being the second-leading drug seller in the world, they would rank 
12 in the United States, according to IMS Health, with slightly more 
than half the sales of Merck and Pfizer. Hoechst and Rhone-Poulenc 
would need another $1.2 billion in U.S. drug sales just to break into 
the top five. ``It's hard to see how Hoechst and Rhone-Poulenc are 
going to achieve a critical mass to make more of a dent than they 
already have,'' said Neil Sweig, a pharmaceutical analyst with Southeast 
Research Partners. ``We'll just have to wait and see the details of 
the merger.'' 
</TEXT>
</DOC>