<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981124.0352 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
The chief arms inspector for Iraq, Richard Butler, told the Security 
Council on Tuesday that he was disappointed with Iraq's cooperation 
with resumed inspections, particularly the refusal to produce any 
documents that the inspectors requested. The council took no action 
beyond noting his report and agreeing to continue discussing the issue. 
Diplomats described the meeting as not confrontational, with no real 
challenges to Butler, as the Iraqis have demanded. He was asked by 
some council members to explain why the U.N. Special Commission, which 
monitors the weapons program, needed to see the documents. The tension 
and crisis atmosphere of the last two weeks is gone from the council, 
and there seems to be a general agreement by critics and supporters 
of Iraq that President Saddam Hussein of Iraq should have time to 
demonstrate amply how he intends to proceed before punishment or rewards 
are rendered. ``This is not a crisis,'' Shen Guofang of China said. 
``This is a problem.'' Sergei Lavrov of Russia also took a low-key 
approach, diplomats said, describing the confrontation over documents 
as something that should be worked out between Butler and Iraq. In 
Washington officials sought to portray firm resolve in dealing with 
Iraq a day after having signaled a new policy of patience. Officials 
used somewhat tougher language than they did on Monday in addressing 
the refusal on documents that relate to suspected weapons sites. ``I 
don't believe Iraq should be in the position of declaring unilaterally 
that documents are irrelevant to the needs and requests of the UNSCOM 
inspectors,'' Defense Secretary William Cohen sai at a news session 
with Defense Minister Rudolf Scharping of Germany. ``So we will continue 
to follow it. But much depends upon the level and degree of cooperation 
on the part of the Iraqis.'' White House press secretary Joe Lockhart 
would not say whether Iraqi resistance would set off American military 
action. ``We remain very skeptical of their intentions,'' Lockhart 
said. David Leavy, a National Security Council spokesman, said Washington 
was not satisfied with Iraq since it agreed 10 days ago to resume 
unfettered access. At the United Nations on Tuesday morning the Security 
Council voted, over Iraqi objections, to renew for an additional six 
months the program under which limited quantities of oil are sold 
to pay for civilian programs. The unanimous vote without a debate 
was taken after several delegations, led by Russia, had proposed changes 
to the plan at the behest of Iraq. The changes received no support, 
diplomats said, because the plan is demonstrating some success at 
improving conditions in Iraq. Childhood malnutrition has, for example, 
leveled off, officials say, and more than $444 million in medicine 
has been imported in two years. ``These delegations dropped their 
requests in favor of a very quick consensus,'' said Antonio Monteiro 
of Portugal, chairman of the council's Iraq sanctions committee. ``This 
is very positive. It shows the awareness of the humanitarian impact 
of this operation.'' Iraq has not said whether it will continue in 
the program, however. It is left to the Iraqis to decide in consultation 
with the United Nations how the money will be allocated, and the Iraqi 
proposals have to be reviewed in New York before goods are bought. 
In recent months Iraq has expanded its requests from basic goods like 
food and medicine to items like telephone equipment and computers 
for schools. Under the program Iraq has built up or renewed commercial 
ties with a range of nations. Last week Foreign Minister Mohammed 
Saeed al-Sahhaf wrote to the council, asking that the current six-month 
phase be extended only an additional two months because Iraq was incapable 
of producing the $5.2 billion in oil now allowed to be sold every 
180 days. Iraqi officials would also like a shorter renewal period, 
because they are pressing to have sanctions lifted so that oil can 
be sold freely, making the program irrelevant. They complain that 
the United States and Britain are holding up approval of imported 
equipment and chemical supplies that independent experts said Iraq 
needed to upgrade its oil fields and pipelines. The first shipment, 
barrels of chemical agents to clean crude oil, did not begin to arrive 
in Iraq until this week. U.N. officials say much of the reason that 
Iraq has been unable to meet the target stems not as much from missing 
parts and supplies as from the fall in oil prices. The United Nations 
takes nearly one-third off the top of earnings under the program for 
a compensation fund that benefits victims of Iraq's invasion and occupation 
of Kuwait and for protected Kurdish areas of northern Iraq. The program 
also pays the expenses of the U.N. Special Commission. In the midst 
of what could be drawn-out negotiations on several fronts with Iraq, 
officials in Baghdad confirmed Tuesday that the Iraqi representative 
at the United Nations, Nizar Hamdoon, would leave at the end of the 
year and that his replacement would be his deputy, Saeed Hasan, an 
economist educated at the Sorbonne. Hamdoon, the ambassador to Washington 
in the 1980s who is widely considered to have been an effective voice 
for Iraq there and in New York since 1992, said in an interview that 
he expected to return to a post in the Foreign Ministry. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>