<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981124.0357 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Frank Gehry has changed Philip Johnson's place in history, and both 
architects are the beneficiaries. If Gehry hadn't come along, Johnson's 
work might well be remembered as an emblem of a time when American 
architecture lost its way. His restless rovings from movement to movement 
and style to style offered giddy architectural entertainment, particularly 
during his high-flying days of big corporate commissions in the 1980s. 
But they demoralized many who think that architecture should stand 
for something more than a flirtation with forms. Gehry's emergence, 
and Johnson's early recognition and support of his talent, have changed 
that. Now Johnson's flirtatiousness has come to seem like a benign 
precursor of Gehry's more patient, continuous development of an architecture 
without clear rules. If you'll pardon the royal analogy, Johnson has 
come to seem like a regent and Gehry like a king who has re-established 
architecture as a field for boldness and conviction. Though they belong 
to different generations and live on opposite coasts, the two architects 
are close friends. They have also collaborated on two projects to 
date. Neither was built. I'm sorry the Lewis Residence, designed over 
many years, was never realized. The building would have given me a 
chance to write something uncomplimentary about Gehry's work for a 
change. With its dumb horse-head roof, the design looked like an assault 
on the silly million-dollar houses rich people build. But I'm glad 
the Atlantic City casino project on which the two conspired for Steve 
Wynn came to nothing. The only way it could have worked was if they 
had made it out of sand and let it wash away. Johnson has moved far 
esthetically from the days when he collaborated with Mies van der 
Rohe on the Seagram Building, but his identity and outlook have remained 
as firmly anchored as the corner table he has faithfully occupied 
at the Four Seasons since he designed the place 40 years ago. He was 
and remains a formalist, an unreconstructed mover and shaper. This 
fixation could be obnoxious when he was turning out forms as flimsy 
as the cardboard tube turrets at 52 Maiden Lane. Still, if Johnson's 
appetite for forms was less insatiable, it's unlikely that he would 
have become such an ardent Gehry supporter. ``I was just trying out 
some ideas,'' Gehry said of the house he designed for his family in 
1977. Gehry's ideas _ exposed wooden studs, a tumbling cube window, 
screens of chain-link fence, the incorporation of an existing dwelling 
_ differed radically, but the experimental spirit much the same. The 
major difference was this: Gehry was finding a way to convey that 
spirit in the individual building. With each project, he was moving 
closer to an architecture of the mutable, polymorphous, heterogeneous 
vocabulary that culminated last year in the Guggenheim Museum in Bilbao, 
Spain. With a few exceptions, Johnson has never quite managed to do 
this. His buildings might vary in style, but each is stylistically 
self-consistent. All elements of the Lipstick Building harmonize with 
the dominant theme of telescoping ovals. The Museum of Television 
and Radio may be a hybrid of Gothic and Classical, but each aspect 
supports the idea that styles once considered antithetical can be 
comfortably fused. The same fusion, prefigured by Charles Barry's 
Houses of Parliament, occurs in Johnson's design for the PPG Industries 
headquarters in Pittsburgh. One exception is the Glass House, the 
home Johnson built for himself in New Canaan, Conn., in 1949. This 
landmark edifice changes according to light and season, and dematerializes 
in a play of reflection and transparency. Johnson's New Canaan compound, 
if seen as a whole, is also polymorphic, a landscape accented with 
variations on the International Style, Moorish architecture, German 
Expressionism, Gehry's urban grit vernacular and other stylistic motifs. 
In his design for the Fort Worth Water Garden, completed in 1975, 
Johnson did adopt a vocabulary of irregularity and fragmentation. 
The garden's ravines, pools and terraces anticipate the fluid forms 
later developed by Gehry and by Peter Eisenman as well. But Fort Worth 
was a work of landscape design as much as it was architecture. It 
is as if water dissolved visual consistency and launched Johnson toward 
a looser, more sculptural approach. There's nothing wrong with a regent 
so long as he knows his place, and I doubt that Johnson ever regarded 
himself as more than that. I think he believed that the period after 
the passing of the great modern pioneers _ Wright, Mies, Le Corbusier 
_ was not destined to be a time for great architecture, and that the 
best way to endure the Spenglerian gloom was to dress buildings up 
in party clothes. And probably no one is happier than Johnson that 
the gloom has lifted. Bilbao is at least as great a work of architecture 
as any this century has produced. Besides its intrinsic merits as 
an object of design and urbanism, it has banished the belief that 
the highest aspiration of our time should be the recycling of history's 
greatest hits. A few years ago, Johnson acknowledged that none of 
the post-modernists were all that good. I basically agree with that 
position. Now that the regency is over, however, it's much easier 
to appreciate the architectural merits of Johnson's works. In New 
York, for instance, these include the New York State Theater, the 
Sculpture Garden at the Museum of Modern Art and the Elmer Holmes 
Bobst Library on Washington Square. These buildings all illustrate 
the most valuable lesson Johnson has taught: the importance of procession. 
Read his 1947 essay on Wright's Taliesin West. It's the best account 
I know of the experience of moving through a great building. Then 
check out the State Theater (now scheduled for restoration). the procession 
_ across the plaza, through the outer and inner lobbies and up the 
grand staircases to the great promenade _ still projects a more glamorous 
sense of occasion than any performance space in the country. Overall, 
Johnson's entire oeuvre can also be seen as a procession, or at least 
a magical mystery tour, a series of surprises, many of them pleasant. 
The stops along the way include not only his own buildings but also 
the spaces between them: the anticipation of where he'll go next. 
At 92, the man who founded the world's first museum department of 
architecture and design is organizing a show on Philippe Starck, a 
designer whose work could not be more alien to the Machine Age esthetic 
he originally promoted. Johnson's curiosity may be more that of a 
curator than of an architect, but it's an invaluable asset all the 
same. On a return visit to Bilbao earlier this year, Johnson was moved 
to tears. I hope he felt that his work helped make this building possible. 
Bilbao stretches the idea of procession to urban scale, and also compresses 
it to daydream dimensions. The forms are like a blend of resonating 
waves coming from the city, the architect's head and those of visitors 
as they approach and move through the building, alive with the discovery 
that this procession has led to something great. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>