<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981124.0275 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Thousands of mourners waited hours in the bitter cold Tuesday to pay 
an emotional and politically charged farewell to a liberal legislator 
whose killing on Friday has turned into a call to arms for Russia's 
frayed democratic forces. Inside the ornate Marble Hall at the Museum 
of Ethnography, where the lawmaker, Galina Starovoitova, lay in state, 
her grim-faced friends and allies issued a challenge to the forces 
that many believe ordered a brazen political assassination. ``They 
are killing our comrades, they are killing our friends,'' said Anatoly 
Chubais, a reform-minded former Kremlin aide and native of St. Petersburg, 
in a voice choked with emotion. ``Do they want to stop us? Do they 
want to frighten us? It won't work. I want to say this at the coffin 
of our comrade, absolutely clearly and absolutely firmly: They will 
not succeed.'' The remarks reflected Russia's growing political instability 
at a time of deep economic crisis with a weakened President Boris 
Yeltsin at the helm. In just the last few weeks the country has heard 
anti-Semitic statements go uncensored, allegations that a renegade 
hit squad was working within the Federal Security Service, and open 
threats against Russia's independent news media. People at the scene 
were comparing the crowds Tuesday to those that came out for the funeral 
of the Nobel laureate Andrei Sakharov in Moscow in 1989. Poets and 
politicians, including three former prime ministers, were among the 
first to crowd past Ms. Starovoitova's open coffin and to deliver 
their eulogies. The line of ordinary citizens that followed was so 
long that the viewing had to be prolonged by several hours. Even then, 
hundreds of mourners were unable to get in before the coffin was taken 
to a cemetery at the historic Alexander Nevsky Monastery for a private 
funeral and burial. The size of the turnout was seen here as a protest 
against the growing lawlessness in the city and as a gesture of respect 
for a woman known both as a staunch defender of democracy and as a 
plain-speaking warmhearted figure, a mother and a grandmother. In 
homage to Ms. Starovoitova, Russia's main television channel repeatedly 
interrupted its programming Tuesday with an old film clip, showing 
her sitting at home, singing a song. ``Everything she did, she did 
as a strong personality,'' said Vladimir Talanov, a 68-year-old engineer 
who was at the back of the line that doubled around a statue of Pushkin. 
``We should pay homage to someone who is one of the brightest faces 
of a democracy that we are now so worried about.'' The wave of violence 
that has swept this city struck Ms. Starovoitova Friday as she and 
an aide were going up the staircase in her apartment building on Griboyedova 
Canal. She was shot in the head three times by waiting assailants 
and died at the scene. Her aide, Ruslan Linkov, was wounded in the 
head and neck and is in a local military hospital. Coming in the midst 
of an ugly local election campaign that has been rife with dirty tricks, 
the attack has heightened the sharp polarization of political forces 
both here and in the country as a whole. Allies of Ms. Starovoitova 
have openly blamed nationalists and communists for her death. The 
speaker of the Russian parliament, a communist from St. Petersburg, 
threw back the charge on Monday by suggesting that her death had been 
ordered by extremists in the democratic movement. Yeltsin, hospitalized 
on Monday with pneumonia, was described as ``deeply angered'' by the 
killing of Ms. Starovoitova, his close ally in Russia's anti-communist 
movement. She was an ethnographer and psychologist, and she served 
as his adviser on inter-ethnic affairs until she was fired in a conflict 
over the Kremlin's policy in the northern Caucasus. In recent months 
Ms. Starovoitova, who was a figure of considerable influence here 
in St. Petersburg, had spoken out against nationalism _ and against 
corruption, collecting materials on illegal fund-raising by local 
Communist politicians. Supporters contend that her resolute positions 
may have cost her her life. ``I know what work Galina Vasilyevena 
was involved in, I know why she paid with her life and I know that 
we will continue to do this work until the end,'' said Chubais at 
the memorial service. Prime Minister Yevgeny Primakov has thrown his 
weight behind the investigation, summoning Russia's top law enforcement 
officials to a meeting at which he pressed them to find the killers. 
Police officers in St. Petersburg announced Monday that they had conducted 
a number of raids and detained several people as they cast their net 
wide in the search for the suspects. The attack had the earmarks of 
contract killings here, with the assailants dropping two guns at the 
scene and leaving in a waiting car. On Monday, shots were fired at 
the windows of the apartment of a local member of the City Council. 
Last year, a top city official _ another close associate of Chubais 
_ was gunned down on the city's main avenue, Nevsky Prospekt, and 
numerous bankers and business executives have been targets of contract 
killings. Many residents of St. Petersburg, Russia's second-largest 
city, with a population of 5 million, have been troubled by the low-key 
response to the attack by the local governor, Vladimir Yakovlev. Yakovlev, 
a former city official who won elections in 1996 as an opponent of 
the democrats, waited two days to send a telegram of condolences to 
Ms. Starovoitova's family and, citing health reasons, did not appear 
at the memorial services Tuesday. For the people who began to line 
up around the Ethnography Museum in the chilly morning darkness, the 
death of Ms. Starovoitova had come as a bitter reminder of democracy's 
tenuous hold in Russia, seven years after the collapse of communism. 
``Maybe we could have democracy, but we don't have it yet,'' said 
Lada Uvarova, 28, an employee at United Parcel Service here and one 
of the few members of her generation to join the mourners. ``If at 
the beginning of reforms there was an enthusiasm, an optimism, now 
something has changed,'' she said. ``Young people don't care about 
government, they count only themselves. For older people, times are 
difficult and they blame the situation on democracy.'' But for the 
people who came Tuesday, Ms. Starovoitova was more than just another 
``democratic.'' The response to the killing of a popular woman who 
held a leadership role swept across ideological lines and brought 
out a big crowd. ``I expected fewer people,'' said Irina Zapozhnikova, 
a senior instructor at a technical institute. ``After all, democrats 
are now considered the ones to blame for everything. But people trusted 
her.'' 
</TEXT>
</DOC>