<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981124.0143 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
It's classic. It's irresistible. And it's a killer. Two bites into 
the standard pecan pie, and even dessert-toughened Yankees raised 
on chocolate decadence cake, tiramisu and creme brulee know that they're 
in deep trouble. This pie is sweeter than a Shirley Temple film festival, 
more cloying than a Barbara Walters interview. Like Rhine maidens 
draped seductively on jagged rocks, those luscious pecans sit atop 
a thick tremulous layer of filling so sweet that it can make grown 
men cry, so gooey that it can stop a speeding locomotive dead in its 
tracks. More than a century after the Civil War, pecan pie remains 
the last holdout against Reconstruction, but wily carpetbaggers, assisted 
by a few Southern scalawags, have been tinkering with the pecan-pie 
formula and coming up with ways to make it a little less sweet. The 
filling is the soft underbelly that's vulnerable to attack. In traditional 
recipes, it is what pastry chefs call a clear custard _ that is, a 
sweet, almost jellylike ooze made without milk or cream. Karo corn 
syrup, sugar and eggs are the three main ingredients, but some chefs 
use dark Karo or dark sugar to bring down the treble notes, so to 
speak, and create at least the impression of less sweetness. In ``As 
Easy as Pie'' (Collier Books, 1990), Susan G. Purdy calls for a teaspoon 
of lemon juice. Wayne Brachman, the pastry chef at Mesa City and Bolo 
in Manhattan, says the problem is architectural. Pecan pie should 
be a tart. ``Pie is the wrong shape for it,'' he said. ``If you use 
a tart dough, you solve the sweetness problem, because it's less sweet; 
it's shallower, so you use less filling, and it adds crunch, which 
is a great foil for sweetness.'' Bill Greenwood, of Greenwoods on 
Green Street in Roswell, Ga., grinds pecans into a meal and uses it 
to thicken the filling, which he makes with dark Karo syrup and dark 
brown sugar. ``It binds with the sugar granules and cuts the sweetness,'' 
he said. ``It almost acts as a flour, so when you bite into the pie 
you get an unbelievable pecan flavor and a firmer texture _ it doesn't 
ooze and goo on you.'' Greenwood also sneaks in a little Wild Turkey 
_ not the bourbon, but the leaner, dryer rye whisky. At Grace's Trattoria 
on the Upper East Side, an unlikely pecan spot, Joseph Trama has fiddled 
around with a dessert he used to make at the Quilted Giraffe and come 
up with a pecan square that cleverly rewrites the traditional roles 
assigned to crust, filling and nuts. In this compromise between pie 
and tart, a dense layer of pecans sits on a pate brisee, or short 
crust, held in place by a lightly applied syrup of butter, honey, 
white sugar, brown sugar and cream. Because the crust and the pecans 
do most of the talking, the dessert is rich but not cloying. It's 
the dry martini of pecan pies. When pecan pie sheds its sweetness, 
though, does it lose its soul? Some Southerners think so. ``It should 
be so sweet it makes your teeth ache,'' said Bruce Lane, who, with 
Scott Wyatt, wrote ``New York's 50 Best Places to Eat Southern'' (City 
&AMP; Company, 1998). ``A lot of the Northern recipes we encountered 
simply aren't sweet enough. We found pies that used all Karo syrup 
and no sugar, and some that even used salted nuts.'' Lane may or may 
not be standing on firm historical ground. Although attempts to trace 
the origin of pecan pie have ended in frustration, it is closely related 
to the semi-sweet cheesecakes of 18th-century England, which, with 
a little linguistic mangling, evolved into chess pie and treacle tart. 
Astonishingly enough, the first printed recipes for pecan pie did 
not appear until the 1930s, but in no time, ``The Joy of Cooking'' 
and the Fannie Farmer cookbooks brought pecan pie to a national audience, 
and it has remained a classic ever since. ``The sweetness is a fairly 
late development,'' said Stephen Schmidt, the author of ``Master Recipes'' 
(Clear Light, 1998). ``In the 1950s, all the butter and milk came 
out of the pie. The 1936 Fannie Farmer Cookbook, for example, calls 
for one-half cup butter and one-half cup milk in its pecan pie recipe. 
That butter and milk cut the sweetness by about a third.'' So, does 
pecan pie have to be so sweet? ``Absolutely not,'' said James Villas, 
who recently wrote ``My Mother's Southern Desserts'' (William Morrow) 
with Martha Pearl Villas. ``You call Mama. She'll tell you all about 
it. She just got her big order of pecans, and between now and Christmas 
she'll be going berserk.'' Villas, you need to call home more often. 
``Of course it's going to be sweet _ it's made with sugar and corn 
syrup,'' Mrs. Villas said, sweetly. Her pie does include two instructions 
that keep the sugar rush within bounds, however. She uses a lot of 
pecans, to shift the pecan-filling ratio, and she uses a crust with 
no sugar. ``Another thing I do, I dry my pastry a little bit before 
I put the filling in, which helps keep it from being soggy.'' At Baby 
Routh in Dallas, Stephan Pyle cuts into the sweetness of pecan pie 
by putting it on a bittersweet chocolate base and serving it with 
whisky-flavored whipped cream. New Yorkers looking for the real thing 
will have a tough time. ``There's too much cheating in this town, 
and it starts with the pecans,'' Villas said. ``People don't realize 
that nothing turns rancid faster than a pecan.'' Rancid pecans are 
the least of it. Forlorn Southerners stand a better chance of hearing 
Rudy Giuliani say ``that dog won't hunt'' than they do of finding 
an acceptable piece of pecan pie in New York, where the crusts are 
sodden, the nuts are desiccated and the fillings look like spackle. 
Of course, they run into the same problem down South. There is hope. 
Lane and Wyatt, who hail from South Carolina and Texas respectively, 
did manage to find good, classic pecan pies at Acme Bar and Grill 
in Greenwich Village, the Hog Pit in the meatpacking district and 
Carolina Country Kitchen in Bedford-Stuyvesant, Brooklyn. They also 
give the Southern seal of approval to the sweet-potato pecan pie at 
Acadia Parish Cajun Cafe in Cobble Hill, Brooklyn. The sweet potato 
takes the sugar and the syrup right out of the recipe, but the pie 
earns a high rating even so. Besides, you can always have it with 
a Dr Pepper. Or, you can heed the advice of Alon Balshan, the owner 
of Alon's Bakery in Atlanta: ``If you don't want something sweet, 
you shouldn't eat pecan pie.'' PECAN SQUARES Adapted from Joseph Trama, 
Grace's Trattoria Time: 1 hour, plus cooling time 7{ sticks unsalted 
butter 3 cups all-purpose flour 1 cup granulated white sugar 2\ teaspoons 
salt 2\ cups firmly packed light brown sugar } cup honey 2 pounds 
pecan pieces { cup plus 1 tablespoon heavy cream. 1. Cut 3 sticks 
of the butter into small pieces, and place in the freezer to chill 
thoroughly; set aside the remainder of the butter at room temperature. 
Set aside a measuring cup filled with a mixture of water and ice. 
Spray a 12-by-17-inch jelly roll pan with nonstick spray, and set 
aside. Preheat the oven to 325 degrees. 2. In the bowl of a food processor, 
combine the flour, { cup white sugar and } teaspoon salt. Pulse briefly 
to blend. Add the chilled butter pieces, and pulse until the mixture 
resembles grated cheese. With the motor running, pour a thin stream 
of ice water through the feed tube, just until the dough is cohesive; 
one-third to { cup may be needed. 3. Turn the dough onto a lightly 
floured board, and roll out to a 13-by-18-inch rectangle. Transfer 
the dough to the jelly roll pan, fitting it into the corners and slightly 
over the edges of the pan. Trim off excess dough. Bake just until 
the dough loses its shine and is very lightly browned, 10 to 12 minutes. 
Remove from oven and set aside; leave the oven at 325 degrees. 4. 
In a large saucepan over medium heat, combine the remaining 4{ sticks 
of butter, { cup white sugar, the light brown sugar, the honey and 
1{ teaspoons salt. Bring to a boil, and continue to boil for 4 minutes. 
Add the nuts, and mix well. Remove from the heat, and stir in the 
cream. 5. Stir the pecan mixture to blend thoroughly, then pour the 
mixture on top of the baked pastry. Spread evenly with a spatula. 
Bake until the pecan mixture is thickened and lightly set, about 22 
minutes. Remove from the oven and allow to cool; the filling will 
continue to firm as it cools. To serve, trim the crust from around 
the edge of the pan. Cut into 3-by-4-inch rectangles, and serve at 
room temperature. Yield: 16 servings. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>