<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981124.0335 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Attorney General Janet Reno concluded Tuesday that there was insufficient 
evidence to seek the appointment of an independent counsel to investigate 
Vice President Al Gore's fund-raising role in the 1996 reelection 
campaign. It was the second time she has investigated and cleared 
the vice president in connection with campaign solicitations he made 
from the White House, and the decision, while assailed by Republicans, 
swept away a potentially ominous cloud of criminal inquiry that had 
hung over Gore's presidential ambitions. With her aides divided, Reno 
deliberated until the final day of a 90-day preliminary inquiry into 
whether Gore misled Justice Department investigators during their 
initial inquiry last year. They were examining whether calls he made 
from his White House office violated laws against fundraising on federal 
property. ``The evidence fails to provide any reasonable basis for 
a conclusion that the vice president may have lied,'' Reno said in 
a legal brief filed with the three-member panel of federal appellate 
judges who supervise independent counsel matters. She added, ``As 
our court filing demonstrates, I have found that there are no reasonable 
grounds for further investigation.'' Reno still has two independent 
counsel decisions pending on other campaign finance issues, but neither 
is aimed so pointedly at Gore. One is examining the truthfulness of 
statements by Harold Ickes, the former deputy chief of staff. The 
other is a broadly framed inquiry into whether Clinton and other officials 
violated the law when they used Democratic party funds, rather than 
Clinton-Gore campaign funds, to finance a major advertising campaign 
that went too far, according to election auditors, in directly promoting 
the Clinton-Gore campaign. A spokesman for Gore, Christopher Lehane, 
expressed the vice president's relief at the decision. ``The vice 
president is pleased that this preliminary review has been concluded 
without the need for an independent counsel,'' Lehane said. ``Vice 
President Gore will continue focusing on what he has been doing _ 
working with the president to prepare America for the 21st century.'' 
Clinton also expressed his satisfaction. ``Obviously the president 
welcomes the news,'' said Joe Lockhart, the White House spokesman, 
who said the president ``believes the vice president has always acted 
within the letter and the spirit of the law.'' Republicans who have 
assailed Reno for two years over her refusal to seek an independent 
prosecutor to investigate possible campaign finance abuses by the 
Democrats again expressed frustration over her unwillingness to allow 
an outside review. Sen. Orrin Hatch, a Utah Republican who is chairman 
of the Judiciary Committee, said she had unnecessarily limited her 
focus to small issues, like whether Gore's fundraising phone calls 
from the White House were proper. ``Whether an independent counsel 
should be appointed to investigate narrow issues such as the improper 
placement of phone calls or misstatements to investigators is not 
the issue,'' Hatch said. ``What is at stake is whether the public's 
confidence in the rule of law and integrity of the Department of Justice 
will be further eroded by this administration and whether there will 
ever be a full accounting for reckless fundraising practices of President 
Clinton and other Administration officials.'' Rep. Dan Burton, R-Ind., 
who is chairman of the House government Reform and Oversight Committee, 
which has investigated campaign finance issues, said, ``Once again, 
the attorney general has failed to follow the law. For the past two 
years, the attorney general has made it clear she is committed to 
protecting the president.'' Few officials within the Justice Department 
believed that Reno was likely to open a wider criminal inquiry of 
Gore, but some expressed surprise over the extensive legal debate 
that the case ignited. FBI Director Louis Freeh urged her to refer 
the case to an independent prosecutor _ a position he has long taken 
on the campaign finance issue. But other top officials, among them 
David Vicinanzo, lead prosecutor for Reno's campaign finance unit, 
were unconvinced. They recommended against appointment of an independent 
counsel because the evidence was insubstantial and provided little 
promise that further investigation would prove worthwhile, law enforcement 
officials said. Vicinanzo replaced Charles La Bella as head of the 
Justice Department's campaign finance team. La Bella left in July, 
before the latest Gore inquiry began, but he had urged Reno to refer 
a number of campaign finance issues to an independent counsel on grounds 
that the possible violations were so serious they should be reviewed 
by an outside prosecutor. The Justice Department's second inquiry 
of Gore began in September after the White House belatedly disclosed 
a fundraising memo written by David Strauss, a Gore aide. Strauss' 
handwritten notes were taken during a White House meeting on Nov. 
21, 1995, that focused on campaign finance issues and suggested that 
Gore may not have been truthful about his fundraising practices during 
the 1997 inquiry. At that time, Gore had told Justice Department investigators 
that he thought the funds he had raised in telephone calls from his 
White House office were only so-called soft money donations. These 
contributions generally fall outside federal election laws, may be 
given in any amount and are spent by political parties only for generic 
purposes like get-out-the-vote drives and other party-building activities. 
There is no prohibition on raising soft money from government property. 
But the Strauss memo indicated that Gore may have known when he was 
questioned by Justice Department investigators in 1997 that the contributions 
he helped raise were partially diverted into hard money accounts by 
the Democratic National Committee. Hard money donations to the political 
parties are limited by federal election law to $20,000 _ and unlike 
soft money _ could be spent directly on the Clinton-Gore re-election 
effort. Under Federal election law, Gore was barred from soliciting 
hard money contributions from government property. The November 1995 
meeting was attended by Gore, Clinton and 13 other presidential aides 
and campaign officials. Reno said Tuesday in her legal brief to the 
three-member panel of appeals court judges that investigators had 
interviewed or obtained statements from each of the participants. 
Clinton provided a statement that said he could not remember the meeting. 
``No attendees recall any particular questions or comments by the 
vice president,'' Reno wrote. ``No one who arrived at the meeting 
without a working knowledge of the DNC financing issues left with 
an accurate understanding of the fact that both hard and soft money 
were necessary to pay for the media campaign. Only two of the fifteen 
attendees at the meeting even recall the topic of a hard money component 
to the media fund being raised during the meeting.'' Based on the 
interviews with the participants in the meeting, Reno concluded that 
the evidence was too weak to support a prosecution of Gore for lying. 
Reno said that there is ``only weak circumstantial evidence of the 
vice president's knowledge _ his presence at a meeting where the subject 
was briefly discussed _ which I do not believe provides reasonable 
grounds to believe that further investigation of this matter is warranted.'' 
</TEXT>
</DOC>