<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981124.0308 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
If things go the way they always seem to, something like 2.5 million 
people will clog the streets to watch Macy's Thanksgiving Day Parade 
on Thursday. Roughly 60 million more will take in the festive event 
on television. And 90 of them will watch it from the windows of Julie 
and David Tobey's apartment. For anyone reading this who is going 
to the Tobeys', they wanted to point out that 8:30 a.m. will be plenty 
early enough. The parade starts at 9, a couple of blocks north of 
their building. One year, someone showed up at 7:45 and Julie Tobey 
was still in bed. It was an entirely unnecessary inconvenience. The 
Tobeys live in the San Remo apartment building on Central Park West 
between 74th and 75th Streets. There are any number of good reasons 
to be thankful one lives in the San Remo _ it's hard to beat the neighborhood, 
and there's always a chance of seeing Steve Martin or Steven Spielberg 
in the elevator _ but on Thanksgiving, if one's apartment faces the 
park, the best reason is an unimpeded view of the parade without being 
trampled and with tastier food than the oversize pretzels sold by 
the street vendors. And so it has become a cherished holiday custom 
for dozens of people who live in the San Remo, not to mention in so 
many of the apartments lining the parade route along Central Park 
West, to have relatives, friends and occasional interlopers converge 
on their homes to witness the marching bands and majorettes and Barney. 
For many years, the San Remo residents even got to admire one of their 
own out there. Eugene Tonkonogy, who lives in the building, marched 
in the parade for many years as a volunteer clown. He relented three 
years ago. He decided he was too old. He was 90. The Tobeys' party, 
continuous for 17 years, built onward and upward slowly. The Tobeys 
have no children of their own. The first year, the 8-year-old daughter 
of a friend asked if she could pretty please come by to see the parade. 
She came with her parents. Three people. She returned the following 
year, and brought some friends. Ten people. Then the Tobeys invited 
some of their other friends. Twenty-five people. Then other acquaintances 
started to call and ask if they could come by. Ninety people. ``People 
bring their grandparents,'' Ms. Tobey said. ``Or they bring their 
neighbors. Or they borrow children.'' On 364 days of the year, New 
Yorkers want to be as high up in a building as possible. Today, for 
those in the San Remo, low is best. Among the residents, there is 
a consensus, at least a consensus among those who live on the seventh 
floor, that seven is pretty much the perfect height. That is the height 
at which the balloons float past. When Superman flies past, you can 
practically step out your window and climb onto his back. The Tobeys 
feel seven is unquestionably best. The Tobeys live on seven. Marjorie 
and David Silverman have little doubt that three is actually a much 
better floor. That's right, they live on three. They moved into the 
San Remo 10 years ago with two young children. Somehow it never occurred 
to them that the Thanksgiving Day parade went directly past their 
windows. They were very abruptly made aware of this when they were 
awakened their first Thanksgiving by bands that sounded as if they 
were bounding through their living room. ``After that, we realized 
that it was sort of our obligation to have a parade party,'' Ms. Silverman 
said. The parties are ostensibly for the children, but the critical 
word is ostensibly. Kathy and James Goodman, who live on seven, used 
to invite all the classmates of their daughter, Laura, each Thanksgiving, 
which naturally also meant siblings and those dreaded escorts known 
as parents. After fourth grade, Laura's interest in Big Bird and Kermit 
began to flag. Now that she has started college, it is nonexistent. 
Her mother's appreciation of the parade, however, remains strong. 
Hence the Goodmans continue to invite friends over, though the quantity 
has diminished to about two dozen from more than 100 in past years. 
Among the regulars is a woman who grew up in the apartment but now 
lives on the 24th floor, where the parade might be best enjoyed with 
the Hubble telescope. ``Laura will be here, too,'' Ms. Goodman said, 
``but she'll probably sleep through it.'' Goodman finds it difficult 
to relax entirely during these parade parties, which is understandable. 
Being art dealers, the Goodmans have a fair amount of art on display 
in the apartment. Particularly fragile pieces are stowed away, but 
much of it remains where it always is. Yet nothing has ever been damaged, 
and one year there were 120 people. The one clear reminder of the 
event is on the windows. ``Thousands of tiny handprints, greasy ones, 
on all the windows throughout the apartment,'' Ms. Goodman said. One 
of the genuinely gratifying things about having a crowd over to watch 
the parade is that often you get to meet people you had never expected 
to meet. Invitees mention to their own friends where they are going, 
and suddenly those friends are in the back seat going, too. One year, 
someone took Pepe Navarro, known as the David Letterman of Spain, 
to visit the Tobeys, who found him rather interesting. Another year 
a Welsh cabaret singer came with someone or other, and willingly sang 
for an hour after the parade. Sometimes the guests are mixed up. One 
year there were three people wandering around the apartment of the 
Silvermans, who invite only people they know. He thought they were 
her friends. She thought they were his friends. Actually, they were 
supposed to be going to a party on five. By the time they figured 
that out, they decided to just stay where they were. ``They were lovely 
people,'' Ms. Silverman said. Alas, a few San Remo residents with 
unbeatable views have had to forgo their tradition this year. Mady 
and Sandy Harman live on the second floor, with a normally exquisite 
view of the parade. This year, however, scaffolding to enable waterproofing 
work has been erected outside the building and it completely blocks 
their windows. And so when the 50 or so people who normally came to 
the Harmans' party began calling this year, they were advised that 
there would be nothing to come to. Ms. Harman is having her brother 
over with his wife and three children, but she doesn't know how they 
will see the parade. She asked an upstairs neighbor if the Harman 
party could go there, but was told the neighbor already had too many 
people. The Harmans and their guests might have to watch it on television. 
After being hosts to a battalion of parade-watchers, the San Remo 
dwellers often have to tidy up hurriedly for the second shift, their 
guests for Thanksgiving dinner. Some residents, however, simply don't 
have the stamina. ``By the time the parade people leave, I'm ready 
to collapse,'' Ms. Tobey said. ``Thank God, someone always invites 
us to their place for dinner.'' 
</TEXT>
</DOC>