<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981124.0211 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
I heard a story that may or may not be true, but it certainly makes 
a point. After World War II, inspectors were going through the food 
depots somewhere in France and discovered that most of the supplies 
had been ravaged by rats. One observant inspector was supposed to 
have said: ``We can be sure of only one thing _ the rats were French. 
The cinnamon is untouched.'' As much as Americans love cinnamon, that's 
about how much we French don't. Vanilla is the typical Frenchman's 
favorite flavor, so you can imagine the adjustment I had to make when 
I came to work in this country. Fortunately for me, I've come to like 
cinnamon _ as long as it's not overpowering. These puff-pastry cookies 
are perfect for my taste: they sandwich just a dollop of cinnamon-scented 
pastry cream. The inspiration for these festive cookies, great for 
the holidays, came from a classic French petit four: the allumette, 
or match, a thin rectangle of puff pastry topped with a baked-on glaze. 
For my cookies, made with store-bought puff pastry, the pastry is 
rolled paper thin and spread with royal icing, a blend of confectioners' 
sugar and egg white. Then _ and here's a feature that makes them right 
for the holidays _ the pastry can be frozen for a month. When you 
want cookies, all you have to do is defrost, cut out (I make these 
star-shaped) and bake in a double process: first you put the cookies 
into a hot oven to set the icing, which pulls away from the pastry, 
so that you can lift it off and keep it aside; next you bake the bottoms 
until they're puffed and perfectly caramelized, a trick to avoid the 
common problem of soggy half-done puff pastry. Give the cookies their 
pastry cream filling, and you're set. You can add ground cinnamon 
to the icing if you want more of that spice, or sprinkle the icing 
with colored sugar or even sprinkles. You can vary the pastry cream, 
too. Make a plain pastry cream and flavor it with orange zest, instant 
coffee or cocoa powder; or, if you're French, go for vanilla. CINNAMON 
STARS Time: 30 minutes plus 4 hours chilling and drying { pound packaged 
all-butter puff pastry 2 cups whole milk 3 cinnamon sticks { cup sugar 
3 tablespoons all-purpose flour 3 tablespoons cornstarch 4 large eggs 
4 large egg whites 5{ cups confectioners' sugar. 1. On a sheet of 
parchment paper, roll out the puff pastry into a paper-thin rectangle. 
Prick it deeply all over with the tines of a fork. Slide the paper 
and pastry onto a baking sheet. Cover with plastic wrap and chill 
for at least 2 hours. 2. Prepare the pastry cream: In a medium saucepan, 
combine the milk and cinnamon sticks. Place over high heat and bring 
to a boil, then immediately remove from the heat. Cover and allow 
to sit for 5 minutes. Strain, and discard the cinnamon sticks. In 
a medium bowl, combine the sugar, flour and cornstarch; whisk to blend. 
In another bowl, whisk 4 eggs until frothy, then add them to the dry 
ingredients. Whisk the mixture vigorously, and while whisking, pour 
the hot milk into the bowl. Return the mixture to the saucepan, and 
place over medium heat. Whisk without stopping until the pastry cream 
comes to a boil; cook 1 minute longer. Pour the cream onto a piece 
of plastic wrap laid on a baking sheet. Cover with plastic wrap, and 
refrigerate at least 1 hour. 3. Prepare the royal icing: In a mixer 
with a paddle attachment, or by hand with a whisk, beat the egg whites 
on low speed until foamy. Gradually add the confectioners' sugar, 
and beat until the icing is shiny and thick as taffy. Keep at room 
temperature until needed. 4. Remove the puff pastry from the refrigerator. 
Using an offset spatula, spread the royal icing evenly over the pastry. 
Set aside at room temperature until the icing dries, 1 to 2 hours. 
5. To bake the cookies, preheat the oven to 400 degrees. Use a star-shaped 
(or any other shape) cookie cutter to cut out the cookies. Release 
the cookies from the cutter by blowing into the cutter. Put the cookies 
on a baking sheet lined with parchment paper, and place in the oven. 
Immediately turn the oven off and bake until the icing tops separate 
from the puff pastry bottoms. Remove from the oven, and return the 
oven to 400 degrees. Carefully pull the icing tops off the pastry 
bottoms, and place the tops on a large plate; set aside. Return the 
bottoms to the oven and bake until the pastry is golden and caramelized, 
about 10 to 15 minutes. Cool the cookies on a rack. 6. To serve, whisk 
the chilled pastry cream to loosen it, and put it in a pastry bag 
with a star tip. Pipe a little pastry cream onto each pastry bottom 
(or put on a small dollop with a spoon). Cap with a royal icing top. 
Yield: About 60 cookies. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>