<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981124.0369 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Two big advertisers are asking agencies for ideas on large, significant 
portions of their accounts. Miller Brewing Co. is placing in review 
the creative account of its biggest brand, Miller Lite, which has 
been handled for less than two years by Fallon McElligott in Minneapolis. 
And Visa USA is seeking proposals for comprehensive campaigns that 
will coordinate variegated pitches promoting the Visa credit card's 
sponsorship of the National Football League. The moves by Miller and 
Visa speak to the increasingly unsettled nature of agency-client relations 
as more marketers constantly re-examine agency rosters. ``We take 
a never-satisfied approach to our advertising,'' said Susan Henderson, 
a spokeswoman in Milwaukee for Miller, a unit of Philip Morris Cos. 
Ms. Henderson declined to speak about the review for Miller Lite, 
which was reported this week in the trade publication Advertising 
Age, because, she said, ``we do not discuss our advertising and marketing 
plans.'' Representatives of Fallon McElligott and other Miller agencies 
referred inquiries to the company. But the Miller decision to re-evaluate 
the creative portion of the account, with billings estimated at $150 
million, was confirmed by advertising executives who were told about 
the company's intent. The review comes after a sales decline for Miller 
Lite this year and continued criticism of an unconventional campaign. 
The review is confined to the three principal Miller roster shops, 
said the executives, who spoke on the condition they not be identified. 
In addition to Fallon McElligott, the agencies are Wieden &AMP; Kennedy 
in Portland, Ore., which creates campaigns for the Miller Genuine 
Draft brand, and Young &AMP; Rubicam Advertising in New York, which 
handles ads for Icehouse and Molson; Miller is the U.S. distributor 
of Molson, brewed by Molson Cos. of Canada. Media services for all 
Miller brands are handled by Starcom Media Services, a unit of Leo 
Burnett Co. in Chicago. Burnett had also handled the creative chores 
on Miller Lite from 1991 until December 1996, when Miller shocked 
Madison Avenue by shifting those duties without a review to Fallon 
McElligott. The decision to add Fallon McElligott to the Miller roster 
was followed a month later by a radically different campaign for Miller 
Lite, which had lost its sales supremacy in the light-beer category 
to the Bud Light brand brewed by Anheuser-Busch Inc. The new campaign, 
initially centered on a make-believe adman named Dick, presented off-kilter 
vignettes that reintroduced the theme ``Miller time.'' To appeal to 
men aged 21 to 27, the prime beer-drinking market, the Miller Lite 
ads were replete with cutting-edge elements like self-referential 
in-jokes about advertising and such startling imagery as a pants-less 
man and a woman with furry underarms. The campaign instantly became 
one of the most contentious ever for a mainstream consumer product. 
Miller executives repeatedly backed the campaign, describing it as 
provocative for a purpose. But many Miller distributors began complaining 
that the campaign's quirky humor and offbeat images were too nontraditional 
and narrowly focused to stimulate sales. Weeks ago, after the ads 
were broadened somewhat to be less off-putting, top Miller executives 
conceded at a wholesalers' meeting that the campaign was not sufficiently 
product-focused and would be changed. ``I think the verdict is in 
and it didn't work,'' Benj Steinman, president of Beer Marketer's 
Insights, a trade publication in Nanuet, N.Y., said Tuesday. ``The 
advertising didn't help the brand.'' ``Many distributors started out 
reserving judgment,'' Steinman said, ``but I've heard nothing positive 
about the ads from them in the last six months.'' Steinman's publication 
estimates that shipments of Miller Lite will decline about 2 percent 
in 1998 after rising last year. The present campaign for Miller Genuine 
Draft will also be changed, the distributors were told, but that revamping 
is being handled by that brand's agency, Wieden &AMP; Kennedy. Turning 
to Visa, Becky Saeger, executive vice president for brand marketing 
in Foster City, Calif., confirmed a report this week in the trade 
publication Adweek about the company's plans. Visa, she said, had 
asked three roster agencies for proposals for broadly focused marketing 
programs to integrate traditional advertising, sales promotion, interactive 
ads, direct marketing and other forms of peddling that remind football 
fans Visa is the ``official'' credit card of the NFL. ``My mission 
here is to push the envelope on integrated marketing,'' Ms. Saeger 
said, ``because we're more and more committed to making sure all the 
elements of our marketing mix work together.'' ``The NFL work we have 
in the marketplace is strong and I'm happy with it,'' she added. ``But 
we pay a lot for our sponsorship and this exercise is to see how far 
we can push the marketing value.'' The agencies are: BBDO New York, 
a unit of Omnicom Group that handles creative duties for Visa like 
television advertising; CKS Partners in Cupertino, Calif., a unit 
of CKS Group that handles Internet marketing, and Highway One in San 
Francisco, a part of the D'Arcy Masius Benton &AMP; Bowles Communications 
unit of MacManus Group that handles sales promotion. The agencies 
will consult with siblings that handle the tasks they do not; BBDO, 
for instance, will collaborate with sales promotion agencies owned 
by Omnicom. The ideas to be presented to Visa will be for the 1999-2000 
season, the fifth year in the five-year Visa professional football 
sponsorship contract. After the presentations, said Ms. Saeger, Visa 
would decide _ most likely by mid-December _ whether ``to have one 
agency lead the whole process'' or continue dividing the pro football 
tasks among the three shops. The work being done by the three agencies 
for the 1998-99 NFL season ranges ``from the mass market down to the 
grass roots, if you will,'' Ms. Saeger said. There are humorous spots 
from BBDO New York featuring Steve Young and Jerry Rice of the San 
Francisco 49ers, promotions and sweepstakes from Highway One and an 
area on the Visa Web site (www.visa.com) from CKS devoted to pro football. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>