<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981124.0298 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Imagine the Bruckner symphonies shorn of sentimental piety, and you're 
at the starting point of a provocative cycle emerging on CDs. Through 
five symphonies, Georg Tintner, 81, a conductor born in Vienna, casts 
Bruckner's grand, emotionally charged structures in a refreshing light 
of restraint and proportion. Reflected back is an aura of honest affection 
and with it a paradoxical exchange: a beguiling intellectual beauty 
where one often finds a cloistered spirituality. Many things are surprising 
about this project on the budget label Naxos, not least the ``sudden'' 
appearance of the conductor himself. Tintner, who lives in Canada, 
has spent most of his life as an expatriate and pursued his career 
out of the international limelight. When Austria was annexed by Nazi 
Germany in 1938, Tintner fled to New Zealand, eventually becoming 
principal conductor of the Australian National Opera and holding other 
posts in Australia. In 1987 he began a 10-year stint as music director 
of Symphony Nova Scotia in Halifax, where he remains conductor laureate. 
He has devoted himself to Bruckner for many years, and his expertise 
tells, not only in the originality of the present interpretations 
but also in his accompanying essays. Although Bruckner often revised, 
even truncated, his symphonies at the urging of colleagues, Tintner 
is a strong advocate of playing the first published versions, as he 
does here. There is perhaps a poetic appropriateness in the scattering 
of orchestras involved in a project led by the peripatetic Tintner. 
The National Symphony Orchestra of Ireland plays the Second Symphony 
and, in a two-disk set, the Eighth and the Symphony No. 0; the Royal 
Scottish National Orchestra performs the Fifth Symphony, and the New 
Zealand Symphony the Sixth. Through and through, Tintner's sure grasp 
of structure underpins his lyrical bent. The Second Symphony (Naxos 
8.554006), with its warmly Schubertian character, glows in a long-lined 
treatment. One can only agree with the conductor that the Second has 
never enjoyed its just measure of popularity. Tradition, he says, 
has followed Wagner in choosing the Third, which was dedicated to 
him, over the Second. The Irish orchestra paints the Second in warm 
hues. While one might wish for a more burnished string sound, the 
woodwinds and brasses distinguish themselves in both solo and ensemble 
assignments. The winds' ability to muster a true blaze of sound illuminates 
and propels the scherzo, which here follows the opening movement in 
accordance with Bruckner's original intention. ``Bruckner wisely placed 
the scherzo second, because this robust music makes a perfect contrast 
to the largely lyrical first movement,'' Tintner writes. ``It is not 
clear what made him change his mind, but perhaps he was frightened 
(and he was easily frightened) that critics would accuse him of copying 
the order of Beethoven's Ninth Symphony.'' The Fifth Symphony (8.553452) 
sidesteps the issue of revisionism. Somehow, the first versions of 
both the Fifth and the Sixth sailed into history without doctoring. 
Declaring the Fifth ``the most intellectual of all Bruckner's works,'' 
Tintner says it is ``the furthest removed from the seductive world 
of Wagner's harmony and orchestration.'' All of which points up the 
depth and power of the conductor's own intellectual instincts. While 
his reading of the Fifth may reflect his aversion to self-indulgence 
(what he calls the self-pitying emotion of Tchaikovsky and Mahler), 
his unfailing sense of line and pace and balance does not make for 
any kind of mathematical encounter. Here is the essence of Beethoven 
transfigured by a spirit of perhaps unsuspected kinship. Nowhere is 
this strain of intellectual humanism more compelling than in the Fifth's 
sweeping (25-minute), rigorously contrapuntal finale. ``Was the great 
Furtwangler right when he described this finale as surpassing all 
others in the symphonic literature?'' Tintner queries. ``Superlatives 
are always dangerous, but it is certainly one of the greatest.'' And 
this version is among the most lucid and radiant to be found on disks. 
Like the Second Symphony, the Sixth (8.553453) has lagged in public 
affection, or perhaps more accurately, in the hearts of conductors. 
Tintner suggests that the problem lies with the finale, which ``in 
contrast to the perfect first three movements is not absolutely satisfactory.'' 
He finds two shortcomings: a rather banal yet belabored principal 
theme and a final affirmation of the home key that does not feel adequately 
prepared. Both points are debatable. The Sixth's finale is (on the 
Brucknerian scale) a scant 15 minutes long. Over that short course, 
the modesty of the main theme doesn't wear all that thin. Nor does 
the suddenness of the return to the symphony's home key, A major, 
seem unusual for Bruckner. Of all the symphonies, the Sixth may be 
the most winsome: a Greek maiden between the Norse gods of Five and 
Seven, to paraphrase Schumann on the Beethoven Fourth. Perhaps because 
of its merry A major, the Sixth has always struck these ears as Bruckner's 
``Pastoral,'' no matter that Beethoven cast his in F. In any case, 
Tintner draws from the New Zealanders just such a sunny, unconstrained 
reading, with a finale that holds up very well indeed. It may have 
been overambitious of Naxos to pair the monumental Eighth and the 
Symphony No. 0 (8.554215/6). Although Tintner supports the idea that 
No. 0, far from being a novice work, was in fact written after the 
First Symphony, he dismisses its finale as an academic exercise in 
counterpoint and treats it as such. But his return to the ``original'' 
1887 version of the Eighth Symphony, edited by Leopold Nowak, in preference 
to the widely performed Robert Haas edition, is historically intriguing, 
even if the differences tend to be subtle. What is constant, on a 
line from the Second to the Eighth, is the conductor's knack for boiling 
away the Romantic excess of tradition and getting at the crux of Bruckner's 
art. One may find more elegant playing of the Eighth among the many 
options on CD, but Tintner's view of the music, ardent yet ever poised, 
commands a place in the sun. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>