<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981124.0252 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Gorgeous to look at but virtually uninhabited, the Metropolitan Opera's 
new ``Traviata'' seems to have been the victim of a neutron bomb. 
Whatever happened during the process of preparation, Monday night's 
opening performance found Franco Zeffirelli's sets still standing 
but not an opera character left alive. We have had periodic reports 
on the progress of the Met's new production and have crossed our fingers 
in hopes that bad luck and bad judgment would somehow be overcome. 
I am afraid they haven't. Zeffirelli reverts to his worst instincts 
in the last two acts, but his new look at Verdi's masterpiece remains 
waiting and ready for a cast strong enough in personality to compete 
with its director's illusions of grandeur. Originally thought of for 
these performances was the wife-husband team of Angela Gheorghiu and 
Roberto Alagna. They were shown the door when their demands were deemed 
highhanded. To replace Ms. Gheorghiu, Renee Fleming was named, but 
she withdrew scarcely a month ago. Personal problems were cited, but 
backstage rumblings hint that Ms. Fleming was having trouble with 
Act I's severe coloratura demands. Patricia Racette, who was to have 
sung some of the later performances anyway, stepped into the No. 1 
slot, and it was she who sang Violetta on Monday. Replacing Alagna 
was an Argentine tenor and relatively unknown commodity, Marcelo Alvarez. 
To complete this revolving door of a production, Vladimir Chernov 
reported in sick near the end, and Haijing Fu was brought in to take 
the role of Germont. Perhaps the only musical consistency left in 
place was James Levine and the Met orchestra; both seem to play more 
glowingly with each new assignment. (Dare we mention that originally 
scheduled for ``La Traviata'' was the young British conductor Simone 
Young, and not Levine at all?) Zeffirelli, as usual, will not be ignored, 
and here he plays the interior decorator with a taste for Empire style 
and an unlimited budget to indulge it. Act I is magnificent luxury. 
Despite good intentions, the mind keeps fixing on Zeffirelli's choice 
of wallpaper. If and when this production is retired, those two splendid 
sofas in the opening scene would fit right in my living room. The 
country house decor is all flowers and sunlight, a sybarite's dream. 
Act II, Scene 2, is Zeffirelli-at-the-Met as we know him best. With 
its lacy crimson veils and descending steps, his ballroom is big, 
big, big, while Violetta and Alfredo are not. Opera is miniaturized 
by the grandness around it. The dance sequences here are wonderful, 
made naughty by the introduction of dancing cows with provocatively 
stuffed bosoms and behinds. Act III indulges the director's fascination 
with the Met's stage elevator. He is as ever the master of the gratuitous 
scene change, and having Violetta's death scene begin in the upstairs 
bedroom and end in the parlor may serve no dramatic purpose, but it 
makes sure we won't forget that Verdi and Zeffirelli have equal billing 
in these proceedings. One wishes no disrespect toward Ms. Racette. 
She is an excellent singer and a scrupulous performer. The voice carries. 
The coloratura is firm. The expression is in place. There are some 
adventures with high notes, but they are quickly covered. Yet it is 
a portrayal that projects light but no heat. We consistently admire 
Ms. Racette's singing without ever being moved by Violetta's plight. 
It is as if Violetta scarcely exists at all. The problem is multiplied 
in the case of Alvarez, a tenor of pleasant natural qualities and 
modest prospects but clearly out of his depth in this setting. Alvarez 
is hardly compelling onstage, and the musicality is inelegant, at 
moments downright coarse. One blamed him less than the people who 
put him in such an unfair position in the first place. The presence 
of Fu was even more baffling. Certainly there were better last-minute 
alternatives for such a well-traveled role. No production will survive 
a Germont wan to the point of invisibility. Fu's severe vocal problems 
often went unnoticed, because he himself was barely noticeable. He 
was one more misfortune in the bringing together of this ``Traviata.'' 
The problems were not always self-made, but they have been met with 
a curious halfheartedness. In the end, compelling singing will stand 
up to Zeffirelli's ego. When it is put in place, this production might 
do very well. PRODUCTION NOTES: LA TRAVIATA: Opera in three acts by 
Giuseppe Verdi; libretto by Francesco Maria Piave after the play ``La 
Dame aux Camelias,'' by Alexandre Dumas; conductor, James Levine; 
production and sets by Franco Zeffirelli; costumes by Raimonda Gaetani; 
lighting by Duane Schuler; choreography by Maria Benitez. At the Metropolitan 
Opera. WITH: Patricia Racette (Violetta), Marcelo Alvarez (Alfredo), 
Haijing Fu (Germont), Deloresok Ziegler (Flora), Jane Shaulis (Annina), 
Tony Stevenson (Gastone), James Courtney (Douphol), John Del Carlo 
(Marquis d'Obigny), Vaclovas Daunoras (Dr. Grenville) and John Hanriot 
(Giuseppe). 
</TEXT>
</DOC>