<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981124.0407 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
In 1955, Oppi Untracht, a New Yorker who now lives in Finland, was 
spellbound by an exhibition of Indian textiles and jewelry he saw 
at the Museum of Modern Art. Since then, Untracht has traveled the 
highways and byways of the subcontinent, studying jewelry-making techniques 
and buying jewelry. (For many years he was accompanied with his wife, 
the Finnish glass designer Saara Hopea, who died in 1984.) Trained 
as a photographer by Berenice Abbott, he also photographed people 
he encountered wearing ritualistic finery. When Nina Stritzler-Levine, 
the director of exhibitions at the Bard Graduate Center for Studies 
in the Decorative Arts in Manhattan, was in Finland organizing last 
year's show on Finnish Modernism, she met Untracht and asked him to 
curate the first comprehensive exhibition of Indian jewelry in New 
York. His collection of jewelry and photographs along with loans from 
museums and other private collectors make up ``India: A Jewelry Spectrum,'' 
a dazzling exhibition on view through Jan. 31. Each of the more than 
300 ornaments on display could qualify as a work of art in itself. 
In reality, the ornaments were intended to be worn in clusters, literally 
covering the body from head to foot. For a woman, her jewelry was 
her dowry, her only personal belongings; and for security reasons 
she generally wore all of it. Seeing the assortment of beads, amulets, 
necklaces, anklets and rings, emblazoned with figures of gods or religious 
symbols, is a reminder of the power that the jewlery held over the 
people who wore it. Steven Waterman, Bard's in-house designer, lined 
the walls of the intimate galleries with handwoven silk in the colors 
worn by Indian women _ green, purple, saffron and rose red. The ornaments 
are arranged in the galleries according to their origins: bead and 
metal work from isolated tribal regions in one, silver jewelry from 
rural villages in another and gold and gemstones from the cities in 
the last gallery. Within each area, Untracht has grouped similar objects, 
beginning with head ornaments followed by earrings, necklaces, armlets, 
bracelets, belts and ankle bracelets. The overall effect of the exhibition 
is like walking into an overflowing treasure chest. An important insight 
gained from the show is that designs were often dictated by available 
technology rather than esthetics. A necklace from the state of Nagaland, 
for example, uses three conch shells, brass trumpet-shaped pendants 
and beads made of carnelian, glass and conch shell separated by bone. 
Although the tribesmen who made it had devised complex bead technologies, 
they used very little metal because they were dependent on metal workers 
from outside the tribal area. What made the jewelry precious to the 
inland tribes, though, were the raw materials that came from distant 
seashores, like coral or conch and cowrie shells. In the villages, 
silver amulets that hung around the neck often depicted the wearer's 
personal deity or the animal upon which the deity rode _ like the 
bull that carried Shiva. One amulet in the form of a container was 
shaped to represent the bull's horns, and for festivals, sacred bulls 
wore silver head ornaments encrusted with glass stones. The wearing 
of animal parts was also thought to impart the power of the beast 
to the wearer: A brooch with tiger claws set in a silver and garnet 
mount became a potent motif. Though most of the pieces on view are 
intricate, others, like a silver-wrapped torque of coiled wire that 
was part of a dowry, demonstrate a simplicity that seems both contemporary 
and timeless. Weddings offered sumptuous displays of jewelry, especially 
in cities where gold was prevalent. A groom might be festooned with 
a gold tinsel plume like a parade horse, while his bride in a red 
sari might have worn a nose ring, bangles and a cobra-shaped braid 
ornament. If she were a second wife, she wore an ornament of rock 
crystal to ward off the spirit of the former wife. With all the glitter, 
the gallery takes on the festivness of a wedding itself. Gold and 
silver, much in demand in India in the 19th century, were also scarce 
natural resources. ``Since Roman times, Indians would only trade their 
spice, ivory and textiles for silver or gold,'' said Untracht, ``and 
the ships came laden in bullion.'' Much of the gold came from the 
1849 California gold rush. Little could a Forty-Niner imagine that 
the gold he gathered would crown a young groom on his wedding day 
in the Punjab. But gold was more than a luxury. In the foreword to 
the catalog, Susan Weber Soros, the director of the Bard Graduate 
Center, writes, ``Hindu belief holds that gold is a sacred metal, 
symbolizing the warmth of the sun.'' 
</TEXT>
</DOC>