<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981124.0299 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Russia, Kazakhstan and major oil companies Tuesday agreed to build 
a multibillion-dollar pipeline to the oil-rich Caspian Sea region. 
The project is scheduled to completed in 2001 and would be the first 
major new pipeline in the region. It would connect the Tengiz oil 
field to a Russian port on the Black Sea. While the move is an important 
step in tapping the oil resources of the Caspian, it is also part 
of the Russian government's struggle to regain credibility with foreign 
businesspeople. With Russia in the grips of a financial crisis, foreign 
investors have been fleeing in droves. The nation's banking system 
is virtually paralyzed. The Kremlin has served notice that it will 
seek to renegotiate its foreign debt. Major Western oil companies 
have also scaled back their operations in Russia by cutting back staff 
and selling stakes in joint ventures. Tuesday's accord is intended 
to signal that Russian Prime Minister Yevgeny Primakov's left-leaning 
team is still capable of doing business with an increasingly skeptical 
West. It will also bring billions of dollars in tax revenue to Russia's 
cash-starved government. But there is plenty of work needed to turn 
Tuesday's accord into a reality. ``It is still a long way to go,'' 
warned Richard Matzke, president of Chevron Overseas Petroleum Inc., 
a unit of Chevron Corp. ``We have not built the pipeline yet.'' The 
Tengiz pipeline has a tangled history. It has been under discussion 
for the better part of a decade. At stake were huge profits for U.S. 
oil companies, greater political independence from Moscow for Kazakhstan 
and revenue for Moscow. Russian President Boris Yeltsin and Kazakhstan 
President Nursultan Nazarbayev agreed that the pipeline should be 
built in 1996. But it took another two years to iron out the details. 
It is hardly the only pipeline project being planned. The United States 
and Turkey are also pressing the construction of a separate pipeline 
from Baku the capital of Azerbaijan to the Turkish port of Ceyhan. 
Turkey has even said that it might try to fight competition from the 
new Tengiz pipeline by reducing tanker traffic through the Bosporus, 
the strait between the Black Sea and the Sea of Marmara, and raising 
transit fees. Still, today's accord was an important breakthrough. 
While Chevron and other oil companies are investing $20 billion to 
develop the Tengiz field transportation has been a major problem. 
Much of the crude is shipped by train. The new plan is to ship it 
along a 900 mile pipeline to the Russian port of Novorossiysk. There, 
it will be loaded onto ships and sold to the West. The goal is to 
load the first ship before July 1999. The capacity of the pipeline 
will be 67 million tons a year, but the plan is to reach a level of 
28 million tons a year before the end of 1999. ``The Tengiz oil field 
may be fully developed only after this pipeline has been built,'' 
Primakov said. ``Many oil companies think this oil region is even 
richer than the Persian Gulf, although I personally doubt this.'' 
Building the pipeline will cost some $2.3 billion. More than $854 
million is to spent next year. But Russia's will ultimately earn as 
much as $23 billion in tax revenue from the project. Under the agreement, 
the Caspian Pipeline Consortium will oversee the project. Russia has 
a 24 percent share of the consortium; Kazakhstan, 19 percent, and 
the Persian Gulf nation of Oman, 7 percent. Other shares are held 
by oil companies, led by Chevron, which has 15 percent, and also including 
a venture of Lukoil and ARCO, 12.5 percent; Royal Dutch/Shell Group 
and RAO Rosneft, a Russian oil company, 7.5 percent; ENI SpA of Italy, 
2 percent; BG PLC of Britain, 2 percent, and the Oryx Energy Company 
of Dallas, 1.75 percent. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>