<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981124.0269 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
In 1994, South Africa's first all-race elections were sloppy, but 
everybody was too happy to care. This time they care. Last time, there 
was no voter registration. All you had to do was show up with an identification 
document. This time, however, the country is trying to enforce stricter 
controls. But for weeks controversy has been brewing over the registration 
process, and fears that administrative chaos could keep millions from 
voting have been growing. A date for the elections has not been set, 
though sometime in May seems likely. Tuesday, the Independent Electoral 
Commission announced that it would postpone its registration drive 
in about half the country, saying it was not prepared to meet a goal 
it set for itself that seemed hopelessly optimistic _ to sign up 23 
million of 25 million eligible voters this weekend. Commission officials 
said they needed more time to train the 72,000 civil servants and 
8,000 soldiers who were to man 15,000 registration booths. The commission 
had to turn to the civil servants because it does not have the money 
to hire and train its own workers. This is only the latest problem 
with the registration. More than 5 million people are thought to lack 
the updated national identity booklets needed to register. Red tape, 
confusion and long lines have hindered many from getting their documents. 
And most of those left out in the cold are white, because blacks acted 
quickly to get rid of their apartheid-era papers. The governing African 
National Congress is nevertheless insisting that the new bar-coded 
identification documents are needed to register, and this has set 
off an outcry from the mainly white-supported opposition parties. 
The delay in the registration process hardly appeased them. The leader 
of the National Party, Marthinus van Schalkwyk, said the delay in 
voter registration showed that the country was being governed ``by 
a bunch of incompetent people.'' In a nationally broadcast speech, 
President Nelson Mandela said difficulties were to be expected given 
the scope of the first-time exercise. ``But the work that has been 
done so far and the good will that has been shown give me the confidence 
that we will succeed,'' he said. Under the commission's new plan, 
only the nation's five northern provinces, including Gauteng, where 
Johannesburg and Pretoria are situated, will register voters Friday, 
Saturday and Sunday. The provinces account for about half the number 
of eligible voters. The other four will go forward Dec. 3-5, said 
the commission's chief electoral officer, Mandla Mchunu. Recent polls 
indicate a decline in the support for the African National Congress, 
with a growing number of South Africans saying they are uncommitted 
to any party. Some experts believe, however, that those voters are 
likely to return to the parties they left. In any case, even with 
the lost of support, the ANC is still the choice of between 50 and 
60 percent of the voters, making its victory a largely foregone conclusion. 
The issue for the ANC, however, is not whether it will win the election, 
but whether it can capture more than two-thirds of the vote, the share 
needed for it to change the constitution. A few months ago, party 
officials were open about this goal, but lately say less about it. 
The other parties rallied quickly to question what it was that the 
ANC wanted to change and to warn about giving any one party that much 
power. Which party will become the official opposition is more in 
question. There is quite a lot of jockeying among the opposition parties. 
The party that brought South Africa apartheid, the National Party, 
has plunged in many of the recent polls. It won about 22 percent of 
the vote in the 1994 elections, but some surveys have said it would 
now win less than 10 percent. The largely white, liberal and very 
vocal Democratic Party is gaining ground, as is the newly created 
United Democratic Party, which is an attempt at a multiracial party. 
The date for the election is to be set by Mandela. But the constitution 
prohibits him from doing so before late April. Mchunu said the commission 
was urging Mandela to settle on a May election date, before the winter 
set in and days shortened in the Southern Hemisphere. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>