<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981124.0331 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Deutsche Bank AG's $9.7 billion bid for Bankers Trust of New York 
is merely the most visible sign of a much broader upheaval in European 
finance. From Swiss giants like UBS to aggressive acquirers like ABN-Amro 
of the Netherlands, big money-center banks in Europe are coping with 
intense new competition both globally and in their home markets. The 
new pressures are sending more and more financial institutions _ banks, 
insurers and mutual fund companies _ into one another's arms. Many 
analysts and industry executives assume there will be additional trans-Atlantic 
deals as European banks struggle to carve out positions in the huge 
American market. Part of the pressure comes from American investment 
banks, which now play a dominant role in orchestrating Europe's biggest 
industrial mergers and help companies raise money from global markets. 
But there are other forces at work. The introduction of the single 
European currency, the euro, for 11 countries in January has increased 
the pressure on national banks to reinvent themselves as European 
players. Meanwhile, profit margins in traditional banking areas like 
commercial lending have declined so much in countries like Germany 
that banks are scrambling to enter more lucrative areas. The result 
is a sweeping realignment in European finance. Big insurers are forming 
cross-border alliances with commercial banks. Takeover battles have 
erupted between rival institutions; the Belgian financial firm Fortis, 
for example, outbid ABN-Amro earlier this year in the $14 billion 
takeover of Belgium's Generale de Banque SA. And within countries, 
banks are merging to reduce their costs and bolster efficiency. ``There 
are whole new growth areas, and these have caused the banks to realize 
they have to reposition themselves,'' said Norbert Enste, a managing 
partner at B. Metzler Seel. Sohn &AMP; Co., a private bank in Frankfurt. 
``This is something that won't be over in one year. It will last a 
long time.'' Not surprisingly, Deutsche Bank's bid for Bankers Trust 
has prompted speculation about other big deals. Dresdner Bank, which 
owns the relatively small investment bank Dresdner Kleinwort Benson, 
has acknowledged that it is interested in American acquisitions. Other 
institutions may feel pressure too, analysts said. Credit Suisse Group 
conducted talks with Chase Manhattan earlier this year. And UBS, which 
is still struggling to reorganize after its merger with the Swiss 
Bank Corp., may still have an appetite for a U.S. investment bank. 
Though UBS has an American base in asset management, Warburg Dillon 
Read, its investment banking business, is not in the top tier of Wall 
Street firms. Behind the chess-like machinations lie deeper problems. 
Except for Credit Suisse Group, which owns Credit Suisse First Boston, 
European commercial banks have had little success when they have bought 
Wall Street investment banks. Investment banking, with its reliance 
on superstar deal-makers and stratospheric salaries, remains alien 
to the stodgier ``universal'' banks that are built around traditional 
lending activities. ``It's an open question as to whether the endgame 
of containing the two things under one roof is workable,'' said Claus 
Lowe, chairman of J.P. Morgan's German office. ``The culture in retail 
consumer banking and wholesale investment banking is just so different.'' 
Indeed, analysts and industry executives have been almost uniformly 
critical about Deutsche Bank's attempt to buy Bankers Trust, which 
derives most of its income from investment banking activities but 
is not big enough to compete directly with Wall Street's biggest firms. 
``It is the management challenge from hell,'' said Peter Thorne, a 
banking analyst at Paribas Capital in London. Most of the big credit-rating 
agencies placed Deutsche Bank under review for a possible downgrade 
soon after the bank confirmed that it was in ``advanced stages'' of 
a deal on Monday. In announcing its review, Moody's Investors Service 
emphasized the ``difficulty'' of integrating with an investment bank 
and noted that Deutsche Bank had already had problems after it bought 
the British investment bank Morgen Grenfell. Robin Monro Davies, chief 
executive officer of the rating agency Fitch IBCA in London, was more 
blunt. ``There are relatively few firms, maybe three or four in the 
world, that have consistently been successful at investment banking,'' 
Davies said at a banking conference here Tuesday. ``The history of 
buying banks has not been a happy one.'' To be sure, European banks 
and insurers may well be more focused on deals with one another than 
with Wall Street firms. Many institutions have become fixated on the 
idea of ``bankassurance,'' the idea of marketing bank services and 
insurance through the same channels, and European insurers already 
have a web of cross-holdings with banks. For instance, Commerzbank, 
Germany's fourth-largest bank, recently exchanged a 5 percent stake 
with Generali, the big Italian insurer. Besides giving both companies 
new channels to market their products in Europe, many bankers say 
the deal provides Commerzbank with a white knight to fend off any 
takeover attempts. But so far, most of the big deals have been between 
banks within individual countries. In Italy, Credito Italiano acquired 
the rival Unicredito for about $7 billion earlier this year. The two 
biggest banks in the German state of Bavaria, Bayerische Vereinsbank 
and Bayerische Hypobank, merged in a deal that created Germany's second-largest 
bank. Several Scandinavian banks have reached deals to merge. The 
action is not over. One of the most aggressive banks in recent years 
has been ABN Amro, which has acquired businesses in most European 
countries and unsuccessfully attempted a $12 billion hostile takeover 
of Generale of Belgium. ABN has bought up smaller banks and brokerage 
firms across Europe, and it acquired the Michigan savings bank, Standard 
Federal Bancorporation, for $1.9 billion two years ago. With total 
assets of about $500 billion, the Dutch bank is now in the same league 
as Germany's biggest institutions. In some countries, political obstacles 
continue to block many bank mergers. In Germany, 80 percent of the 
bank industry is controlled by either nonprofit cooperatives or state-owned 
institutions. Private banks like Deutsche Bank or Dresdner Bank are 
essentially prohibited from buying these institutions. In France, 
government leaders continue to block foreign banks from taking over 
French institutions. Even the loss-plagued Credit Lyonnaise, which 
the government is desperately trying to sell, remains off limits to 
banks from other European countries. ``France in a way is a closed 
shop,'' said Michael Klein, a German bank analyst at Sal. Oppenheim 
in Frankfurt. ``They don't want to sell their silver to foreigners, 
but they don't have enough money to really enter Germany.'' 
</TEXT>
</DOC>