<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981124.0302 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Next Sunday, an exhibition of photographs by Brassai, called ``The 
Eye of Paris,'' will open at the Museum of Fine Arts in Houston. The 
result of 15 years of research by Anne Wilkes Tucker, the museum's 
curator of photography, it is the first major museum retrospective 
of Brassai's work to be held in this country since one at the Museum 
of Modern Art in New York in 1968. There was a time, not so many years 
ago, when Brassai was one of the best known and most visible photographers 
around. He was also one of the great company of Central European exiles 
of World Wars I and II. In person, he was a twinkling little Transylvanian 
with a magic touch in all human relations. Born in 1899 in the ancient 
Hungarian city of Brasso, he was a cosmopolitan by birth, almost, 
in that Brasso had a large numbers of Hungarian, German and Romanian 
inhabitants. As a young man he took the pseudonym ``Brassai,'' which 
means ``the man from Brasso.'' After the defeat of the Austro-Hungarian 
monarchy in 1918, he eventually made his way to Berlin, where he fell 
in with an exiled artistic elite. (Among them were Kandinsky, Moholy-Nagy 
and Oskar Kokoschka.) From Berlin, early in 1924, he got to Paris, 
which was to be his home until his death in 1984. There he lived with 
his wife, Gilberte Mercedes Boyer, who after his death became a formidable 
guardian of his estate. He endeared himself everywhere, and to almost 
everyone. He got the pulse of a certain Paris, and he knew how to 
present it. When the two great high-art magazines in Paris were ``Minotaure'' 
and ``Verve,'' he was welcomed in both of them. But he could also 
adapt to more raffish milieus. To writers _ Americans like Henry Miller 
and Englishmen like Lawrence Durrell _ he was the embodiment of an 
easy-going Paris in which people could live as they pleased, and for 
very little. Before 1939, Brassai had made his name in England primarily 
with his contributions to the new-style magazines _ among them ``Lilliput'' 
and ``Picture Post'' _ which brought a new, fast-moving and somewhat 
rakish esthetic to the stately world of English periodicals. He was 
also well known, then as now, for his studies of the more disreputable 
aspects of Parisian night life. In the United States, and when Carmel 
Snow presided over Harper's Bazaar, he was constantly on view. (Ms. 
Tucker says in her catalogue that between 1945 and 1960, Brassai appeared 
in more than 70 features in Harper's Bazaar.) But he also had an auxiliary 
activity. Little known at that time, it may well be his most lasting 
achievement. He had won the confidence of many of the major painters 
and sculptors of the day. Among them were Pierre Bonnard, Georges 
Braque, Alberto Giacometti, Fernand Leger, Henri Matisse, Joan Miro 
and Pablo Picasso. Not only did he photograph them, but he overheard 
what they talked about. Thanks to him, posterity can know what they 
looked like, how they lived, what company they kept and what was said 
around them. A major document in that connection is ``Picasso and 
Company,'' with text and photographs by Brassai (published in 1966 
by Doubleday). Another, smaller one is ``The Artists of My Life,'' 
also with text and pictures by Brassai, published by Viking in 1982. 
The Picasso Museum in Paris is preparing an exhibition of Brassai's 
photographs of Picasso and his friends for next year. At the time 
Brassai was taking those photographs, major artists were not celebrities 
in today's sense. Often their neighbors did not even know who they 
were. The ``photo-op'' was unknown. Brassai's photographs have therefore 
a certain privacy, not to mention an authenticity that we immediately 
recognize. It so happens that both the name and the work of Brassai 
have specific echoes for me. During much of the 1950s, I was way behind 
with a long-promised and largely paid-for book about Paris. Those 
were easy-going times for delinquent authors, but even so I was conspicuously 
late. When I finally gave my manuscript to my publishers, B.T. Batsford 
in London, they did not scold. What they said was: ``We have good 
news for you. Brassai is doing the photographs for your book.'' Batsford's 
had published the English-language version of Brassai's ``Paris by 
Night.'' They had also organized his first exhibition in London. It 
was natural that they should bring Brassai aboard. Nor could I have 
wished for a better jacket image than his panoramic photograph of 
the Place de la Concorde, with its fountains, its obelisk, its two 
great town houses designed by Gabriel, and the church of the Madeleine 
in the distance. Inside the book were 42 more photographs by Brassai. 
Our joint book (if I may so describe it) did not result from a collaboration. 
My work was already done. I did not meet Brassai until late in the 
day, when I was deputed to ask him to make two new photographs for 
the book. We met as strangers, therefore. On our way out to lunch 
I noticed that when it came to crossing the road _ and especially 
at one of those five- or six-way crossings in which Paris specializes 
_ he would take me by the waist, as if I were made of blown glass. 
After looking in every possible direction, he would tighten his grip 
and guide me, step by step. What I then regarded as almost an excess 
of courtesy (and one that was to mark our every outing in Paris), 
has been made clear to me by Ms. Tucker in her catalogue. When Brassai's 
parents took him to Paris in 1903-04, he was terrified by the still 
largely horse-drawn traffic. That he would be trodden underfoot was 
a matter of daily anxiety. The headlong gallop of horse after horse 
was terrifying to the small boy. Something of that terror never left 
him, and for that reason he would continually watch over his friends 
when crossing the road. This matter apart, our relations were cloudless. 
Brassai was the very spirit of mischief and good humor. His images 
chimed with what I had written. The jacket, with its blue rinse, has 
never faded, and the book sold nicely. ``Brassai: The Eye of Paris'' 
will be on view in Houston through February. It will then travel to 
the Getty Museum in Los Angeles and to the National Gallery of Art 
in Washington. I cannot resist remarking on the exemplary discretion 
with which Gilberte Brassai, the artist's widow, has chosen to be 
represented by a portrait of herself that is exactly 2\ inches high 
by 1\ inches wide. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>