<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981124.0397 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
A ruling by a federal judge Monday that barred public libraries in 
Loudoun County from limiting how patrons use the Internet is binding 
only in southern Virginia, but it seemed sure to have national implications 
as librarians across the country began to review their own Internet 
policies in the wake of the decision in the closely watched case. 
The judge, Leonie Brinkema of U.S. District Court in Alexandria, Va., 
is a former librarian herself and wrote that the county library's 
decision to install computer programs that seek to block sexually 
explicit material on the Internet ``offends the guarantee of free 
speech in the First Amendment.'' Such ``filter'' programs have been 
widely criticized by civil libertarians as ineffective because they 
fail to screen out all material that might be harmful to minors and 
in the process block a wide spectrum of material that is not inappropriate. 
The plaintiffs in the Loudoun case, represented by the American Civil 
Liberties Union, included the proprietors of sites on the World Wide 
Web about safe sex, banned books and gay and lesbian teen-agers. All 
claimed to have been blocked by the software. In striking down the 
Loudoun County Library board's policy, which required that all library 
computers connected to the Internet be equipped with a filtering program, 
Judge Brinkema cited Reno vs. ACLU, the 1997 Supreme Court decision 
that upheld a ruling that overturned a federal law that sought to 
prohibit the distribution of indecent material to minors over the 
Internet. ``It has long been a matter of settled law that restricting 
what adults may read to a level appropriate for minors is a violation 
of the free speech guaranteed by the First Amendment,'' she said. 
The ruling comes as a federal judge in Philadelphia last Thursday 
issued a temporary restraining order on a new federal law intended 
to protect children from Internet pornography. And several congressional 
attempts to require schools to install filter programs failed to pass 
in the last session. But particularly because public libraries provide 
free access to the Internet to those who may not have any other means 
of using it, they have been seen as a crucial site of the struggle 
over how the medium will be regulated. In the absence of any precedent, 
librarians and patrons have cobbled together various compromises in 
an attempt to strike a balance between providing access to the vast 
array of information on the Internet and protecting children from 
portions of it that may be harmful. Tuesday, several librarians in 
communities where the decision to use filters has been particularly 
controversial said they were carefully reviewing the Loudoun decision. 
``This will be helpful for decisions in the future,'' said Mike Harris, 
interim director of the Medina County District Library in Ohio, where 
last year community members organized an unsuccessful campaign to 
cut the library's funding unless it installed filters. ``We've been 
flying a little bit blind here and this gives us a good referral point.'' 
Brenda Branch, director of the Austin Public Library, where the decision 
to install filters has endured sustained protest from civil libertarians 
over the last year, said she had asked the city attorneys to review 
the Virginia court's decision. Dorothy Field, director of the Orange 
County Library system in Orlando, Fla., said she would not consider 
removing the filtering system there. ``We have exercised our role 
as librarians to choose the material for our selection,'' she said. 
``What happens in Loudoun County is not going to change anything here.'' 
The Virginia decision raised the possibility that less restrictive 
methods, such as using privacy screens or installing filters on terminals 
that are set aside for children, might be acceptable under the First 
Amendment. ``We're very pleased with the decision, and we are hopeful 
that the library board will now put a constitutional policy in place 
and that this will be the end of the issue,'' said Jeri McGiverin, 
a retired schoolteacher who helped organize the group of Loudoun residents 
who initially filed the complaint. Librarians in Loudoun cut off the 
Internet connections on Tuesday pending a library board meeting next 
week where a decision will be made on whether or not to appeal. ``I 
would expect to win on appeal,'' said John Nicholas, the former chairman 
of the library board who helped install the old policy. ``This is 
an issue of the library following its historical mandate, which is 
to select material which is appropriate to the community at hand.'' 
But Nicholas said the composition of the board had changed since the 
policy was instituted, and he did not expect a vote to appeal to pass. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>