<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981124.0140 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
This year, say those who tend the stately groves of pecan trees here 
in central Georgia _ or ``middle Georgia,'' in local parlance _ the 
pecans ``did not show up for work.'' That's an exaggeration, of course. 
The inexperienced eye sees great heaps of the nuts on the ground beneath 
the huge, spreading trees, before they spill in a golden rush from 
shelling machines. And there will be no shortage of pecan pie on the 
nation's Thanksgiving tables Thursday. But this year the rigs that 
are still weaving their way among Georgia's pecan trees will shake 
loose only an estimated 50 million pounds of the sweet, tender, meaty 
nuts, about half the normal harvest for the state, which leads the 
nation in pecan production. No, this was not a normal year. ``The 
weather did not cooperate,'' said Al Pearson, an owner of Big Six 
Farms in Fort Valley, near Perry, where patches of raw earth are the 
color of yams and where fields of cotton sugar the flat landscape 
that has not been planted with peach or pecan trees. The rains, and 
then the heat, came at the wrong times. ``I'm just hoping we can get 
enough of the crop in before the leaves fall,'' Pearson said two weeks 
ago during a tour of his land. Given the proper conditions in the 
fall _ a nip in the air doesn't hurt _ the round, lime-size husks 
begin to split, releasing the nuts inside. In a good year, a tree 
will produce 100 pounds of pecans, which works out to about 1,000 
pounds an acre. Farmers here still speak wistfully of 1978, when the 
state produced 135 million pounds. This year's shortfall is forcing 
prices up to $7 or more a pound for pecan halves, about a $1 more 
than they were last year. The harvest, which began about a month ago, 
is now going full bore and is likely to continue well into December. 
You start to see roadside stands that advertise ``new crop pecans'' 
along the flat highways that radiate south from Macon. Six weeks ago 
in Atlanta, about an hour's drive north of Macon, there were no pecans 
for sale at Harry's Markets, a chain of huge food stores that specialize 
in fancy produce. ``We're waiting for this year's crop,'' a clerk 
said. A fresh pecan is a revelation, a far different thing from the 
brown, often wizened nut that you find in bags on supermarket shelves. 
At its best, no more than a month off the tree, a pecan is golden, 
plump and tender, with a mellow, buttery flavor and hardly any of 
the bitter tannins found in the walnut, a distant relative. The farmers 
always hope for an early harvest, starting in mid-October and finishing 
fast. Later in the season, when the tree's slender, gray-green leaves 
begin to drop, they slow the complex sorting and grading process. 
And in an off year especially, it becomes a burdensome expense. ``One 
good day of harvest in October is worth a week in December,'' Pearson 
said. But Pearson, a gray-haired man who manages to avoid the farmer's 
weather-beaten look, is into pecan production for keeps, as temperamental 
as it may be. Constantly fishing the smooth-shelled oval nuts from 
his pocket, cracking them in his palms and absent-mindedly munching 
them, he explained that his great-grandfather came to the region from 
a town near the Alabama border more than 100 years ago for logging 
and farming. There were few pecan trees at the time. Pecans are native 
to the lower Mississippi Valley but not to Georgia. The 16th-century 
Spanish explorer Hernando De Soto, who discovered the Mississippi 
River, wrote about these nuts. They are a relative of the hickory, 
and their name comes from a Cree word meaning ``bone shell'' or ``hard 
shell.'' Their botanical name, Carya illinoinensis, or Illinois hickory, 
may be a misnomer, since you won't find many pecans growing there. 
Texas follows Georgia in production, with an average of 60 million 
pounds a year. Thomas Jefferson planted Mississippi Valley pecans 
at Monticello and gave a few trees to George Washington. Three of 
them still flourish at Mount Vernon. Over the years, stands of wild 
pecan trees took root in Georgia, but in the late 1800s there were 
only about 100 acres planted for commercial purposes. They thrived, 
and by the 1920s nearly 100,000 acres were under cultivation. The 
ideal pecan tree _ one that is easy to grow, has a straight trunk 
that is not vulnerable to storms and matures early with high yields 
of large, high-quality paper-shell nuts _ has not been developed. 
Today, there are more than 500 growers in Georgia but no single major 
brand to promote them, the way Diamond Walnut Growers has established 
a market for California walnuts. Pearson's grandfather John Winlock 
Pearson, who was the oldest of six boys and six girls _ a number that 
gives Big Six Farms its name _ grew mostly peaches. Fort Valley is 
in Peach County. Pearson's father, Lawton Pearson, began planting 
pecans on a large scale after World War II, finding that the two crops 
complemented each other: they require the same soil and can be harvested 
at different times. Pearson now runs the farm's 1,100 acres of pecans 
and 1,200 acres of peaches with his brother-in-law Bill McGehee. ``I 
wish it could be all pecans,'' Pearson said. ``They're less labor-intensive, 
and they don't have a lot of competition, the way the peaches do from 
California. I think there's a real future for them.'' By future, Pearson 
is looking beyond Thursday's pies, or even the few weeks following 
Thanksgiving when bags of the nuts are added to cookies and gift baskets. 
And perhaps he is also looking beyond our shores. Unlike other indigenous 
American foods _ corn, beans and potatoes, for example _ pecans have 
never been embraced by Europeans and are still relatively unknown 
in Europe or other parts of the world. Hardly any of the American 
crop is exported. Only recently have pecans been grown outside the 
United States, notably in Australia and South Africa. But if there 
is to be future growth in the pecan market, there must also be an 
appreciation for pecans that goes beyond the pie and a few other confections. 
Pecan pie is on every Georgian menu, of course. It's usually made 
with nut pieces, not halves, and often has a gooey, pale filling, 
because many Georgian cooks use granulated sugar and light corn syrup. 
Elizabeth Terry, an owner of Elizabeth on 37th, a restaurant in Savannah, 
said that the more delicate flavor is needed to offset the pecan taste. 
It's the same at the venerable New Perry Hotel in Perry. But Pearson's 
wife, Mary, who bakes the pies that the Pearsons sell in their cafe 
and store, Pearson Farms, also in Perry, uses light brown sugar for 
a little more intensity. When it comes to pecan pie in Georgia, everyone 
is an expert. But you have to be in Georgia to understand that pecans 
are also there for breakfast, lunch and dinner year-round, in pancakes, 
muffins, salads, chicken dishes, fish breading, casserole toppings 
and desserts. And also for nibbling plain, an easy habit to acquire 
when the nuts are so good and so fresh. And freshness is at the heart 
of the matter. They know how to handle pecans in Georgia. When the 
season is over, Georgians maintain the quality of the nuts by keeping 
them refrigerated, which will preserve them for a month or so, or 
better still, by freezing them, which holds them in top condition 
for six months or longer. ``If people came down into a grove and tasted 
a fresh pecan, they might never buy one from a store,'' said Buddy 
Leger, who grows pecans at L &AMP; M Enterprises in nearby Cordele, 
and who is also the chairman of the state's Pecan Commission. ``We 
can't get supermarkets to put them in the cooler with the produce.'' 
Because pecans have such a high fat content _ more than 70 percent, 
compared to 64 percent for walnuts _ they easily turn rancid and acrid. 
But freshness is only the first thing to understand about Georgia's 
pecans. Of the 100 or so varieties, about 30 have been developed for 
commercial production, and several of them are important in Georgia. 
Stuarts _ medium to large flattened ovals _ are the most likely to 
be on store shelves outside the state. The Schley _ pronounced SLY 
and more spade-shaped than the Stuart _ has the thinnest shell, making 
it the easiest to crack; it is often sold in the shell. The largest 
of the lot is the Desirable, which is often called ``mammoth'' in 
mail-order catalogs. It is fat and meaty but slightly rumpled-looking. 
And who would not be intrigued by medium-size ones called Cape Fear? 
But local connoisseurs tend to prefer the plump but small, rounded 
Elliotts. ``Why does anyone need a nut larger than the Elliott, especially 
when it tastes so good?'' Pearson asked. It isn't hard to be won over; 
they are deliciously sweet and beautiful, in flawless halves. At Ellis 
Brothers, a grower and sheller in Vienna (pronounced vye-AN-nuh), 
the owners love the Elliott because the neat, perfect halves are easily 
popped from the shells. ``It doesn't make pieces, and in our business, 
we want 85 percent of the nuts in halves,'' said Elliot Ellis, who 
is an owner of the company, which was founded by his father in 1944, 
and whose first name is a coincidence. Once the nuts have been harvested 
and separated from debris like leaves, twigs and stones, they are 
polished mechanically to remove the natural black streaks that sometimes 
mark the shells, a process that is strictly cosmetic. Then the shells 
are washed in a chlorine solution to sanitize them before they are 
fed into a bank of crackers, where each nut is grabbed in a little 
vise and hit by a plunger to break the shell, at the rate of one nut 
a second. At Ellis Brothers, a relatively small company, 10,000 pounds 
are processed a day during harvest time. The nuts pass through a series 
of contraptions with galvanized metal arms and chutes covered in pecan 
dust. In the chutes, extraneous bits of shell are removed, as the 
nuts are sorted and graded before reaching conveyors, where women 
do a final inspection and sort the pecans by hand. Then the nuts are 
bagged. Some go directly into the country store in the front of the 
plant, where they sail off the shelves. ``This year we know we can 
sell everything we shell,'' Ellis said. So, it may pay to stock up 
on shelled pecans. Now. Just remember to put them in the freezer. 
GEORGIA PECAN CREAM CHEESE POUNDCAKE Adapted from Gwen Arrendale, 
Arrendale Farm, Quitman, Ga. Time: 2{ hours 1{ cups soft unsalted 
butter, in pieces 2 tablespoons all-purpose flour 8 ounces cream cheese, 
in pieces 3 cups sugar 6 eggs 1{ teaspoons vanilla extract { teaspoon 
almond extract 3 cups cake flour 1{ cups finely chopped pecans. 1. 
Preheat oven to 325 degrees. Use a little of the butter to grease 
a 10-inch tube pan. Dust with all-purpose flour, and shake out the 
excess. 2. Place remaining butter and the cream cheese in an electric 
mixer, and beat briefly to combine. Add sugar, and beat at medium-low 
speed until light and fluffy, about 5 minutes. Beat in eggs, one at 
a time. Stir in vanilla and almond extracts. 3. Add cake flour, about 
{ cup at a time, beating at the lowest speed to blend it in, until 
there is only about \ cup flour remaining. Toss pecans with this flour, 
and then fold them into batter by hand. 4. Spoon batter into the pan, 
smooth top, and rap the pan once or twice on counter top to even it. 
Place in oven, and bake about 1 hour 45 minutes, until top is golden 
brown, cake begins to shrink from sides of pan and a cake tester inserted 
in the middle comes out clean. 5. Allow to cool on a rack for 30 minutes, 
and then remove from pan to finish cooling. Yield: 18 servings. GEORGIA 
PECAN TURKEY SALAD Adapted from Mary Pearson Time: 20 minutes 2{ cups 
very finely minced cooked turkey { cup chopped pecans \ cup sweet 
pickle relish { teaspoon celery salt Two-thirds cup mayonnaise Salt 
and freshly ground black pepper. 1. Mix turkey, pecans, relish and 
salt together. Fold in the mayonnaise. Season to taste with salt and 
pepper, and serve. Yield: 4 servings. PECAN PANCAKES Adapted from 
``Recipes From the New Perry Hotel'' by Bobbe Nelson Time: 30 minutes 
2 cups flour 4 teaspoons baking powder 1 teaspoon sugar { teaspoon 
salt 2 eggs 2 cups milk 1{ cups finely chopped pecans Butter for greasing 
skillet (optional) Melted butter and maple syrup for serving. 1. Whisk 
flour, baking powder, sugar and salt together in a bowl. In another 
bowl, beat eggs and milk together, pour over the flour mixture, and 
stir until blended. Fold in the pecans. 2. Heat regular or nonstick 
skillet or griddle over medium-high heat. Grease it with butter, if 
needed. 3. Drop large spoonfuls (about one-third cup) of batter into 
skillet or onto griddle. Use back of spoon to spread it a little. 
Cook each pancake for 1 or 2 minutes on each side, until golden brown, 
and then remove from pan. Repeat with remaining batter, and then serve 
with butter and syrup. Yield: 12 large pancakes, serving 6. OUTSIDE 
pecan country, the only way to buy the nuts by type is by mail order. 
Here are a few pecan sources: PEARSON FARMS, 1412 Sam Nunn Boulevard, 
Perry, Ga. 31069; (888) 423-7374. Shelled halves are $7 a pound, or 
$10 a pound in a gift tin; in the shell they are three pounds for 
$7.75. Prices do not include shipping. ELLIS BROTHERS, 1315 Tippettville 
Road, Vienna, Ga. 31092; (800) 635-0616. Halves are sold by variety, 
with a three-pound minimum. Stuarts are $21 for three pounds; Elliotts, 
$22.95, and Desirables, $24, including shipping. SUNNYLAND FARMS, 
P.O. Box 8200, Albany, Ga. 31706; (800) 999-2488. Three pounds of 
mammoth halves are $29.55; 2 pounds 4 ounces of junior size are $24.10, 
including shipping. YOUNG'S PECANS, Pecan Plantation, 551 West Lucas 
Street, Florence, S.C. 29502; (800) 729-8004. Mammoth halves are 14 
ounces for $8.95; 34 ounces, $20.25, and 5 pounds, $45.25. Shipping 
is $5.50 extra per address. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>