<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981124.0338 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
The latest snapshot of the U.S. economy showed on Tuesday that the 
long-predicted slowdown is still more forecast than fact. The economy 
performed better during the summer than had been originally reported 
and consumer confidence bounced back this fall, according to a fresh 
batch of data released on Tuesday. Along with other signs of buoyancy 
_ in jobs, retail sales and housing _ the new data suggest that growth 
remains surprisingly solid. Despite financial turmoil abroad and tremblings 
at home, the nation's gross domestic product grew at an annual rate 
of 3.9 percent in the third quarter, revised upward from an initial 
estimate of 3.3 percent, the Commerce Department said on Tuesday. 
The growth did not reflect goods piling up in warehouses but stronger 
demand in most parts of the economy. Inflation, meanwhile, was less 
than 1 percent. Consumer confidence, as measured by an index by the 
Conference Board, a private research group in New York, has risen 
this month after four consecutive declines that brought it to an 18-month 
low in October. Armed with the latest data, forecasters are saying 
that growth in the current quarter could run as high as 3 percent 
but slow down sometime in the new year. ``The slowdown turns out to 
be a 1999 story rather than a 1998 story,'' said Nick Perna, chief 
economist at Fleet Bank. Barring a bolt from the blue, the current 
economic expansion should by January overtake the 92-month boom experienced 
during the Reagan administration and close in on the Kennedy-Johnson 
expansion, the longest ever. ``We're not in familiar forecasting territory,'' 
William Dudley, chief economist at Goldman, Sachs &AMP; Co., said. 
He pointed to the three interest rate cuts made by the Federal Reserve 
over the last two months. ``We don't usually think of an economy with 
a 4.6 percent unemployment rate that's growing at a rate of 2.5 percent 
to 3 percent as requiring three Fed rate cuts.'' All this does not 
mean that the economy is not suffering some visible strains that presage 
slower growth in 1999. Despite healthy growth in sales, American industry 
is suffering a profit squeeze. Excess capacity at home and intense 
competition from abroad are making it nearly impossible for manufacturers 
to pass along rising labor and other costs to customers. The most 
accurate and broadest measure of corporate profits rose only marginally 
this summer compared with results from the spring quarter, the Department 
of Commerce reported on Tuesday, and it is down 2 percent compared 
with figures from the quarter a year earlier. Despite optimistic forecasts 
from analysts, few economists expect the corporate profit picture 
to brighten much, though the recent surge in the stock market's main 
gauges indicates investors obviously think the companies in those 
indexes will do better than the average company. What is more, the 
cash flow businesses had for retooling and expansion was flat in the 
third quarter, explaining why spending on plants and equipment, which 
was rising at double-digit percentile rates in the first half of the 
year, has also stopped growing. And while shipments of business equipment 
jumped 0.6 percent last month, orders that prefigure spending a few 
months down the road dropped 1.7 percent, more than erasing a 1.3 
percent rise in September. That probably reflected Asia's woes and 
those of American producers. But businesses might have reined in new 
investment anyway. Another report, concerning revised Federal Reserve 
data on industrial capacity and production going back to 1992, shows 
that capacity growth has been phenomenal in key industries. In the 
computer and office equipment business, for example, production capacity 
soared 58 percent in the last year alone. A reduction in capital spending 
by itself does not necessarily indicate slower growth. Half of the 
equipment American businesses buy comes from abroad, thus less capital 
spending means fewer imports, a smaller trade gap and more domestic 
production than would otherwise be the case. Indeed, imports as a 
whole rose less than initially reported this summer, at a 1.3 percent 
annual rate compared with 3.4 percent, while exports also fell less 
than reported. Manufacturing, of course, is the sector where the economy 
has been weak, though not as weak as previously thought, according 
to the Fed. In the last two years, industrial output has grown nearly 
a percentage point more than originally reported. Still, growth has 
fallen off sharply, only 1.9 percent this year compared with 6.6 percent 
last year. And forward-looking indicators, like the monthly reports 
by purchasing managers, suggest that the weakness in manufacturing 
is deepening. Still, manufacturing is not the whole story. American 
households, whose purchases of consumer goods and services and new 
homes account for almost three-fourths of the nation's gross domestic 
product, have been living up to their reputation as big spenders. 
Spending on goods and services rose at an annual rate of more than 
4.1 percent in the third quarter. That is slower than the more than 
6 percent annual rate of the first half, but not much. Meanwhile, 
home buying in the quarter jumped at an annual rate of 8.6 percent. 
Low interest rates, fatter household balance sheets and healthy income 
gains combined with a surge of consumer confidence have kept home 
and car sales near record highs. Consumers cannot keep spending faster 
than they earn, of course. In the last year, consumption has outpaced 
income, rising 4.7 percent vs. 3.2 percent. As a result, saving out 
of current income has slipped to practically zero. The stock market's 
rebound has repaired some of the damage to household balance sheets, 
but few economists expect that stock market gains from here on can 
provide fuel for big spending gains. What is more, Dudley of Goldman, 
Sachs noted, the impact of improved consumer spirits may be less than 
it appears. The Conference Board's November confidence reading shows 
that confidence has bounced back to the high levels it reached in 
September. What has not rebounded nearly as much is consumers' assessment 
of job market conditions. Just 40.6 percent rated jobs as ``plentiful'' 
in November, compared with 45.2 percent in September. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>