<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981124.0410 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
NEW YORK _ D.E. Shaw &AMP; Co, a big New York hedge fund and broker, 
is seeking a partner or buyer for its stock-related trading business, 
an indication that the shakeout in the hedge fund world continues 
despite calmer markets. The unit had been part of a broad strategic 
alliance between Shaw, a hedge fund founded by a former computer science 
professor, David Shaw, and the BankAmerica Corp., one of the country's 
largest banks. The alliance collapsed last month when BankAmerica 
announced that it had lost $372 million on a bond trading venture 
with Shaw. David Coulter, BankAmerica's president, resigned his position 
shortly after the loss was made public. Shaw said it hoped to attract 
a new major bank that would replace BankAmerica as the main backer 
for its stock-linked business financial products group. It would otherwise 
seek to find a buyer for the group, which employs more than 100 traders. 
The group specializes in trading convertible bonds and derivatives 
tied to stocks. The offer to sell the unit, which Shaw maintained 
had been highly profitable, suggests continued turmoil at the once-unstoppable 
hedge fund, which in recent years made 25 percent annual investment 
returns from secretive trading strategies. The private investment 
house has not sought to recruit partners publicly in the past, and 
Shaw has repeatedly denied that the fund faces even minor financial 
difficulties. The effort to raise fresh capital also shows how many 
hedge funds now have to scramble to adjust their business strategies 
and lower their risk profiles. Though financial markets have stabilized, 
many hedge funds still face net withdrawals of money from investors, 
who became more cautious about taking big risks following the summer 
crisis in world stock and bond markets, analysts said. A Shaw spokesman 
said that the hedge fund remained in excellent financial health and 
that its losses were confined to previously reported troubles at its 
fixed-income trading units. He said the effort to seek fresh capital 
or a buyer for the equity-linked unit was necessary because Shaw does 
not have a high enough credit rating to borrow money on the most favorable 
terms, and that higher borrowing costs could render some of its low-margin 
trading strategies unprofitable. ``To run the equity business successfully, 
you need a double A credit rating,'' said Nick Gianakouros, a Shaw 
executive. ``You also need relationships with corporate officers and 
treasurers. When BankAmerica was not longer willing to provide these 
functions for this business, we decided that we needed another partner.'' 
BankAmerica had provided the hedge fund with investment capital, loans 
and access to the bank's list of blue-chip clients around the world. 
Through cooperation with BankAmerica, Shaw became a leading trader 
_ in some cases, it contends, the single largest buyer and seller 
_ of some equity-linked products. Areas of specialty included Japanese 
warrants, and Southeast Asian and European convertible bonds. Gianakouros 
said the alliance with BankAmerica wound down because the bank acquired 
the in-house capability to trade and make markets in equity products 
after it merged with Nationsbank. He said the bank is under contract 
to provide services to the hedge fund through the end of 1999. But 
the relationship suffered what would appear to be a fatal blow from 
heavy bond-trading loss. To cover expected losses on a $1.3 billion 
loan to Shaw, BankAmerica took charges in October of $372 million 
and it bought all of Shaw's $20 billion bond portfolio in an attempt 
to recoup some losses. Shaw's stumble in fixed-income trading was 
not unlike that suffered by another big hedge fund, Long-Term Capital 
Management. Both speculated that prices for riskier bonds would rise 
relative to benchmark U.S. Treasury offerings. Such bets went bad 
when a worldwide flight to safety in the late summer and early fall 
pushed up Treasury prices dramatically. At the time, Shaw maintained 
that its other businesses remained highly profitable. But if the hedge 
fund ends up selling its equity-linked businesses, its trading on 
behalf of customers, as opposed to its propriety trading for investors, 
would be greatly reduced in scope. The fund said it had hired Wasserstein 
Perella &AMP; Co. to help recruit partners or find buyers for the 
unit. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>