<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981124.0303 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Among the snubbed were the silver stick in waiting, maltravers herald 
extraordinary, black rod, portcullis pursuivant, the crown equerry 
and the gentleman usher of the sword of state. Casualties of a Buckingham 
Palace effort to slim down the grandest occasion of the British ceremonial 
calendar short of a coronation or royal funeral, they were not in 
their accustomed places Tuesday at the state opening of Parliament. 
And many in the ranks seated before Queen Elizabeth on Tuesday probably 
won't be in theirs next year. In the most noted passage of the traditional 
queen's recitation of government plans for the new legislative session, 
the hereditary peers heard from the sovereign herself the official 
notice that a principal government goal next year is the removal of 
their right to sit and vote in the House of Lords. You didn't need 
to note their ermine-caped scarlet robes to spot them. They were the 
ones who kept stony silence while members of the Labor-dominated House 
of Commons standing behind them bellowed their approval at mention 
of the reform. Whatever degree of flash was lost from the pageant 
by the Buckingham Palace decision to downsize was glitteringly compensated 
for by the wives of the dukes, earls, marquesses, viscounts and barons, 
appearing in larger numbers than anyone could recall, who pressed 
onto the benches in silk and fur and family heirloom tiaras and jewelry. 
The queen's speech, which is written by the government and read by 
the monarch, disclosed 22 bills to be introduced covering the National 
Health Service, food safety, immigration, youth justice, trade union 
rights and welfare reform. The program, the queen said, staring at 
her script from beneath the imperial state crown surmounted by a diamond-encrusted 
Maltese Cross and orb, ``will focus on the modernization of the country, 
its public services and its economy.'' The most striking omission 
was any commitment to freedom of information legislation, something 
that has been promised since the Labor Party was elected in May 1997. 
Included in the speech was the government's resolve to force passage 
of new voting procedures for coming elections to the European Parliament, 
a measure the Lords defiantly sent back to Commons five times this 
month. Prime Minister Tony Blair called their performance ``an affront 
to democracy.'' The peers, who have the power to delay but not defeat 
legislation that has passed Commons, could still stall the European 
elections bill for weeks with meddlesome amendments. They could then 
proceed to tie up Parliament with objections to the bill to banish 
the hereditary members, and thereby deny the government time to pass 
its other priority bills dealing with health and education. There 
is no widespread public opposition to abolishing the voting rights 
of hereditary peers, the 759 members of the Lords whose titles, some 
dating back to the Norman Conquest, are passed down from generation 
to generation. But there is concern over Labor's failure to produce 
a plan for what will replace them. In the queen's speech on Tuesday, 
the government assigned the job to a royal commission, a step as inconclusive 
and unconvincing in Britain as referring problems to task force studies 
is in the United States. Once the hereditary peers are gone, the House 
will be made up of 512 life peers and 26 archbishops and bishops known 
as lords spiritual. With that action, the government changes a body 
with an overwhelming Conservative majority to one with a slight Tory 
edge. Opponents fear that with no agreed-upon plan in place, the government 
could quickly stack the new body with its sympathizers and end up 
with a reform that simply exchanges an unelected House with a Conservative 
dominance to an unelected one with a built-in Labor bias. As Tuesday's 
pageant unfolded, its slimmer dimensions weren't immediately noticeable, 
a reminder that regal reform moves at a stately pace. A reduction 
in the number of attendants to the queen from 51 to 37 was barely 
noticeable; even if the silver stick in waiting was gone, the gold 
stick in waiting remained. While black rod, dressed shoulder to stocking 
feet in black, no longer marched in the royal procession, he went 
through his traditional pantomime of knocking loudly on the door to 
the House of Commons with his gold lion's head ebony stick after it 
had been slammed in his face in the symbolic act representing the 
parliamentarians' independence from the crown. Hours before the queen's 
arrival at Westminster, uniformed yeomen of the guard conducted their 
Gilbert and Sullivan search for explosives in the lords' basement 
_ a throwback to the discovery of the Gunpowder Plot in 1605. Led 
by parading soldiers of the Household Cavalry, the queen rode from 
Buckingham Palace to Parliament in a gilded carriage drawn by four 
Windsor Grays and guarded by coachmen in cockaded hats who are still 
called bargemen because in the past the monarch would make the passage 
by river. Separate carriages rattled along the streets of London carrying 
velvet cushions bearing the imperial state crown, the sword of state 
and the miniver-trimmed crimson cap of maintenance. Once seated in 
the House of Lords, she received the speech from a ceremonial purse 
borne up the stairs to her throne by the lord chancellor, Lord Irvine. 
In his second victory over cumbersome protocol this month, Lord Irvine 
was permitted by the queen to descend the stairs forward rather than 
in the more precarious backward mode of his predecessors. He had earlier 
won the right to wear suit trousers and polished black shoes instead 
of black tights and buckled shoes when he serves as speaker of the 
House of Lords. No such relief awaited the earl marshal and lord great 
chamberlain. As the queen and her procession moved out of the chamber, 
they were retiring from the hall before her humbly _ and very carefully, 
their backs turned to the exit and their faces respectfully regarding 
their sovereign. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>