<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981124.0287 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
The government announced Tuesday that nearly 10 million playpens must 
be repaired or destroyed because children could strangle themselves 
if their clothing became caught on metal rivets protruding from rails 
and hinges atop the pens. The announcement was made by the Consumer 
Product Safety Commission, which said that eight toddlers had died 
in such playpens over the last 15 years. At first, federal officials 
said, they thought the problem occurred only when children were choked 
by strings attached to pacifiers. But last year, they said, a toddler 
died when the child's clothing was snagged on a playpen rivet. ``That 
indicated that the problem may be attributed to the rivets on the 
playpens, rather than to pacifier cords,'' said Nychelle Fleming, 
a spokeswoman for the commission. Federal officials said that consumers 
should destroy or repair the playpens, which carry a variety of brand 
names: Kolcraft, Playskool, Strolee, Bilt-Rite, Evenflo, Gerry, Graco 
and Pride-Trimble. Manufacturers are cooperating with the government 
to make sure that parents and day care centers eliminate the hazard. 
Companies are offering refunds or repair kits to consumers. Some of 
the portable mesh playpens were made as long as 38 years ago; others 
were produced just six months ago. The rivets look like nuts and bolts, 
but cannot be removed. They stick out one-quarter to one-half inch 
from the top rails of the playpens. The shape of the rivets varies 
with the manufacturer. There are many models of playpens without the 
dangerous rivets. They are not affected by Tuesday's announcement. 
Russell Rader, commission spokesman, said the action was ``one of 
the largest recalls of a children's product in the history of the 
agency,'' which was created in 1972. Commission officials and spokesmen 
for the baby-products industry said they did not know how many playpens 
were sold in a year or how many exist. The government said that consumers 
should immediately stop using the playpens with protruding rivets 
and should call a toll-free telephone number established specifically 
to deal with the problem. The number is (800) 794-4115. Callers will 
be told how to obtain refunds or repair kits. The commission said 
that the dangerous rivets were found in playpens manufactured by seven 
companies. Three companies account for 90 percent of the products 
to be repaired or destroyed. The companies are Graco Children's Products 
of Elverson, Pa., which made 2 million of the playpens from 1976 to 
1990; Kolcraft Enterprises of Chicago, which made 2.6 million such 
playpens from 1986 to May of this year, and Pride-Trimble Corp. of 
Burbank, Calif., which produced more than 4 million of the playpens 
from 1960 to 1991. Graco is now a unit of Rubbermaid Inc., in Wooster, 
Ohio. Its products carry the Graco name on floorboards or side rails. 
The Kolcraft products have the name Kolcraft or Playskool on floorboards 
or side rails. The Pride-Trimble name appears on the floorboards of 
its playpens. The commission said that other companies cooperating 
with its effort were Bilt-Rite of Orangeburg, N.Y., which made more 
than 409,000 playpens with protruding rivets through 1989; Evenflo 
Co. of Piqua, Ohio (205,000 playpens from 1994 to 1996), and Hufco-Delaware 
of Dayton, Ohio (100,000 playpens from 1986 to 1992). The commission 
said that another manufacturer, Strolee Co., of Compton, Calif., had 
made 200,000 such playpens through 1983 but was no longer in business. 
Hufco-Delaware playpens carry the Gerry brand name on their floorboards. 
Bridget Reuter, a spokeswoman for the Juvenile Products Manufacturers 
Association, which represents makers of playpens and baby strollers, 
said, ``We will do everything we can to cooperate with the Consumer 
Product Safety Commission.'' Thomas Koltun, president of Kolcraft 
Enterprises, said his company was working with the government and 
with retailers to publicize the problem. He said the company would 
provide free repair kits to consumers who requested them. Playpens, 
also known in recent years as play yards, are meant to provide a safe 
place where children can play. They typically have nylon mesh sides 
to keep toddlers in an enclosed area. The rails are padded and collapse 
when several levers are released. The models identified as potentially 
hazardous can be folded in half for storage. The price for a unit 
ranges from $35 to $70. Graco and Bilt-Rite are offering a refund 
of $20 for a unit, with proof that the playpen has been destroyed. 
Pride-Trimble is offering a refund of $15 a unit. The commission said 
that Houdini-brand playpens manufactured by Evenflo from 1994 to 1996 
needed to be repaired even if they had plastic covers over the rivets. 
``The rivet covers on these playpens must be replaced because they 
are defective and can crack, break or come off, exposing the rivet 
and presenting a risk of strangulation,'' Ms. Fleming said. In a further 
caution to parents, the commission said that a pacifier should never 
be hung from a string around a child's neck. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>