<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981124.0248 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
They're ganging up on ``60 Minutes.'' In the pile-on are Roman Catholic 
prelates, medical ethicists, editorial writers, television reviewers 
and teachers of journalism, all expressing indignation, shock, outrage 
that the pre-eminent news magazine should have run a video of Dr. 
Jack Kevorkian giving lethal injections to Thomas Youk, who suffered 
from Lou Gehrig's disease. To which ``60 Minutes'' on CBS and any 
other journalistic operation is bound to reply that where such a controversy 
occurs, the solid principle is to cover the news. In this case, that 
was more than amply justified by the attention the report drew to 
issues that make most people uncomfortable and only too inclined to 
ignore. When a news program compels many of them to confront a life-and-death 
issue it is doing the journalist's job, which is to say the educator's 
job. The reasons for the onslaught on the Sunday program vary, but 
common to much of the opposition is a widely held feeling that the 
picture of a man being killed simply ought not to be shown on television, 
that it offends respect for privacy, dignity, good taste and other 
values common to decent folk. The offended class can claim to be more 
refined than the people who put on television shows, more sensitive, 
more feeling and so merit special due from the rest of us. But with 
all respect, as television panelists are prone to introduce their 
caveats, such expressions of private delicacy are not self-evidently 
persuasive and may invite other interpretations. Perhaps blinking 
at death is attributable to squeamishness, immaturity, fear, denial 
of the reality that Kevorkian, the celebrant of euthanasia, is determined 
to force on viewers. When a Boston Globe editorial (``Shame on `60 
Minutes''') calls the showing of the videotape ``an unparalleled obscenity,'' 
one suspects that the writer has not been paying close attention to 
world events lately. The truly great obscenity for journalists is 
to ignore what should be before one's eyes. Whatever the motives of 
the opposition, they have more to do with defensive therapy than reporting. 
In a field rampant with entertainment violence, a television program 
with very subdued violence is protested because it defies some amorphous 
standard of propriety. In a field where mindlessness rules, a program 
with deeply serious content is protested because it goes uncomfortably 
deep. In a field of instantly forgettable trivia, a program that is 
bound to stand as one of the more powerful offerings of the season 
is protested because it may upset some stomachs or nerves or sensibilities. 
Should ``60 Minutes'' have resisted the temptation and spared itself 
charges of sensationalism and exploitation? ``What price ratings?'' 
asked a spokesman for the Brooklyn Roman Catholic diocese. Alas, television 
producers are all to some degree in thrall to ratings; by that criterion, 
they are all sinners. The justification for any decision has to rest 
with the work that emerges. In this case, however crass the motives, 
the important result was to force public attention to a subject that 
is so hard to think about that many find excuses for looking away. 
Isn't that a mandate of responsible journalism? The immediate salubrious 
effects were evident even in the dithery purviews of cable shows that 
picked up on the subject. Audience panels proved affecting; everyone 
seemed to have had a hard experience of a loved one's dying and to 
want to find words to talk about it in a reasoned way. The commotion 
over the video provided an opportunity, and they rose to it. Some 
of the opposition to ``60 Minutes'' is directed not strictly at the 
death scene but at the subject of doctor-assisted suicide itself. 
A lot of people are against euthanasia and many no doubt are put off 
by the zealotry and flamboyance of Kevorkian, who is not the most 
appealing television personality around. They can make a fair case 
that the ``60 Minutes'' segment was a platform for the doctor's reach 
for martyrdom and might have been classier journalism if he had not 
been allowed to carry the day. But that's a criticism of the shaping 
of the program, not of the decision to roll the big scene. The suggestion 
that a more decorous report, like others over the years, could have 
been offered without the evidence of the killing became irrelevant 
and sappy once the tape's existence was announced. Call the taping 
a stunt if you like; that was the evening's news. Both opponents and 
enthusiasts of euthanasia and admirers and detractors of Kevorkian 
can welcome a program that sets millions arguing over the hard issue 
of dying. Given how little appears on the nation's news magazines 
to stir recumbent minds, the notion of discouraging them further with 
rules of deportment seems a touch gratuitous. As for the six CBS affiliates 
owned by the Dallas-based A.H. Belo Corp. that refused to run the 
segment, I bet they have never banned a show on grounds that it was 
too puerile for their viewers. The message for television journalism 
in this episode is an abiding one: at its best it ought not to be 
in the business of concealment, whether on grounds of piety or politeness 
or prudence. Its mission is to carry the news and take the knocks. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>