<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981124.0307 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
While listening to David Robertson conduct the Juilliard Orchestra 
recently in Gyorgy Ligeti's ``Atmospheres'' _ a remarkable performance, 
by the way _ I started to understand something of the difference between 
live and recorded music. The orchestra got to that point where the 
sound becomes a kind of buzzing, and here _ with the piece's dynamic 
variation projected as strongly as its continuity, and the noise now 
quite loud _ the effect vividly called to mind the composer's reference 
of his music to a childhood dream: he was in bed, and his room was 
filled with a spider's web in which candles, damp cushions and insects 
were all held. Sometimes in this dream, he recalled, a cushion would 
tumble, the web would lurch, and some beetles would be set free for 
a moment, only to get themselves caught up again and emit ``a stifling 
buzz.'' But the contact with Ligeti's dream was not the main point. 
What struck me, as I tried to make out which instruments were responsible 
for the whir of coleopterous doom, and why I had not heard it quite 
like this before, was the immediacy of the sound. It was not just 
this one passage that sounded new. The entire piece had little connection 
with my previous experiences of it, nearly all of which had come through 
recordings. My intent visual scanning of the orchestra at this point 
was a clue. As mechanisms of sound reproduction improve, the day may 
come when one cannot distinguish aurally between sitting in Avery 
Fisher Hall (where this concert took place) and listening at home 
with headphones, though that day is a long way off. And with DVD and 
its future developments, the time may come when the impression of 
facing an orchestra can be reconstructed. But it is hard to imagine 
the technology that would allow individual watcher-listeners to use 
their eyes and ears with the range of choices available in any concert 
hall: to fix attention on a cellist's bowing, to scrutinize the field. 
Such an advance seems especially unlikely given that the whole effort 
of people in the film and television industries is to do the fixing 
of attention, the scrutinizing, for you. Few movies are generous enough 
with visual information and with pace that one's eyes can wander around 
and into the screen. This is one of the things that make Andrei Tarkovsky's 
films so special. Still, the freedom to relate ear and eye, while 
the bassoon, as I decided it principally was, droned with such agonizing 
intensity, was only part of the issue. Perhaps Ligeti's dream was 
the next clue, for it was a dream, as he himself recognized, about 
``the hopelessness of elapsing time and of a past that could never 
be made good again.'' Here in the concert hall, time was indeed elapsing. 
But at home, when you are listening to a record, it never is. The 
past of a recording can always be made good again: all you have to 
do is rewind the tape, press the start button another time. This is 
time that has already been experienced, music that has already been 
heard. In the useful term of Claude Levi-Strauss, recorded time is 
time ``cooked'': prepared not only by composers and performers, as 
any music is, but also by producers and the whole apparatus of the 
record business. Time in the concert hall is time raw. The fact of 
freshness is one thing, but the psychological difference goes deeper. 
Listening to a recording, one feels oneself to be receiving an object 
with an almost tangible existence: a length of recorded time. One 
can even check the precise length on the back of the box. Hence the 
invitation to try to reconstruct this object in one's head, to create 
an image of a shape, a form. That was what I thought ``Atmospheres'' 
was: a length of time that I had more or less copied from one sort 
of memory (dots in silver plastic) to another (brain cells). In the 
concert hall, though, there is no object being transferred. A performance 
does not exist until it is happening, and then it is gone again. Everything 
one hears is in the present, and has to be seized in the present. 
Perceived time is thin, and forever being renewed. As the brasses 
and woodwinds came forward with their diatonic chord near the start 
of the piece, like a rainbow arcing out of cloud, the moment moved 
into that bubble-thin, shimmering time of perception with an immediacy 
that cannot be matched when one is listening to a recording, which 
one knows to be repeatable, already in the past, already a memory. 
If recordings give the effect of music as a sequence of events, one 
after another, at a concert each event seems to flash on top of the 
last. Music becomes vertical _ sound on sound on sound _ rather than 
horizontal. Perhaps it needed a piece of relatively recent music to 
make this clear. After all, the great effort of composers in the classical 
tradition, from the Renaissance through the early 20th century, was 
to create a horizontal effect: to suggest, by all the musical means 
at their disposal, a continuity, to make the piece seem indeed an 
object in time. Once this could be taken care of by recording, composers 
were free to do other things with their time. Recordings may, by their 
difference, have changed how concerts are experienced. If so, they 
changed music by changing time. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>