<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981124.0173 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Drew Nieporent's original concept for the menu at the restaurant he 
is planning to open on East 49th Street was true fat-free food. The 
chef he hired to create the menu, Michel Nischan, tried to please. 
Eventually, he conceded defeat. Thank goodness. With some exceptions, 
food needs a little fat. And Nischan _ who was well known throughout 
Connecticut for his own restaurant, Miche Mache, in South Norwalk 
_ has finally created a menu that lies somewhere between spa cuisine 
and contemporary cooking, which is finished off with more than a dab 
of butter. His food calls for a little oil and uses inventive means 
of flavoring that are alternatives to butter and cream. The development 
of this food, from idea to menu, has been an interesting journey, 
one in which I participated from time to time. Nieporent has named 
the restaurant Heartbeat _ as in what you can expect on a regular 
basis if your arteries remain unclogged. Heartbeat, in a new ``spa'' 
hotel, W New York, is to open Dec. 7 at 149 E. 49th St. Nieporent 
has to hope the restaurant's name does not suggest the butter substitute. 
Or spa cooking. My first visit to Nischan's laboratory _ the kitchen 
at Tribeca Bakery _ took place at the beginning of June, when he was 
up to his elbows in vegetable juices and raw vegetable tartares. The 
discussion at that point was less about taste and enjoyment than about 
his search for organic products and the nutrient content of rutabaga 
syrup. The food that I sampled certainly had miles to go. In place 
of fat-laden sauces, there were combinations of juices from corn and 
peas, carrots and beets, artichokes and, yes, those rutabagas. Sometimes 
the resulting melange took on a muddy color; sometimes there were 
just too many ingredients; at other times it just tasted thin and 
bland. Think bad spa food. Nischan was not shy about his failures. 
But by the third visit, in the middle of September, a new cooking 
philosophy was beginning to take shape. In his quest for a kitchen 
without the usual cornstarch, potato starch or roux for thickening, 
Nischan had carried Jean-Georges Vongerichten's pioneering work with 
vegetable broths several steps further. Sweet potatoes, corn, beets, 
rutabagas and sugar snap and English peas are juiced and then allowed 
to sit so that the starch separates from the liquid and sinks to the 
bottom. The amount of time the juices rest depends on the level of 
starch the chef wants the liquid to retain. Tree fruits like quinces, 
Granny Smith apples and pears are similarly treated. When some of 
these vegetable and fruit liquids are cooked, they thicken naturally. 
Some are further reduced, depending on how they will be used, and 
others are used without thickening. Usually the liquids are combined 
with other ingredients to make a sauce: the apple and pear juices, 
for instance, are mixed with chicken stock, caramelized shallots and 
a shaving of ginger to sauce seared chicken. The result is as smooth 
as anything finished with butter. ``I've become very comfortable with 
the cuisine,'' Nischan said. ``I feel strongly about no butter, no 
cream. It's been tough, but if you mount a dish with butter, you take 
away from it, you round it out too much.'' The leftover pulp is added 
to breakfast breads and muffins for the hotel. Nischan has come up 
with some delicious inventions _ light but suffused with flavor. This 
is clean, bright cooking: you feel satisfied but not stuffed. ``I 
know I'm taking a risk because I know there are people who are going 
to come gunning for us,'' Nischan said. ``People like Julia Child 
and Jacques Pepin hate the health police. And I hate the health police, 
too. They get carried away. A lot of people have called and said, 
`Oh, you are going to be a health-food restaurant,' and that's scary. 
This is a restaurant where you can go and feel comfortable that you 
are indulging but you are not paying as high a price.'' So the butter 
and cream, the saturated fats, are gone, right? Not where desserts 
are concerned. Although half of the dessert menu is Nischan's new 
Heartbeat fare, the other half is as decadent as chocolate mousse 
with a center of creme brulee. CORIANDER DUCK WITH SWEET-POTATO SAUCE 
Adapted from Michel Nischan, Heartbeat restaurant Time: 3 hours 2 
pounds (3 large) sweet potatoes, peeled 1 5- to 6-pound duck (see 
note) Salt and freshly ground black pepper 5 teaspoons grape-seed 
oil 2 medium onions, diced 1 rib celery, diced 1 large carrot, peeled 
and diced 8 cups low-sodium chicken or duck stock 2 medium parsnips, 
peeled 1 tablespoon coriander seeds Grated zest of 2 lemons 1 Thai 
chili or other very small hot chili, very thinly sliced 1 tablespoon 
fresh lemon juice [ ounce fresh ginger (about 1 tablespoon), sliced 
paper-thin 1 tablespoon chopped parsley. 1. Using a food processor, 
or by hand, finely chop the sweet potatoes. Transfer about a cup to 
a blender, add { cup water, and puree as finely as possible. Continue 
adding the potatoes until all are pureed. Place a fine-mesh strainer 
over a bowl, pour in the puree, and stir and press to extract as much 
liquid as possible. Discard the solids, and allow the liquid to sit 
for 1 hour. 2. Season the duck quarters with salt and pepper; refrigerate 
the breasts. Place a 14-inch nonstick or well-seasoned skillet over 
medium-high heat, and add 2 teaspoons of the oil. Sear the quarters 
until browned on all sides. Add the onions, celery and carrot, and 
stir until they have softened and are beginning to brown. 3. Add the 
stock, and bring to boil. Reduce the heat to low. Simmer, partly covered, 
for 1 hour. Add the parsnips, and simmer until tender, about { hour 
more. Set the duck and parsnips aside on plate. Place the fine-mesh 
strainer over a large bowl, and pour in the stock and remaining vegetables. 
Discard the solids. Return the stock to the skillet; over high heat, 
boil until it is reduced to } cup. Remove from the heat, and set aside. 
4. Place a small skillet over medium-low heat. Toast the coriander 
seeds, stirring, until fragrant, 30 to 60 seconds. Grind coarsely 
with mortar and pestle. Set aside. 5. Pour the sweet-potato liquid 
into a small pan, discarding the thick starch at the bottom of the 
bowl. Take the duck breasts out of them refrigerator, and allow them 
to reach room temperature. 6. Preheat the oven to 400 degrees. Spray 
two baking sheets with nonstick spray. Rub the parsnips with 1 teaspoon 
of the oil, and place on one sheet. Cover them with the other baking 
sheet, sprayed side down. Bake until the parsnips are browned, 15 
to 20 minutes. Set the parsnips aside to cool, but keep the oven at 
400 degrees. 7. Prepare the sweet-potato sauce: place the pan of sweet-potato 
juice over low heat, and bring to a simmer. Add the lemon zest. Simmer, 
stirring occasionally, until the liquid has thickened; it should not 
taste starchy. Add the chili, lemon juice and ginger. Simmer 1 minute. 
Add the reduced stock, and salt and pepper to taste. Remove from heat; 
cover to keep warm. 8. Season the duck breasts with salt and pepper. 
Pat the tops with the ground coriander seeds, and sprinkle the other 
side with the parsley. Place a large oven-proof skillet over medium-high 
heat, and add the remaining 2 teaspoons of oil and the duck breasts, 
parsley side down. Sear for about 15 seconds, then turn to sear the 
other side. Add the duck quarters, then put the skillet into the hot 
oven. Roast until breasts are medium-rare, about 3 minutes. Remove 
the skillet from the oven, cover lightly with foil, and allow the 
duck to rest for 5 minutes. 9. To serve, thinly slice the breasts, 
less than [ inch thick, and halve parsnips lengthwise. Place a parsnip 
half on each of four plates. Fan the breast slices across the parsnip, 
and lean a duck quarter against the highest point. Drizzle with sauce. 
Yield: 4 servings. Note: Ask your butcher to remove and bone the breasts 
and to quarter the remainder, discarding all skin and fat. HOWS AND 
WHYS By MARIAN BURROS c.1998 N.Y. Times News Service Using juices 
in place of flour, butter or other thickeners takes lots of culinary 
skill. But if you want to experiment, here are a few basics: _ Juices 
can be bought at natural food stores. And juicers for home use can 
be had for less than $100. _ When buying vegetables to juice, be sure 
they are extremely fresh; if your vegetables have a wax coating, peel 
them. _ The vegetables Michel Nischan uses can be divided into three 
categories: those that have starch, like corn, sweet and white potatoes, 
parsnips and English peas; root vegetables like rutabagas, golden 
beets, turnips and carrots, and those that produce a clear liquid, 
like celery, asparagus and sugar snap peas. _ The starchy and root 
vegetables are best suited for use as thickeners. Clear juices will 
brighten broths that are used in place of sauces. The pulp of the 
root vegetables can replace 15 to 25 percent of the flour in muffins 
or flat breads. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>