<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981124.0403 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
The tube in my hand would have earned an F in glass-blowing class. 
It was thick and ungainly with stubby limbs extending at odd angles 
and was painted a kind of mustard yellow. I thought it was beautiful. 
What Elma ``Pem'' Farnsworth had just dropped into my sweaty palms 
represented the dreams of her husband, Philo, in 1926, when he was 
19 years old. It was his first attempt at a picture tube after being 
told by experts in the growing television field that his plan to create 
an all-electronic system was impossible on his limited budget, not 
to mention that this was a boy without a college degree. And at first 
they were right: The tube didn't work. But the experts underestimated 
Farnsworth's genius. While they were still toying with their mechanical 
systems, which used spinning disks to scan pictures, Farnsworth and 
his plucky team produced the first all-electronic television picture 
on Sept. 7, 1927. ``Oh, that was some day,'' recalled Mrs. Farnsworth 
with a gleam in her eye in the living room of her modest Salt Lake 
City home. ``I was just so excited. Afterward, we sent a telegram 
to the backers.'' It just said that the thing worked. Mrs. Farnsworth's 
continued devotion to her husband, who died in 1971, and his legacy 
had her audienc _ an interviewer and a two-person camera crew _ wiping 
their eyes. We were videotaping her for the Academy of Television 
Arts and Sciences' Archive of American Television. Since April 1996, 
the archive has been sending video crews around the country in a race 
against the actuarial clock to interview the dwindling stock of television 
pioneers. Eventually the videotapes will go into a library, which 
will be open to the public, in Los Angeles. The list includes not 
only the Berles and the Caesar-Cocas but also the technical geniuses 
like Farnsworth and the unrecognized heroes of television's early 
years. Charlie Andrews, for example, inspired the influential Chicago 
School of Television, which brought Studs Terkel, Dave Garroway and 
Hugh Downs to national prominence. Terkel's show, ``Studs's Place,'' 
was truly remarkable. It was a live, ad-libbed comedy-drama set in 
a bar. Back then, that kind of risk taking was typical. That's what 
makes the stories so important to preserve. They recount a time when 
creativity, intelligence and the ability to think by the seat of one's 
pants was paramount. Out of that came the golden age of television. 
It was all about risk taking and freedom. At a time when the television 
industry seems as desperate for good programming as viewers are, these 
veterans have something important to say. Like Mrs. Farnsworth, the 
earliest pioneers vividly recall the thrill of exploration, of building 
something from nothing, to please not some corporate sponsor but themselves. 
Nobody knew what television was or would be, so there were no molds 
to fit into. Mostly, they proceeded on curiosity and raw intelligence 
and a willingness to experiment in an atmosphere that not only tolerated 
resourceful thinking but depended on it. It is this thread that runs 
through nearly all the interviews for the archive: the enormous dividends 
that are accrued by allowing creative people to create under conditions 
in which there is no margin for error. You heard this repeatedly. 
Because no spare parts were available, Arch Brolly used a pickle jar 
to complete his transmitter and keep WBKB, Chicago's most important 
station, on the air during World War II. When Brolly's boss, the redoubtable 
Captain Bill Eddy, needed a camera base that could be raised and lowered, 
he created one from a barber chair. When Eddy desperately needed a 
show to fill his schedule, he called a staff meeting. While puffing 
on his pipe (which doubled as a hearing aid), Eddy recalled a young 
puppeteer he worked with at the 1939 World's Fair, and ``Kukla, Fran 
and Ollie'' was born. Eddy was a master at this. He created the first 
microwave network because it was the only way to bring Notre Dame 
football to Chicago. Lighting was a major hurdle in television's earliest 
days. Cameras were so insensitive that tons of light had to be poured 
on the subject to get a picture. Eddy wrote the book on television 
lighting. ``We knew we had enough light when the model's hair began 
to smoke,'' he later joked. Eddy, who is virtually unknown today, 
was also one of the first to regularly televise wrestling. And it 
was the popularity of Gorgeous George and his crowd, not Milton Berle 
or Ed Sullivan, that sold television to the American public. Noel 
Jordan worked with Eddy at RCA before the war. He recalls the excitement 
of just being there. ``Everybody worked 60 to 80 hours a week,'' said 
Mr. Jordan. ``We slept in a first-aid room where they had a couple 
of cots. We felt pretty cocky about being in the forefront of something 
new.'' Farnsworth literally worked while he slept, his wife said. 
She told the archive interviewer how her husband had trained himself 
to dwell on a problem in his sleep so he would have it solved by the 
time he woke up. But then Farnsworth, who was mulling over the limitations 
of mechanical television while still in his teens, was always thinking. 
One day while out plowing on the family farm, he noticed the lines 
in the field that his harrow had just made. ``He said to himself, 
`I can just magnetically deflect those electrons across the screen 
in the same way you plow a field, line after line,' '' said Pem Farnsworth. 
``That's the way he did it, and that's the way it's done today.'' 
He was 14 at the time. Seventy years later, she still reveled in the 
romance of it all. Philo had told his first serious girlfriend about 
television, and she promptly dumped him, so he was a little apprehensive 
when it came time to let Pem in on his secret. He took her for a horseback 
ride to Bridal Veil Falls in a nearby town. It was there that he nervously 
told her his dreams. She told him that not only did she believe he 
could do it but that she would help him any way she could. She did, 
by keeping his patent books and doing other work in the lab. Long 
after Farnsworth got his patents, the medium remained a forum for 
experimentation. Well into the 1950s, the DuMont network was an exercise 
in bargain-basement programming. Bishop Sheen went up against Milton 
Berle (Tuesday nights at 8) with just a blackboard for a set. The 
DuMont studios were located in Wanamaker's department store in Greenwich 
Village, so when the producers of ``Captain Video'' needed a ray gun, 
Charles Polachek, the director, grabbed a spark plug, muffler, rearview 
mirror and ashtray from the automotive department, glued them together 
himself and called it the opticom scillometer. When they did chase 
scenes for ``Rocky King, Inside Detective,'' cameramen focused on 
the actors' feet. Otherwise, viewers would see they were running through 
Wanamaker's piano department. Dick Smith, NBC's legendary makeup man, 
found that his job called for constant problem solving. On a live 
show set around a boxing match, he had to figure out how to make bruises 
suddenly appear on the fighter's face. ``I dressed up as a corner 
man. In between rounds I got in the ring,'' Mr. Smith recalled in 
one of the archive's first interviews. ``While I pretended to be mopping 
the guy off, I was really making him up to look bruised.'' The rewards 
from that kind of thinking may be the archive's most valuable legacy. 
``Hollywood has become a pretty joyless corporate affair,'' says Dean 
Valentine, president of UPN, who was instrumental in setting up the 
television archives, ``and the art and the joy seem to have disappeared. 
But for them it hadn't. That's what keeps coming through again and 
again in a lot of the interviews. I think the lesson is to bring some 
of that back.'' Gutsy behavior extended beyond the technical achievements. 
Joseph Wershba, who as a young reporter located Milo Radulovich, the 
dismissed Air Force lieutenant whose story became a symbol of rampant 
McCarthyism, recalled the evening of March 9, 1954, when ``See It 
Now'' devoted an entire broadcast to Joseph McCarthy at the height 
of the senator's power. That night, CBS threatened to dismiss the 
program's production manager, Palmer Williams, because they had learned 
that his ex-wife was a member of the Communist Party. But Edward R. 
Murrow and his producer, Fred Friendly, would have none of it. Still, 
tension ran high. Opinions differed as to whether the program should 
go on, considering the risks it posed to everyone involved. The feeling 
was that CBS probably wouldn't back them in the event that McCarthy 
counterattacked. Recounting that evening, Mr. Wershba gave the archive 
some of its most vivid moments. ``Ed said: `The terror is right here 
in this room. No one man can terrorize a whole nation unless we are 
all his accomplices.' '' Needless to say, they went ahead. Creativity 
wasn't the only kind of freedom at stake. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>