<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981124.0393 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Thanksgiving Day games have become such a tradition in the National 
Football League that teams other than Detroit and Dallas would like 
a special serving of the day's sweets _ especially the competitive 
edge that they say is allowed the hosts. Only the Detroit Lions and 
the Dallas Cowboys are host for Thanksgiving Day games, Detroit almost 
every year since 1934 and Dallas all but two years since 1966. Detroit 
owns a 29-27-2 record in those games; Dallas is 20-9-1. Their opponents 
vary. Opposing NFL teams say that the short turnaround _ playing on 
the previous Sunday and then having to travel to Detroit or Dallas 
to play on Thanksgiving _ gives the Lions and the Cowboys a competitive 
edge. The thinking goes that the Lions and the Cowboys are more used 
to the short work week. Lions and Cowboys players and coaches are 
supposedly more tuned for the annual clash than the opposing players 
because the opponents change. In recent league meetings, several owners 
discussed the idea of rotating the Thanksgiving games among NFL sites 
each year. Basically, they were told to sit down. Some traditions, 
it was decided, were worth keeping. Detroit plays host to the Pittsburgh 
Steelers on Thursday, and the Minnesota Vikings visit Dallas. Each 
Thanksgiving Day team this year remains in playoff contention. Detroit, 
barely. Pittsburgh, mightily. And Minnesota and Dallas? Both are the 
gravy of this day. Both are division leaders. Both will use this game 
as a playoff-type test. Both will give us a festive affair. And with 
these two teams, we find a generous portion of what so far has been 
the gravy of the 1998 NFL season. CHAN GAILEY _ The former Pittsburgh 
Steelers offensive coordinator rose from the bottom, leaping over 
a pile of names more familiar and famous, and took the job as head 
coach of the Dallas Cowboys. He said from the start that he realized 
he was coaching more than a team but an institution. One of the most 
famous and fabled sports franchises ever. A 6-10 team last season. 
An 8-3 team this season, and the front-runner in the National Football 
Conference East. Quite an about-face. Quite a makeover. It is said 
that the NFC East is a scrap heap. Better to be at the top of a pile 
of junk than in the bottom of the rubble. Gailey has won with and 
without Troy Aikman at quarterback. He has made the Dallas offense 
fun and imaginative. There has not been a bushel of wild off-field 
stories floating from Dallas so far this season. Stability. Victories. 
Gailey's got them. What more could Dallas ask? RANDY MOSS _ Pssssst. 
He's trouble. Watch out. Don't take a chance. He'll make you pay. 
Not a cornerstone on which to build your franchise. That was the pre-draft 
chatter. That was the draft-day chatter. But Minnesota plugged its 
ears. It did its homework on Moss, and Coach Dennis Green and receiver 
Cris Carter took him in. Now the rookie receiver is turning every 
team on its ears. He is exciting on the run and in the air. Acrobatic 
and athletic. Speedy, quick. Courageous. He has the entire package 
at receiver and is so much fun for fans to watch. But more important 
to the Vikings, he is fun for his teammates to watch. He excites them. 
He gives them a jolt. He makes those around him better and helps them 
to excel. That is a great gift. THE AFC EAST _ The American Football 
Conference Central features three teams with winning records. Four 
other divisions in the NFL feature only two winning teams apiece. 
But the AFC East features four winning teams (the Jets, Miami, Buffalo 
and New England). The first three are deadlocked at the top with 7-4 
records. New England is close behind at 6-5. This division features 
cunning, mind-game-playing Super Bowl-winning coaches (Bill Parcells 
and Jimmy Johnson), a quarterback legend (Dan Marino) and physical 
teams built with defense as a priority. This division race will stretch 
until the last day of the regular season. As many as three from the 
East could make the playoffs. And then they get to knock each other 
silly all over again in the post-season. DOUG FLUTIE _ It is hard 
not to enjoy watching him. Not just because he is a little guy and 
because he is back from playing in Canada. Not just because the NFL 
did not think he could play quarterback and has returned to prove 
his doubters wrong. Not just because he has skill at the position 
and is a thinker. It is fun to watch Flutie play because he has fun. 
He makes football fun. He runs, he jumps, he throws in the air, off 
balance, on the sly, on the move. He keeps the game on the move. Catch 
him. Catch up to him. Flutie helping to bring Buffalo back to respectability 
and beyond is some of the smoothest gravy this season. DENVER BRONCOS 
_ This team will most likely do it. The Broncos will most likely win 
them all, go 16 and Oh! Unbeaten, untied. If they achieve that, it 
will make the 1998 season a dramatic one, one that historians will 
recall forever, much like the 1972 season, when Miami went 14-0. It 
is a mission now for the Broncos, and for them the Super Bowl will 
be their gravy. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>