<DOC>
<DOCNO> PRI19981124.2000.1258 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
This is The World. I'm Lisa Mullins. When she retired last year from 
the New York City ballet, Lourdes Lopez could look back at a career 
that fulfilled all of her dancing dreams -- all but one. Lopez had 
never performed in Cuba. She was born there 40 years ago, but before 
she reached her first birthday, her family fled Fidel Castro's Communists 
for America. Lopez had been asked many times to dance in Cuba, but 
her answer was always no until this month when she appeared in the 
International Ballet Festival in Havana. The World's Mario Zareyes 
filed this report from the Cuban capital. Mom, should I bring my journal? 
Yes, bring your journal. Put it in my backpack or no? The morning 
after her debut in Havana, Lourdes Lopez was in her hotel room sharing 
a quiet moment with her family -- her mother, who hadn't been to Cuba 
in 40 years, her sister and her 9-year-old daughter. She looked relaxed 
and pleased to have done something she always wanted to do -- dance 
in her native Cuba. I've always had an attachment to this place, even 
though I left when I was very, very young. And that I can't explain. 
I think it's growing up in a Cuban community and speaking and reading 
the language. So to come back and dance finally, you know, the thing 
that I've done my entire life all over the world except the place 
where I was born, that has an emotional content to it that it's hard 
for me to express. But it's something that I just feel very deeply. 
Lourdes Lopez, now retired from the New York City ballet, had been 
asked to dance in Cuba many times before. But time and time again, 
she declined. I've been invited to attend these festivals in the years 
past when I was really at my prime, dancing at my best. And I always 
said no because, A, I didn't want to offend my parents, who had escaped 
when the other government took over, and I also didn't want -- I thought 
that for my career wasn't a good move. But in a way, you changed your 
mind. Somehow you didn't mind sort of coming now, and you think it 
is the right thing to do? I think it's the right thing to do. I think 
-- I really believe that it's time an opening up of conversations, 
I think, or in dialogue. I think people have to cross the bridges. 
I think the arts, throughout history, have always been the ones who 
basically pushed the envelope to initiate changes, to initiate dialogue, 
to initiate conversations to make a connection between the two countries. 
For her debut in Havana, Lourdes Lopez wanted to offer Cubans something 
new. She brought with her "Pavane," a ballet the late George Ballanchine 
created in 1978 for Patricia McBride, one of the senior ballerinas 
at the New York City ballet at the time. It's been performed only 
three times since then. It's an odd ballet. It's odd because it really 
is a spiritual piece. It really is about someone -- you can look at 
it as a spirit that just can't rest, as someone who just refuses to 
die. As I started rehearsing it, it dawned on me how odd -- how oddly 
this is very much like Cuba, this ballet. Why is that? How is that? 
Well, because it's a spirit that won't die, that's not happy in the 
place that it is right now, and I just -- I really think, you know, 
if you see the ballet, you know, you start up with your hands up in, 
you know, asking for something and then crying. And then, there's 
a lot of memories that go on, you know, when she's dancing around. 
And in the end, she ends up back again in the same place that she 
was. The reaction to her performance was tenuous. Cubans are used 
to seeing more traditional classical ballet. Modern choreographies 
like "Pavane" don't seem to have a place here as yet. Well, it's not 
my favorite performance. I prefer classical ballet, to be honest. 
In general, I don't like this modern stuff. Well, I liked it a lot. 
But the problem is it doesn't really fit in with the Cuban classical 
ballet repertoire. Plus, maybe tonight was not her night. Looking 
back at her first night dancing here, Lourdes Lopez can't hide her 
disappointment. I wanted to bring something to them that they hadn't 
seen before, music that they hadn't heard before. Did they get it? 
You know, maybe not last night. I know that they didn't understand 
it last night. But maybe five years from now, or maybe two years from 
now, they'll understand it a little bit more. And they'll start to 
say, "Hey, wait a minute," you know. "I can make up my own." By then, 
Lourdes Lopez hopes the relationship between Cuba and the U.S. would 
have normalized. There are many people who still think that while 
Fidel Castro is in power, Cubans living outside the island should 
not come back. But she maintains it's about time for things to change. 
For The World, I'm Maria Zareyes in Havana. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>