<DOC>
<DOCNO> PRI19981124.2000.2708 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Time now for the answer to today's geography quiz. Remember, we're 
looking for a European capital that will officially cease to be a 
capital next year. It's a sleepy town on the Rhine River that's still 
home to many German bureaucrats, not to mention Cold War holdovers. 
Well, the answer, of course, is Bonn, where German government workers 
are packing for their imminent move to Berlin. But as The World's 
Clark Boyd reports, they're already finding out that they truly can't 
take everything with them. Now there's a sound that the residents 
of Bonn never wanted to hear during the Cold War -- a siren signaling 
the start of a nuclear attack. But like many countries in that era, 
West Germany was ready should the alarm have sounded. Welcome to the 
chancellor's bunker, 400 feet below the streets of Bonn. Its 11 miles 
of rooms and corridors were designed and built by the West German 
government in the 1960s. The idea was simple. Provide enough supplies 
and protection to keep the German chancellor and his government going 
for 30 days. And the 30 days in the installation, make no fear, by 
the 31st when you have to open the gates again, this is the day that 
fears me the most. That's Joaquin Schrader, a German civil servant 
whose mission is almost as daunting as coming out of the bunker one 
month after a nuclear attack. Schrader must find a buyer for the bunker, 
which the German government has now deemed surplus to requirements. 
The installation is very special, so the use has to be very special. 
Here you could, perhaps, think about physical elementary research 
-- how atoms are built or something like that. But as well, restaurants 
-- eat and sleep in nuclear shadow. They're of widespread variety. 
Although the German government hasn't set an asking price for this 
prime real estate, they are advertising it in the papers. So far, 
16 investors have expressed serious interest. One wants to use the 
bunker to grow mushrooms. Another is interested in turning it into 
a kind of nuclear nightclub. BEE GEES Ha, ha, ha, ha. Stayin' alive. 
But not everyone wants to completely revamp the chancellor's bunker. 
Entrepreneur Alexander Sheiler says the bunker is workable and profitable 
as is. ALEXANDER SHEILER, ENTREPRENEUR I want to keep it exactly as 
it is, right down to its current use. I think it's a little shortsighted 
of the German government to say they no longer need a nuclear bunker. 
There are a lot of people in this world who'd certainly want to book 
space here. Some might see it as a joke, but for others it's just 
practical planning for the future. And speaking of practical planning, 
you may wonder what Germany's new chancellor, Gerhard Schroeder, will 
do without the bunker when he moves to Berlin. Well, those plans, 
as they say, remain a state secret. Until then, maybe Schroeder can 
buy into a time share at Bonn bunker estates. For The World, this 
is Clark Boyd. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>