<DOC>
<DOCNO> PRI19981124.2000.0373 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
This is The World. I'm Lisa Mullins. Hundreds of Palestinians poured 
into an international airport in Gaza today, not to catch a plane 
but, in many cases, to see a plane. Many ordinary Palestinians had 
never seen an airplane on the ground until today when their first 
airport was officially opened. As The World's Richard Myron reports, 
it was an occasion for pomp, pageantry and anticipation of bigger 
things to come. The first plane to land at Arafat International Airport, 
as it's called, was an Egyptian airbus carrying a select number of 
dignitaries from Cairo. The plane taxied toward the new marble terminal 
building to a welcome from Palestinian leader Yasser Arafat and thousands 
of ordinary people who came to witness this historic event. On the 
tarmac, smartly dressed politicians danced alongside soldiers and 
men in traditional flowing Arab robes and headdresses. Mohammed Nashashibi, 
the Palestinian finance minister, called the airport a sign of statehood. 
I'm so happy. But let me tell you that this is one of the symbols 
of our sovereignty. And now, from here we leave to the whole parts 
of the world with the full dignity of a genuine Palestinian system. 
The airport's inauguration was delayed as the peace process stalled. 
Last month's Wye River memorandum broke the deadlock. Today, Yasser 
Arafat thanked Jordan's leader for his help in negotiating the opening 
of the Gaza airport. It's a very big step from the agreement of Wye 
River, and we can't forget that His Majesty King Hussein was with 
us four days at Wye River to push forward the peace process and to 
arrive to this agreement. Some Palestinians didn't sound such a positive 
chord, as they chanted, "With our souls, with our blood, we will redeem 
you, Palestine." For many in Gaza and the West Bank, the airport's 
another step on the road to full Palestinian independence. But some 
are unhappy that Israel retains overall security control of the airport. 
Following today's opening, there are plans to run regular flights 
between Gaza and destinations in the Arab world and Europe. Until 
now, Palestinians had to travel overland to Egypt or try to get permission 
to use Israel's international airport. Nabil Shaath, the Palestinian 
minister of international cooperation, says the Gaza airport has enormous 
value. The symbols start today with the coming in of 10 planes from 
Egypt, Jordan, Morocco and several European countries. But the real 
benefit comes in tomorrow. From now on, we will export our cut flowers 
from here, rather than through the Israeli monopoly. We will start 
getting our tourists in through here. Palestinians coming to visit 
their relatives, people even leaving on a weekend to go to Cairo. 
I mean, it's going to have a lot of important benefits. Israelis, 
too, may benefit from the new airport. Palestinian officials say that 
ticket prices will be lower from Arafat airport than from Ben Gurion 
airport near Tel Aviv to the same destinations. The Israeli authorities 
say for the time being, Israelis are barred from flying from Gaza 
for security reasons. But Israel's foreign minister, Ariel Sharon, 
says he doesn't see why Israelis couldn't some day use the airport. 
Why not? If the security conditions would allow that, I don't see 
any reason why not. I think the Arabs are already flying from Ben 
Gurion airport. Today's opening is evidence that the Wye agreement 
is working. While getting possession of the West Bank and Gaza is 
vital in achieving Palestinian independence, the airport is vital 
in keeping that goal alive. So Arafat International Airport is a building 
block in the quickening pace of constructing the Palestinian state. 
For The World, this is Richard Myron in Jerusalem. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>