<DOC>
<DOCNO> PRI19981124.2000.0619 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Palestinians hope that Arafat International Airport will boost their 
economy by opening up trade routes to the outside world. Palestinian 
business leaders also want to build stronger economic ties with Israel. 
Currently, both sides trade far more with other countries than they 
do with each other. Walid Najab is a managing director of a business 
consultancy based in Ramallah on the West Bank. Mr. Najab, can you 
tell us the state at this point of economic ties between Palestinians 
and Israel? The state of Palestinian-Israeli trade relations is almost 
going in one direction. Where we have the Palestinian market that 
presents a high percentage of the Israeli export, whereas we export 
very little to the Israeli market. And can you give us the reason 
for that traditionally? Up to 1994 or 1995, the Palestinians were 
not allowed to import directly from the outside world. All trade had 
to go through Israeli agents and, of course, Israeli border points. 
Do you see this as a time of transition, as many people obviously 
do, politically in -- between Palestinians and Israelis? Is it also 
a transition in terms of professional trade and business between you, 
for instance, and the businesses you represent and Israeli businesses? 
That's certainly the case because we've seen more and more Palestinian 
companies, Palestinian business entities that are presenting overseas 
corporations. An example that's worth mentioning here is the new bottling 
plant. The new Coca Cola bottling plant in Ramallah, which is -- has 
been running now for the last three months. So give us an idea what 
it's like for you as a business consultant on a daily basis there 
during this transitional period. For instance, is your phone ringing 
every day with people who are interested either on the Palestinian 
or the Israeli side in trying to foster a better business relationship? 
Yes, in the sense that whenever there is a breakthrough in the peace 
process or the negotiations, we certainly do feel a greater interest 
by business people, both Palestinians and Israelis, and some of the 
neighbor countries like Jordan and Egypt. Well, give us an example. 
Give us an example of perhaps some of the phone calls that you've 
received in the past week or so. We have been contacted by an American 
company that manages permanent trade exhibitions, and they would like 
to extraordinary idea of setting up a permanent trade exhibition in 
the Gaza industrial area. Your Secretary Daley was visiting the area 
two weeks ago, and he actually paid a visit to the industrialist there. 
I know that you were at that dinner when the U.S. Commerce Secretary, 
William Daley, was holding talks about boosting economic activity 
between the two sides. Has that kind of U.S. involvement been helpful? 
Well, it was very clear at the dinner in both of the speeches that 
it is time that a business delegation from the United States visits 
Palestine, and Commerce Secretary Daley promised that he would look 
into this and probably even, you know, head this delegation sometime 
in the near future. Mr. Najab, we appreciate your speaking with us. 
Thank you. Walid Najab is the managing director of a business consultancy 
based in Ramallah. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>