<DOC>
<DOCNO> PRI19981124.2000.2392 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
When China's president arrives in Tokyo tomorrow, he'll be making 
history. Jiang Zemin's six-day official visit will be the first ever 
by a Chinese head of state to Japan. And if the wording can be ironed 
out, Jiang will hear an official apology from Japan for wartime atrocities 
it committed in China. Both Asian nations have much to gain from overcoming 
their historical animosities. But as the BBC's Duncan Hewitt reports 
from Beijing, there's a lot of animosity to overcome. On a frosty 
Saturday morning, hundreds of middle school students crowd into a 
Beijing museum. Like many before them, they're here to learn about 
China's fight against Japanese occupation in the 1930s and '40s. It 
can be a harrowing experience. Museum education officer Lisha Ali 
points to a Japanese newspaper article from 1937. During the bloody 
siege of China's then-capital Nanking in which some 300,000 people 
are thought to have died. The article describes a competition between 
two Japanese army officers to see who could kill the most civilians. 
Lisha Ali says this exhibition is designed not to stir up old hatreds, 
but to prevent such tragedies from recurring. LISHA ALI, CHINESE MUSEUM 
EDUCATION OFFICER We have to face up to history. It's a fact. But 
I believe that if we stress peace and friendship, then people won't 
overreact. When they come here, they think, "I hate the Japanese. 
How could they have treated the Chinese like that?" But when they 
think about it, they realize it's history, and so it makes them cherish 
the peaceful relations we have with Japan now. For the young people 
emerging from an underground tunnel of the kind once used to hide 
from Japanese attacks, there are varying reactions. "You can't completely 
forgive them," said this 15-year-old girl. "What they did was so extreme." 
Her friend agreed, but she said living in the past served no purpose. 
Some Japanese people are taking their own action to tackle this perception. 
I just want to do by my personal motivation, to just see those people 
as like the same like my grandmother or father, to just want to talk 
with them before they die. Then I just want to remember. Tomoko Kocuchi 
is a young Japanese photographer, who's been interviewing elderly 
Chinese survivors of Japanese atrocities. It's a response to what 
she agrees are the limitations of Japanese education about the war. 
We Japanese young generation really don't know anything about what 
we did to China because, for example, many Japanese young generation 
come to China. But they don't have so much knowledge about the history. 
They're just there for the example, the university. But it's not really 
deep. It's not with sympathy or with feeling to what happened. Japan's 
new prime minister Keizo Obuchi is expected to go some way toward 
facing up to history by issuing a fresh apology. Yet some have said 
it's China which can't afford to put the past behind it, that Beijing 
benefits from the political and economic leverage it can exert over 
guilt-stricken Japanese leaders. But according to Professor Jiang 
Li Fung of China's Academy of Social Sciences, it's only the denials 
of Japan's war record by Japanese right-wingers which have kept this 
issue alive. JIANG LI FUNG, CHINA'S ACADEMY OF SOCIAL SCIENCES Actually 
back in the 1950s, the Chinese leaders at that time, Chairman Mao 
and Chou Enlai, said let historical problems pass. It's unnecessary 
for the Japanese people to apologize every time. But in recent years, 
some people from Japanese political circles have caused trouble over 
historical issues. So China had to take some action. In the Beijing 
war museum, the songs of the anti-Japanese struggle still resound. 
Some in China say if the Japanese government is sincere about putting 
the past behind it and forging a new trust to accompany the growing 
economic relationship, it must not only apologize but also offer further 
compensation. Yet according to Japanese photographer Tomoko Kocuchi, 
for the war victims she meets, the best solution to the legacy of 
history is genuine human emotion. I don't really think they want money. 
I mean, if Japanese government apologize they feel much better, even 
though they don't get compensation. Even they feel the Japanese government 
trying, maybe they feel much better even though they don't get money. 
Duncan Hewitt, BBC, Beijing. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>