<DOC>
<DOCNO> PRI19981124.2000.0876 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
The cease-fire in Kosovo is holding barely. Last month, Slobodan Milosevic 
agreed to end his crackdown against ethnic Albanian separatists in 
the Serbian province. Two thousand monitors from the Organization 
for Security and Cooperation in Europe are arriving there to verify 
that Milosevic is keeping his promise and pulling back his troops. 
Today, about 50 of the OSCE monitors began their training. We get 
the story from The World's Jackie Rowland. In Pristina, the capital 
of Kosovo, workers are turning the offices of a Yugoslav bank into 
the OSCE's headquarters. It's the same picture throughout Kosovo. 
The organization has to set up five regional centers and several smaller 
field offices. The OSCE spokesman, Manz Neiberg, says the organization 
is moving fast. This has to be done very quickly because we see the 
situation on the ground out there in the villages of Kosovo deteriorating 
steadily. And we need to become operational pretty soon. We need to 
have our verifying teams out there in the field pretty soon. The arrival 
of the OSCE mission has breathed new life in Brezevitza, a ski center 
in southern Kosovo. The organization has taken over this hotel for 
three months to run training courses for the monitors who will oversee 
the cease-fire. The verifiers will spend five days here before being 
sent to towns and villages throughout Kosovo. The director of the 
center, Colonel Mario Regele of the Italian army, says five days will 
be enough to teach the recruits all they need to know. Most of them 
have experience from previous missions like in Croatia, and as we 
literally break ground from some people the structure, they meet problems 
similar to the problems we meet in this together, maybe in other theaters 
-- Somalia, Albania, Kuwait, Kurdistan and so on. Personal security 
will be high on the agenda for the training course. The verifiers 
will be unarmed, which has given rise to fears that they could be 
abducted by rebels or disgruntled Serbs. One of the instructors, W. 
Piaget Yanni, an Italian police inspector, says one training session 
will be about what to do in such cases. We have this kind of problems 
already, policy as you might know, and I found out this to be the 
best kind of reaction -- no reaction at all. And the most important 
thing, and this will be stressed over and over, will be to be as flat 
as possible. Neutral -- very, very neutral. Do not talk at any costs 
to anybody if you think that it may upset that person. Officially, 
the ethnic Albanians and the Serbs welcome the verifiers and promise 
to cooperate in their mission. But privately, many on both sides express 
doubts about the ability of the verifiers to do their job. Mickey 
Mikaylevic, the director of the Serbian Media Center in Pristina, 
is one of the skeptics. My position is that verification mission is 
not going to be very effective because 2,000 of unarmed persons wearing 
only their identity strips around their elbows cannot resolve the 
problem of an armed group that is going around. The effectiveness 
of the verification mission will probably depend on the negotiations 
to convert the shaky cease-fire in Kosovo into a lasting settlement. 
U.S. envoy Christopher Hill met in Belgrade last night with Yugoslav 
president Slobodan Milosevic, who agreed to the cease-fire last month 
under the threat of NATO air strikes. On Friday, Hill is due to travel 
to Pristina to meet with ethnic Albanian politicians who have not 
abandoned their long-term goal of independence. One Western diplomat 
describes Hill's objective as a compromise acceptable to both sides 
between Kosovo and Serbia and Kosovo out of Serbia. For The World, 
this is Jackie Rowland in Pristina. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>