<DOC>
<DOCNO> PRI19981124.2000.2998 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
This is The World. I'm Lisa Mullins. To the traditional pomp and ceremony, 
Her Majesty Queen Elizabeth II presided over the state opening of 
Britain's parliament today. It was a somewhat different event this 
year, with some of the most bizarre elements having been dropped. 
The changes are part of a package of reforms that Prime Minister Tony 
Blair is pushing. The Queen announced the most dramatic one in today's 
speech to parliament. A bill will be introduced to remove the right 
of hereditary peers to sit and vote in the House of Lords. It will 
be the first stage in a process of reform to make the House of Lords 
more democratic and more representative. Among those listening to 
the Queen, presumably without the harumphing in the background, today 
was the Boston Globe's London bureau chief, Kevin Cullen. Kevin, what 
was it like to be there? Can you describe the ceremony for us? It's 
very formal. It is, I guess, pomp and circumstance describes it well. 
But once that's done, it's very serious business that's being discussed 
because basically, the Queen is reading a government-scripted speech 
which outlines what their legislative agenda is. If anything, it's 
sort of a declaration of political war because it's what the government 
says it wants to accomplish. And obviously, it's what the opposition 
will immediately attack. And tell us more about that. I mean, why 
is what she was suggesting there and getting that kind of reaction 
from the House of Lords such a political hot potato? And tell us more 
about the House of Lords itself. It really is an epic battle when 
you think about it, because the House of Lords, you know, goes back 
over 1,000 years. You're talking about the upper house of parliament. 
All the House of Lords really can do is delay legislation for one 
year. After that, government can ram it through, no matter what. So 
they don't really have an unlimited veto power like the U.S. Senate. 
The other thing is that the House of Lords is really -- there are 
two different kinds of lords. There are what is known as hereditary 
peers. That means they literally inherit their position in the House 
of Lords, and this goes back centuries. There are some people in there 
today whose ancestors go back to the Middle Ages and sat in the House 
of Lords. And then there are life peers which -- who were basically 
appointed by the various governments as they're sitting there. And 
it sort of underscores the political bind that Prime Minister Tony 
Blair finds himself in. Well, at this point, I think he's simply taking 
on the peers, which would seem to be enough of a battle. But you say 
it seems as though it was going to happen no matter what. But why 
does he want the peers to no longer have the vote? Well, first of 
all, there are probably two levels of this. At one level, the Blair 
government would say, hey, this is anachronism. In a modern democracy, 
you don't have people inherit their seats and have authority over 
things that are being done by an elected government. And there's a 
second level of this, and to be honest -- you know, Blair has been 
honest about it and said there's an in-built Tory majority within 
the House of Lords. I mean, members of the House of Lords would have 
had traditional ties to the Tories anyway because, let's face it, 
the Tory party was always the party of the privileged and the landed 
and the gentry. And so, it's -- all you need to know is that of the 
hereditary peers, over 400 of them are Tories and 17 -- just 17 of 
them would be members of the Labour Party. So you can't really consider 
this a case of good old-fashioned gerrymandering. Because he's -- 
the Labour Party really doesn't stand to gain much here. Well, I mean, 
but you know the flip side is you would say he's trying to get rid 
of -- and people are saying this that he's trying to get rid of one 
of the few institutions in Britain that has any kind of check on governmental 
power. But I mean, the thing I keep coming back to is that it's a 
foregone conclusion. They're gone. The issue is what are they going 
to be replaced with, and that's where the Blair government has also 
left itself open to criticism. It would be one thing if they knew 
what they wanted to replace them with. But they don't. There's a commission 
now that is going to decide, will make recommendations of what kind 
of upper house of parliament will replace the lords. But until we 
know where that is, that is ammunition for Mr. Blair's enemies who 
are saying this is just a power grab. He wants to have more patronage 
perks, and he wants to get rid of somebody who will question his power. 
The Boston Globe's London bureau chief, Kevin Cullen. Thank you, Kevin. 
Thank you, Lisa. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>