<DOC>
<DOCNO> PRI19981124.2000.2027 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
The rhetoric from Baghdad today was especially vicious, and much of 
it was directed at the United States. Deputy Vice President Tariq 
Aziz accused Washington of trying to break Iraq through military attacks 
and sanctions. "The tyrants and the evil of the world," he said, "America 
and the Zionists, seek to humiliate Iraq." But Aziz concluded, "They 
have tried and failed before, and they will fail also this time." 
Anthony Lake, when you were President Clinton's national security 
adviser from 1993 to 1997, you heard the same kind of rhetoric, I 
know. But these days, the crises with Iraq seem to be happening weeks 
and, in some cases, even days apart. What do you think it's going 
to take to break this cycle once and for all? Well, in the end, what 
can break the cycle is a change either in the policies of the Iraqi 
government or in the Iraqi government itself. And what of the idea 
of simply removing Saddam Hussein in office? I say simply, and certainly, 
it's not going to be a simple task. In today's government-run newspapers 
in Iraq, there was a surprisingly candid article that was written 
by one of Saddam Hussein's advisers chiding Iraq's Arab neighbors, 
saying that they don't understand just how much it would hurt their 
countries if Saddam is removed from office, which has become one of 
the goals of U.S. foreign policy. Well, I hardly think whoever wrote 
that article is speaking for the -- Iraq's neighbors, who have to 
be very concerned, both about Iraq's behavior in the past, you know, 
in invading Kuwait, and in their development of -- or trying to develop 
weapons of mass destruction. A way to imagine this perhaps is to see 
what the Balkans would be like if Milosevic were able to develop weapons 
of mass destruction, just how terrifying to all those Serbia's neighbors 
that would be. And in effect, Saddam is a Milosevic who is trying 
to develop those weapons. And then what about the notion, though, 
that an Iraq without Saddam is an extremely unstable Iraq, and that 
would mean instability throughout the whole region? I hardly think 
Iraq, over the past few years, has been a poster for stability. Obviously, 
we don't want to create a vacuum in Iraq. Obviously, one has to be 
concerned about who would replace Saddam, which is one reason to be 
-- trying to strengthen now the democratic opposition to him. But 
at the same time, I think it's very fair to argue that the greatest 
source of instability in Iraq, certainly in the long-run, is Saddam, 
who has, for example, now in the way he has treated the Kurds in the 
north and the Shia in the south, created a legacy of hatred that in 
the long run could imperil Iraqi unity. And we certainly do have a 
stake in that unity. And how credible is the opposition? We know that 
yesterday 16 opposition groups were in London trying to get support 
for the overthrow of Saddam. Is there enough power behind them? Well, 
I think the next step is for them to come up with plans and programs 
that make sense and to come together more than they have in the past. 
And that's -- I understand what both the American and the British 
governments are trying to encourage them to do. Let me ask you a question 
about in terms of your own role, when Iraq was certainly on the front 
burner as national security adviser, when you were national security 
adviser. What did you learn in dealing with Saddam Hussein, in terms 
of your own impressions about how to deal with him effectively? I 
think he responds to one thing, and that is either force or the threat 
of force. He is a bully, and like most bullies, he only backs down 
when he sees that he could pay a terrible price for what it is that 
he tries to do. And so, you have to be very firm and make it always 
very clear that if you are threatening the use of force, you are prepared 
to use it. And so, do you think then, given the idea of the U.S. threatening 
force and then be willing -- being willing to use it in the end, since 
it didn't happen this last time, did we actually gain something by 
not striking, or have we stepped back a few? Well, first of all, I 
think there was no choice at the end. The cost to all of us, not just 
in global terms, because the French and the Russians would have opposed 
-- been opposed to it, but even more in the region, where our interests 
would have suffered had we acted despite Saddam's having backed off. 
It would have been unreasonable and damaging to continue. But coming 
out of it, I think one important thing has changed, unlike earlier 
this year, and that is in part because the United States and Britain 
acted responsibly in the end, there is now, I think, a reservoir of 
understanding in the global community at large which would allow us 
to act with far less notice and far less international consultation 
than would have been required last spring. And my own impression is 
that the United States government is prepared to act and act very 
quickly if there is an overall pattern of behavior now in which the 
Iraqis are not complying with their most recent agreement and with 
the UN resolution. Anthony Lake is the former national security adviser. 
He's now professor of diplomacy at Georgetown University. Thank you, 
Mr. Lake. Thank you very much. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>