<DOC>
<DOCNO> VOA19981124.1600.1343 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
The Native American Cherokee Indians are survivors. They survived 
disease and epidemics brought by the white man in the 1700s, hid out 
in the mountains of Western North Carolina while many of their people 
were forcibly removed to Oklahoma in the 1830s. Since that era, they 
grew up as separate nations in Oklahoma and North Carolina. Of the 
approximately 300,000 Cherokee today, some 12,000 are members of the 
Eastern band, living in their ancestral home in the Great Smoky Mountains 
of Western North Carolina. As VOA Roseanne Skerbel discovered in a 
visit to the Eastern band's town of Cherokee, the Indians are now 
struggling to keep their language alive. Although you don't hear much 
Cherokee spoken in Cherokee, Bull Parrish, the preacher at the Big 
Cove Baptist Church, says his congregation sings Christian songs translated 
into Cherokee. It helps in a way to keep the language alive. Normally, 
a language, you can say, is lost when they quit using it in religious 
worship. And you don't want to see that happen. No, not hardly. What 
about for the young people? I don't have any young people here who 
speak Cherokee, but they learn the songs. That's a start. Now they 
got the school, so they're going to get more down there. I want you 
to listen to me say the days of the week, and Mr. Bushyhead will say 
the Cherokee word. Sunday. Eighty-five-year-old Robert Bushyhead and 
his daughter, Jean, are leading the effort to introduce Cherokee children 
to their language. They write the curriculum and produce video and 
audio tapes for some 800 students at the Cherokee Elementary School. 
The students first learn simple vocabulary, but as they progress from 
grade to grade, so do their skills. By third grade, they are speaking 
to each other in simple sentences. Jean Bushyhead says she never learned 
Cherokee even though both her parents spoke the language fluently. 
Robert Bushyhead says that's because of the way he grew up. Like many 
of his generation, as a young boy, he was sent away from his home 
to a government boarding school run by the Bureau of Indian Affairs. 
And they let us know right away that we were not to speak the Cherokee 
language. We would steal away. Back in those days, they had furnace 
rooms down in the basements of each building, and we would steal away 
behind the furnace and start talking Cherokee, and about the time 
we got started good, then someone would say, "OK. Go on up," and we 
would go up, and they would punish us for speaking the Cherokee language. 
I didn't understand why that was. I know a lot about the language 
from working with my father. I know more about it than I know how 
to speak it. However, I would have liked to have the choice when I 
was a child of whether I wanted to speak it or not, and I feel that 
I can help in giving the children a choice of whether they want to 
speak it when they -- once they learn it. Robert Bushyhead became 
a student of Cherokee, documenting the written and spoken language. 
His daughter, Jean, took the materials and started organizing. Supported 
by the school system and later by the tribe, the father-and-daughter 
team began producing materials for the classroom. Robert Bushyhead 
recalls one incident not long ago among the elders of the tribe that 
showed him the language lessons are beginning to take root. Sometimes 
we have these little students come in there and visit us, talk with 
us, and sing for us and so forth, and so was the case when a little 
boy about, oh, 6 years old, I guess, walked by, and I said to him 
-- as he passed by, I said, "Shil," and he said, "Shil," and then 
I said. That means "Are you all right?" and he turned around at me 
and looked at me, and he says, "Where did you learn that?" So they 
are getting it, and they are passing it along to each other. So this 
is, indeed, your legacy. Yeah, and that's what I feel, that perhaps 
in my last days I'll feel like that this is something that I can leave 
with my people. And I just -- I just think that without their language 
that they're still lacking in their culture being whole. Jean Bushyhead 
says that language can begin to renew a sense of pride in the Cherokee 
people, pride in their lives today and what they can become in future 
generations. I'm Roseanne Skerbel. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>