<DOC>
<DOCNO> VOA19981124.0500.2461 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
European authorities say a week-long cold snap has claimed nearly 
100 lives, with parts of the continent gripped by sub-freezing temperatures 
and blanketed by heavy snow. The highest death tolls have been reported 
in Romania and Poland, where at least 36 people, in each country, 
succumbed to hypothermia. Reporter, Stephan Bosz, in Budapest, told 
News Now's Victor Behe, the situation all across the continent is 
very serious. If you look to Ukraine, and Hungary, thousands of people 
became homeless after what was described as one of the most serious 
flukes, this century. If you look, for example, in the west part of 
Ukraine near the border with Hungary, people are now coping in freezing 
temperatures, with the problem of rebuilding their homes, etc. So, 
the situation is very grim here, in this area. Did this cold snap 
catch everyone by surprise? Did it come earlier than it normally does 
this time of year? Yes, that is what the experts are saying. This 
is usually a very difficult time, anyway. And the winters are very 
difficult, generally speaking, But, at this time of year, it is usually 
not that cold, especially not in the areas I mentioned. But, yes, 
it came as a surprise. Some experts say this is the most serious weather 
condition, especially if you look to Ukraine and Russia, in more than 
three decades. So, that gives you an indication how the situation 
is at this moment. Stephan, how are people coping with this? How are 
they getting to work? How are they operating their cars? How is mass 
transit operating? Well, this is, of course, extremely difficult. 
The situation is somewhat better, here in Budapest, at this point. 
But, especially in the other areas, in Romania, it's really very, 
very difficult. Many cars are not that good, let's say, as western 
cars, anyway. People usually have very old cars here -- 10, 11, 12-years 
old. And, the petrol is not always that good. So, things are very 
difficult to operate cars, if people have cars. But, many people simply 
have to walk, or travel otherwise. But, it's very, very difficult 
for many people here. And, it's obviously affecting business, as well. 
Yes, it is affecting business. Especially, also companies that, of 
course, are having to deal with imports. They are very hard hit and 
other companies as well. It's interesting, I think, to note that the 
electricity companies, here, that have already suffered because of 
the changes after the fall of Communism. The state, less and less, 
supported the electricity business. They had to raise prices. They 
will be very hard hit because people simply cannot pay for the bills. 
And, I think they will have serious to think about what to do next. 
You know, if they are starting to cut off people from their electricity, 
etc., then of course people will be very angry. And, it could even 
lead to social unrest. We already saw that in Rumania. Reporter Stephan 
Bosz spoke with News Now's Victor Bhe. The cold wave is also being 
blamed for 11 deaths in Russia, where the related fatalities are also 
reported in Bulgaria, Austria and Italy, as well as France, where 
fountains in front of the Eiffel Tower in Paris were completely frozen. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>