<DOC>
<DOCNO> VOA19981124.1600.0581 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
A United Nations report is warning that genocide on a regional scale 
could take place in the Great Lakes area of Central Africa following 
new alliances between rebel groups and governments in the area. VOA's 
United Nations Correspondent Max Rustin has this report. The warning 
comes in a report to the U.N. Security Council from the chief of a 
special commission of inquiry Nakmud Kasim of Egypt. The council commissioned 
the report in 1995 to investigate how arms transfers reached Hutu 
fighters in the Great Lakes region. Much of Mr. Kasim's report focuses 
on the Democratic Republic of the Congo, formerly Zaire, which has 
become the center of tension in the region. Mr. Kasim says tension, 
particularly along ethnic lines, now threatens to trigger a major 
genocide in the region. The danger of a repetition of the tragedy 
is comparative to the Rwandan genocide of 1994 but almost sub-regional 
scale out. Why? Because this time the rebel groups are not only allying 
itself among themselves, they are allying with governments, and these 
governments are using them, especially on the operation of it, on 
military operations and also on the logistical training, et cetera, 
using them for their own purposes, and it looks as if now we find 
these rebel groups having the kind of forum of, see, which they didn't 
have that before. Mr. Kasim says these new alliances are very dangerous 
when combined with what he calls racial propaganda warfare. He says 
this sort of warfare has been seen most recently in the Congo in that 
government's alliance with the former Rwandan Hutu army and its public 
calls for the killing of ethnic Tutsis. At this time, Mr. Kasim says 
there are at least 23 rebel groups active in Congo, Angola, Burundi, 
Uganda, and Rwanda. He says Congo alone there are more than 400 ethnic 
groups, many of which do not like each other. He says racial propaganda 
warfare or invitations of hatred and killing would be very contagious 
in Congo and could lead to a genocide even worse than the 1994 genocide 
in Rwanda. The report says urgent and decisive measures are needed 
from the international community to reduce the flow of arms to the 
region, one of the main causes of instability. Members of the U.N. 
Security Council say efforts to ease tension in the Great Lakes region 
is one of their top priorities, but they say their work has been slowed 
by the complexity of the issue, including the many governments and 
rebel groups involved and the difficulty of communications. They say 
it is likely a peacekeeping force will be needed for the region. Such 
a force, they say, would be dominated by African soldiers but would 
also include assistance and personnel from other regions of the world. 
Max Rustin, VOA News, United Nations. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>