<DOC>
<DOCNO> VOA19981124.1600.0350 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
I'm Tony Riggs bringing you this hour of VOA News Now from Washington. 
Thousands of Russians have turned out in St. Petersburg to pay final 
tribute to slain pro-democracy activist and lawmaker Galina Starovoitova. 
The mourners included the leaders of several past Russian governments 
but few representatives of the current one. VOA's Peter Heimline was 
there. Hundreds of ordinary people bundled in scarves and heavy coats 
rubbed shoulders with many of Russia's political elite Tuesday at 
the chapel of St. Petersburg Alexander Nevsky Monastery. They were 
there to say goodbye to one of the city's favorite daughters, democracy 
campaigner, human rights activist, and member of parliament Galina 
Starovoitova. The funeral had to be delayed two hours to allow thousands 
of others to file past her open casket at the Grand Marble Hall of 
St. Petersburg's Esnography Museum. Miss Starovoitova was gunned down 
by two masked assailants last Friday in the stairwell of her apartment. 
It was a classic contract killing but with two exceptions: One, almost 
all other victims have been men; and, two, Galina Starovoitova was 
not known to have any questionable business dealings that mark most 
professional murders. Her friends and supporters believe the motive 
for this killing was purely political. Miss Starovoitova's friend 
and political soul mate, former Deputy Prime Minister Anatoly Chubais, 
is more blunt. He says the 52-year-old lawmaker was killed because, 
in his words, "She angered Communists and bandits." At a memorial 
service Tuesday, a tearful Mr. Chubais vowed to fight back. He says, 
"Our comrades are being killed. Our friends are being killed. They 
want to stop us, to frighten us, but it will not work." He added, 
"Whoever tries to stop the work Galina Starovoitova has started will 
not succeed." The memorial service was packed with former senior government 
officials, three former prime ministers, two former first deputy prime 
ministers, and a host of former Kremlin advisers, but Communists and 
members of the current government were conspicuous by their poor showing. 
Prime Minister Yevgeny Primakov sent Deputy Prime Minister for Social 
Affairs Valentina Mutveyenka as his representative. Former Prime Minister 
Yegor Gaidar told VOA he believes Miss Starovoitova's killing was 
directly linked to her effort to organize a political bloc to oppose 
criminals trying to steal the upcoming elections in the St. Petersburg 
region. The elections in St. Petersburg were under the very serious 
influence of the criminality, and Galina Starovoitova was leading 
the democratic bloc, and I know that she upset them, and I cannot 
exclude the possibility that this murder was connected with that. 
Galina Starovoitova was laid to rest in the Alexander Nevsky Cemetery 
where many distinguished Russians are buried. Among others who lie 
there are the author Fyodor Dostoyevsky and composer Pyotr Tchaikovski. 
An army of investigators are said to be on the Starovoitova murder 
case, but weeping friends and associates Tuesday fear that her killing, 
like virtually every other contract murder in Russia, will go unsolved. 
Peter Heimline, VOA News, St. Petersburg. 09.41 
</TEXT>
</DOC>