<DOC>
<DOCNO> VOA19981124.0500.1343 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
About an hour's drive west of Washington D.C., is an historically 
important little town, Harper's Ferry, West Virginia, it's called. 
Two beautiful rivers converge there, amongst rolling hills. The world 
famous Appalachian hiking trail, which runs from Maine to Georgia, 
is also in Harper's Ferry. VOA travel reporter, Ted Landfair, tells 
us that one of America's most famous songs was inspired by an historical 
event occurring there. Perhaps you've heard this tune: Most people 
know it as the great civil war song, " The Battle Hymn of the Republic". 
Mine eyes have seen the glory of the coming of the Lord. But, there 
were earlier words to this tune, listen. John Brown's body lies a 
moldering in the grave. John Brown's body lies a moldering in the 
grave. John Brown's body lies a moldering in the grave. His soul goes 
marching on. Glory, glory hallelujah... Here's the story of John Brown's 
body. The tune was actually an old Methodist camp song, called, "My 
Brother Will You Meet Me?" Then, along came John Brown, one the dozen 
or so famous Americans to play a prominent role in the history of 
tiny Harper's Ferry. Because the Potomac River runs from there, directly 
to Washington, George Washington once surveyed the town and built 
an armory an arsenal there. A second great river joins the Potomac 
at Harper's Ferry. The Shenandoah runs south, through the Blue Ridge 
Mountains. Because these vital rivers met there, and because of the 
armory and arsenal, Harper's Ferry, which was then in Virginia, since 
West Virginia was not yet a state, was a strategic location. That's 
where John Brown came in. Brown was a fanatical abolitionist. He, 
and his sons, had lived in Kansas, murdering many a slave holder in 
that state on the border between North and South. In 1859, two years 
before the Civil War, Brown and his followers armed themselves, rode 
east and snuck into Harper's Ferry. Marcia Starkey is a ranger at 
Harper's Ferry National Historical Park. His plan was to move throughout 
the south, raiding farms and plantations to free slaves, and ultimately, 
to see an end to slavery in the United States. Brown and his men took 
the Harper's Ferry armory and the gun-making works. But, he lingered 
too long. Federal soldiers showed up, captured him, and in the words 
of the song, "They hanged him for a traitor." Robert E. Lee, who would 
later leave the U.S. Army to lead the unsuccessful Confederate fight 
for independence, commanded the troops, who trapped, and then hanged, 
John Brown. When John Brown was in prison, there were schemes to break 
him out of jail. But, Brown said he did not want to escape. He knew 
he would be a martyr for the cause of abolition. As he put it, " I'm 
worth considerably more to hang, than for any other purpose. Slavery 
existed. Folks didn't have to look at it, necessarily, unless they 
chose to. But, John Brown made it front-page news. I like to compare 
him to an awl, splitting a block of wood, or a log of wood. He facilitated 
the split in the country by what he did. Early in the Civil War, the 
song about John Brown was turned into the "Battle Hymn of the Republic." 
When a Boston writer, Julia Ward-Howe, stayed at the Willard Hotel 
on Pennsylvania Avenue, In Washington, below her window, Union troops 
marched back and forth, singing " John Brown's Body." The tune haunted 
her. She wrote new words to fit the music, "The Battle Hymn of the 
Republic." He has loosed the fateful lightning of his terrible swift 
sword. One last story about this song. Remember... John Brown's body 
lies a moldering in the grave... When these words were first put to 
the old tune, it was not even the John Brown we've been talking about, 
that the song was referring to. It was another John Brown -- a Union 
soldier, killed at Ft. Sumter, South Carolina, where the first shots 
of the Civil War were fired. But, words were quickly added to tell 
abolitionist John Brown's story when he became famous at Harper's 
Ferry, West Virginia. I'm Ted Landfair. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>