<DOC>
<DOCNO> VOA19981124.0500.1970 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
United Nation's Security Council, today, takes up another dispute 
between Iraq and chief U.N.'s weapon's inspector, Richard Butler. 
At issue are documents Mr. Butler believes Iraq has, relating to its 
program to develop weapons of mass destruction. Iraq sent a letter 
to the council, Monday, complaining that Mr. Butler is demanding documents 
that Baghdad cannot provide. VOA's Max Rustin reports. The 18-page 
letter accuses UNSCON chairman, Richard Butler, of making unfounded 
charges against Iraq, and putting forward requests that are impossible 
to satisfy. It says Mr. Butler is doing so to prolong the weapons 
inspection process by, it says, "having an endless game to show Iraq 
is at fault." The letter is signed by Iraqi deputy Prime Minister 
Tara Azees. It is the latest in a series of Iraqi responses to Mr. 
Butler's requests for about one dozen documents related to Baghdad's 
programs for missiles, and chemical and biological weapons. Mr. Azees, 
in his letter, provides a detailed response concerning each requested 
document. Some, he says, have been destroyed. Some never existed. 
And, others are not relevant to the inspection process. The Security 
Council had no immediate formal response to the Iraqi letters. But, 
diplomats say they will examine the issue, closely, to see if Iraq 
is violating its pledge made earlier this month, to cooperate unconditionally, 
with UNSCOM. Iraqi ambassador, Nezar Homdune spoke to reporters after 
delivering the letter to the Security Council We wanted to make clear 
to the Council that Iraq is, in no way, showing any sign of non-cooperation. 
Iraq wants to cooperate because it wants to finish this whole job 
of the work of UNSCOM. If the Security Council, or individual members 
of the Council, view the Iraqi responses as an attempt to block the 
work of UNSCOM, that could open the way to new threats of military 
strikes against Iraq. Iraqi officials say they want the United Nations 
to begin a comprehensive review of U.N. resolutions related to sanctions 
and weapons inspections. They say it is unfair for UNSCOM to request 
more information ahead of that review. Security Council members say 
they have agreed to carry out such a review, only after Iraq demonstrates 
full cooperation with UNSCOM. And that, some members say, includes 
meeting the latest UNSCOM requests for documents. Max Rustin, VOA 
News, United Nations. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>