<DOC>
<DOCNO> VOA19981124.0500.0662 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
U.S. Senator, Bob Graham of Florida says, when the new Congress convenes 
in January, he will work to pass a comprehensive aid package for Central 
American Nations ravaged by Hurricane Mitch. VOA's Michael Bowman 
reports from Miami, where Senator Graham, Monday, outlined major components 
of the anticipated disaster relief legislation. Speaking from the 
Catholic Charity's warehouse at Miami International Airport, Senator 
Graham stressed the need for a long-term approach when planning U.S. 
assistance. The Senator says trade, and market access, will become 
the main focus once relief operations wind down and the Central American 
nations turn their attention to reconstruction. The key to the long-term 
economic development of these countries is going to be trade, or their 
ability to access the market of the United States for the products 
that they produce. For several years, these very countries have been 
at a competitive disadvantage with Mexico. I will be proposing, again, 
legislation that will give to these countries the same access to the 
United States market as is currently available to Mexico. This access 
is known by its shorthand term NAFTA Parity. Since 1994, when the 
North American Free Trade Agreement took effect, between the United 
States, Canada and Mexico, tens of thousands of manufacturing and 
garment industry jobs have migrated from the Caribbean in Central 
America, to Mexico. NAFTA Parity would seek to rectify the situation 
by providing NAFTA-like benefits to many disadvantaged nations in 
the region. In recent years, attempts to enact NAFTA Parity have failed, 
but Senator Graham believes the effort will be successful, this time, 
given the outpouring of sympathy by Americans for hurricane victims. 
I think there will be good support. It's important that this legislation 
be considered early in the new Congress, and adopted so that its benefits 
can be made available throughout the whole expanse of this emergency, 
plus recovery, period. The senator's proposed U.S. assistance package, 
for Central America, which would be submitted in January, when the 
new Congress convenes, would also expand direct U.S. emergency aid 
to the region, provide additional debt relief, and extend the Clinton 
Administration's moratorium on deportations to hurricane ravaged nations. 
Michael Bowman, VOA News, Miami. 13.37 
</TEXT>
</DOC>