<DOC>
<DOCNO> VOA19981124.0500.0814 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
A Dutch couple who risked their lives by sheltering Jews during World 
War II, has been honored in Los Angeles. Mike O'Sullivan reports the 
Attorney General of Israel presented an award to the children of the 
couple. Vinn Hordyke was an infant in Holland, when his parents made 
a dramatic decision. They would shelter five Jews in a room above 
their grocery store, to save them from a Nazi death camp. Mr. Hordyke 
heard the story from his father, many times. My dad had to go to Amsterdam, 
and he had a produce store. And, he saw they were loading up the Jews. 
One truck was the men and the other one, the women. And, the children 
were all crying. That's how he saw, because they were supposed to 
all be shipped to the Holy Land, but they were all in trucks and treated 
like animals. So, then he said, "If I can save some." So, he knew 
one family who didn't turn themselves in yet. The family lived in 
an apartment in Amsterdam. Mr. Hordyke's father took them, one by 
one, to his home, where they remained hidden in an upstairs room for 
two and one-half years. The Hordyke family was taking a risk, as Vinn 
Hordyke says, his parents were fully aware. The whole family would 
have been killed, four children, plus Mom and Dad, and plus upstairs. 
But what they did have, they had a greengrocer. So, they made a buzzer 
underneath the counter. So one buzzer meant, "be quiet," and two of 
them meant, "you have to go into the shelter." The shelter was a 75-centimeter 
crawl space between the first and second floors. It was used only 
once, when Vinn, then a three-year old child, pushed the buzzer by 
accident. At the end of the war, in 1945, the Jewish family was free 
to leave. One, an elderly woman, survives and is living in Israel. 
The ceremony honoring Landert and Elizabeth Hordyke, took place at 
the Museum of Tolerance, which is part of the Simon Visontall Center 
in Los Angeles. The Center's associate dean, Rabbi Abraham Cooper, 
says bravery like the Hordyke's was, unfortunately, uncommon. You're 
looking at families that are modest, people who did it for the right 
reasons, not looking for any recognition, often anonymously. But, 
when you're talking about those kinds of situations, for example, 
in Holland, where over 92 percent of the Jewish population was murdered, 
to have a family survive the war, took the absolutely heroic intervention 
of another family that said they just weren't going to let it happen. 
The posthumous award for the Hordykes, was presented by Israel's Attorney 
General Eliokum Rubinstein who notes that five decades after World 
War II, the ideas, that inspired the Nazi death camps, have not been 
fully uprooted. But, he sees some progress in the fight against hatred 
and prejudice. By and large I think, yes. I think the -- by and large, 
the world is much bigger. Never the less it's not uprooted. Prejudice, 
hate, is not yet uprooted. Anti-Semitism is not yet uprooted, and 
we'll have to work on it. Israeli Attorney General Eliokum Rubinstein, 
believes religious and ethnic hatred should be battled on several 
fronts, through public denunciations, through education and laws, 
and through honoring the example of families like the Hordykes who 
risked their lives and those of their children, to save the lives 
of their neighbors. Mike O'Sullivan, VOA News, Los Angeles. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>