<DOC>
<DOCNO> VOA19981124.0500.2163 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Cambodian Opposition leader, Sam Ransey, returned to Phnom Penh today. 
But, he was prevented, by police, from holding a gathering near the 
city center. Hugh Watkins reports from Phnom Penh, violence erupted 
as Mr. Ransey made his way to a planned memorial service for protesters 
killed by authorities. The growing band of supporters, which followed 
Mr. Ransey from the airport, was intercepted by the police, who dispersed 
them with electric cattle prods, and a flurry of blows from heavy 
wooden battens. No one was seriously hurt, but Sam Ransey's spokesman, 
Rich Guerilla, says the police action was a bad sign for political 
freedom in Cambodia. We were hoping today would be a day when an opposition 
politician could come home, talk to the people, speak freely about 
the future of Cambodian policy. And it's something that they, apparently, 
want to prevent. Mr. Ransey returned from Thailand, where he had fled 
two months ago, because of concerns for his own security, to attend 
Wednesday's meeting of the National Assembly. He had planned to lay 
a wreath in front of the Assembly building, to commemorate the hundreds 
of Cambodians who died in political violence since March, last year. 
But, 300 heavily armed policemen prevented him from doing so. Instead, 
Mr. Ransey addressed his supporters at his nearby party headquarters. 
Mr. Ransey has been shut out of the coalition deal between Cambodian 
leader, Hun Sinn and Prince Nardo Reriq. The agreement is intended 
to put an end to more than three months of government paralysis following 
last July's election. Mr. Ransey says he, and 14 members of his party, 
elected to the 122-seat National Assembly, will work hard to keep 
the new coalition government honest. I will not make change. The blood 
of those who sacrificed their life for democracy and generous for 
position in any fundamental politics, and corrupt government. Both 
Sam Ransey and Prince Reriq had rejected the results of the July election. 
But, following heavy pressure from foreign journalists to Cambodia, 
the Prince agreed to join Hun Sinn, the man who ousted him as first 
Prime Minister in a bloody coup in July 1997. Late Monday, the Prince 
and Hun Sinn announced the division of ministerial portfolios in the 
new government. Under the arrangement, Hun Sinn's Cambodian people's 
party, the CDT, will take control of the government's most powerful 
institutions. Hun Sinn is to become sole Prime Minister, but both 
the CDT and Prince Reriq's Foncentpak Party will nominate deputy premiers. 
The Prince is expected to become the president of the National Assembly, 
a powerful position in terms of the parliament's legislative agenda. 
Defensive interior positions will be shared. But the CDT has sole 
control of 12 portfolios, including foreign affairs, finance, and 
commerce. Foncentpak will control 11 ministries, including justice, 
rural development, and the new portfolio of inspection and anti-corruption. 
This is Hugh Watkin for VOA News, Phnom Penh. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>