<DOC>
<DOCNO> VOA19981124.1600.2148 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
I'm Tony Riggs, and this is VOA News Now. U.S. and British officials 
have been meeting today in London with members of 16 Iraqi opposition 
groups. Britain has urged the groups to unite and help bring President 
Saddam Hussein to trial for crimes against humanity. Critics of U.S. 
foreign policy have urged the United States to support opposition 
groups more, not only in Iraq but other countries. Supporting opposition 
movements is the subject examined on today's edition of Dateline. 
Here's Pamela Taylor. :9 On November 15th, the day after President 
Clinton decided to abort a planned air attack on Iraq, he said the 
United States would step up efforts to help those struggling to bring 
about a new government in Baghdad. Over the past year, we have deepened 
our engagement with the forces of change in Iraq, reconciling the 
two largest Kurdish opposition groups, beginning broadcasts of a Radio 
Free Iraq throughout the country. We will intensify that effort. President 
Clinton speaking in a televised address after his decision to abort 
planned air strikes against Iraq. In late October, Congress had sent 
President Clinton a bill to underwrite the ouster of Saddam Hussein. 
It gave the American president 90 days to designate Iraqi opposition 
groups eligible to receive up to $97 million. However, many analysts 
are skeptical since most Iraqi opposition leaders are out of the country. 
One skeptic is Mary Jane Deeb, former editor of "The Middle East Journal." 
I think at this point there is little that can be done internally 
in Iraq. It's very difficult to sort of rally the man in the street 
and convince him that somehow he has to get rid of his president for 
some ulterior motive, such as democracy, when he's facing problems 
of survival. One would need major incentive to encourage people to 
overthrow their leader. Miss Deeb doubts that $97 million can create 
that incentive. Ahmad Chalabi, leader of the Iraqi National Congress, 
disagrees with Professor Deeb and the other naysayers. He says the 
Iraqi National Congress, an umbrella organization composed of 12 opposition 
groups, has great support inside Iraq. There is no way, of course, 
to judge public opinion in Iraq. The press is controlled. Dissent 
is punished by death. However, you know, we believe the majority of 
the Iraqi people share our aspirations for the establishment of democracy 
and respect for human rights in Iraq, but resistance continues, as 
I've said in my testimony to Congress. This -- it needs open assistance 
from the United States for it to succeed in mounting a major challenge. 
Ahmad Chalabi adds that the Iraqi National Congress is committed to 
overthrowing Saddam Hussein and establishing a parliamentary, pluralistic 
democracy. But Michael Hudson, a professor at Washington's Georgetown 
University, questions the strength of the Iraqi opposition inside 
Iraq. He spoke with VOA's Judith Latham. I don't know of any really 
organized opposition inside Iraq. From time to time, one hears stories 
of plots and conspiracies, for example, in the military that are discovered 
by the regime and liquidated, but I don't know of any major sustained 
internal opposition organization. The Iraqi National Congress is an 
umbrella group, and it is based outside Iraq. It has offices in Jordan. 
It has representatives in Washington and London. It groups together 
a number of smaller organizations that would like to see the regime 
disappear. It is not thought to have very much influence inside the 
country, but Ahmad Chalabi has told congressional committees and other 
people here in Washington that, were the United States to support 
the Congress with military equipment, it would be possible to liberate 
small parts of Iraqi territory and that there would be then a kind 
of cascading spread of liberated zones as local populations would 
have confidence to rise up against the regime. In the past, the United 
States has encouraged opposition movements and then abandoned them 
at great peril to those who have relied on Washington. How committed 
is the United States to the Iraqi opposition at this juncture? Well, 
President Clinton in his statements during the last crisis said something 
that he had not said before, and that was that the United States is 
supporting an eventual change of government in Baghdad. The national 
security adviser insists that this is a very long-term matter. It's 
not going to happen tomorrow. And many Middle East specialists and 
military experts in Washington feel that there is very little likelihood 
that American support under the Iraq Liberation Act would be sufficient 
really to shake the regime. The Iraqi analysts say that there are 
many ethnic divisions -- Kurds in the North, Shi`ites in the South, 
Sudanese in the center -- and that weakens cooperation among them. 
Well, certainly, Iraq is a very complicated society, and when you 
look at it from the opposition's point of view, it gets a little bit 
more complicated because, while there are lots of groups -- not just 
Shi`ites and Kurds, but also Communists, leftists, Arab nationalists 
and others -- that would like to unseat Saddam Hussein, there's no 
real core and, indeed, it is true that cooperation and coordination 
between these different groups has proved to be very difficult. What 
are the reasonable prospects of the Iraqi opposition bringing down 
Saddam Hussein without both massive military and political support 
from the West? My guess would be that the prospects are not very good, 
and it's not clear at all, despite the American rhetoric that the 
U.S. is ready to push hard for an Iraqi military opposition campaign 
against Baghdad. I think the problem of the Iraqi opposition fundamentally 
is that it cannot develop a unified stand, and the other problem rests 
in the nature of the regional balance of power. It's pretty clear 
that the big powers and even the major regional powers are ambivalent 
about what to do about Iraq. All of this, I think, leads to a certain 
kind of paralysis for the Iraqi opposition. Professor Michael Hudson 
speaking with VOA's Judith Latham. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>