<DOC>
<DOCNO> VOA19981124.0500.2708 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
We have 10 hours 45, universal time. Researchers in Texas have identified 
a gene defect that may be involved in a great many human cancers. 
This discovery may lead to involved, new, more effective, treatments. 
Brian Sislek reports. Lung cancer and colon cancer are two of the 
most intractable malignancies. In the United States alone, those tumors 
account for over 270 thousand new cases of cancer each year. Researchers 
at the University of Texas Southwestern Medical Center in Dallas have 
found that 15 percent of lung and colon cancers can be traced to defects 
in a gene on Chromosome #11. The gene, which goes by the designation, 
PPP2R1B, is a tumor-suppresser gene. It controls the amount of phosphate 
in certain critical proteins involved in cell growth. When the gene 
is defective, that control is lost. It no longer works. It's shut 
off by virtue of mutations. And what happens is, too much phosphate 
builds up on the surface of these proteins, and it, essentially, steps 
down on the accelerator and causes itself to grow uncontrollably. 
Dr. Glenn Evans, the research team leader, says the discovery emerged 
from the involvement of his laboratory in the Human Genome projects, 
an international effort to map, in sequence, all the genes in the 
human body. The University of Texas, Southwestern Lab chose chromosome 
11 as its mapping assignment, due to its apparent involvement in many 
human cancers, including, most definitely, colon and lung, with strong 
indications for breast, ovarian, head and neck, and skin cancers. 
Dr. Evans says that, for cancer to arise, it requires a double mutation 
of the PPP2R1B gene. Everyone has two copies of this gene. In fact 
people have a copy of every gene. One comes from the father, and one 
that comes from the mother. With the case of most kind of alga genes 
that are known as suppresser alga genes, what has to happen is both 
of those two copies have to be inactivated. There has to be no active 
gene. And, then that's one of the things that stimulates the cancer. 
Dr. Evans says there are many things that can cause such mutations, 
including cigarette smoking, or environmental muti-genes. It is also 
possible to inherit the defective copy from one of our parents. In 
that case, one would walk around your normal life, absolutely normal 
with of those two copies of the gene inactivated. But, you wouldn't 
know it. So, people with have an inherited mutation of this gene. 
And, if they would've inherited from their parents. would beat much 
higher risk for getting cancer, because it would take only a single 
mutation, then, to stimulate it. Dr. Evans adds that the implications 
of this discovery, for the treatment of cancer, are immense. In studies 
involving laboratory mice, inserting a normal chromosome 11 with two 
normal copies of the gene, caused tumors to shrink. This suggests 
that the gene therapy may one day be used to treat certain cancers 
of the colon and lung. Dr. Evans says, it's unusual to have such a 
clear-cut link between the discovery of a gene defect, and the solution 
to the problem it causes. If we can reverse the gene, he says, then 
we can reverse the tumor. The discovery of the PPP2R1B gene defect 
can also tell people, early on, if they might be susceptible to a 
lethal cancer. Right now we know that there are a few cases of these 
mutations being inherited. Not many have been discovered, so far. 
And, we don't know how frequent they might be in the population. But, 
these in other words discover a variant in this gene, that is find 
that people could be divided into two categories; those that are normal, 
and those that carry the variant. It might be that, that variant will 
be predictive for susceptibility to cancer. Discovery of one mutated 
copy of the gene in an individual, might encourage him, or her, to 
adopt certain lifestyle changes, like a high-fiber diet, or avoidance 
of exposure to certain chemicals that might prevent the second gene 
from mutating. That would be one case where knowledge, very definitely, 
is power. I'm Brian Sislak. 49.10 
</TEXT>
</DOC>