<DOC>
<DOCNO> VOA19981124.0500.3185 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Most rock and roll bands don't last three years, let alone 30. Even 
those few groups that make it a fraction of that long, often make 
a living on past hits and not new songs. Well, Aerosmith is the major 
exception. They've made a career out of breaking the rules and the 
records. In fact, the Boston based band, may be actually reaching 
its height in popularity today, 28 years after the group was formed. 
VOA's Katherine Cole reports on Aerosmith's latest release called 
"A Little South of Sanity." If you enjoy the subtle approach, you'd 
best stay far away from this one. It's a two-hour album full of raucous 
live rock and roll with no studio fix-ups after the fact. In other 
words, what you hear on this album is just what you hear at an Aerosmith 
concert. That is called "Falling in Love is so Hard on the Knees", 
off the new Aerosmith CD, "A Little South of Sanity." This 23-song 
set was recorded during the band's 1993, and 1997, tours and it's 
basically a live greatest-hits collection. Some of the newer songs, 
like the one we just heard, and another called "Love in an Elevator," 
have a bit more vitality than the older ones that have been played 
thousands, and thousands, and thousands of times over the years. However, 
there is a great version of one of Aerosmith's first hits, "Walk this 
Way." "Walk this Way," was originally a hit in 1976. That live version 
is off the new Aerosmith CD, ' A Little South of Sanity." This collection 
is proof that "old guys" can still rock. Forty-eight-year old guitarist, 
Joe Perry, is heard in tip-top form, as is 50-year old lead singer, 
Steven Tyler, heard here singing "Crazy", one of those turbo-powered 
soul ballads that he loves. Sometimes you can replace a bass player 
or a drummer, but it's hard to imagine Aerosmith without lead singer, 
Steven Tyler. That is "Crazy" off of "Little South of Sanity," a very 
satisfying, new album from an old band that refuses to act its age. 
This has been a year full of ups and downs for Aerosmith. On the up 
side, a number one record. On the down side, two freak accidents caused 
the band to postpone several weeks of concerts. Now comes word that 
they've had to postpone some of next year's shows. The unconfirmed 
reason is that lead singer, Steven Tyler, needs some time to recover 
from knee surgery. But, back on the positive side, this new, live 
CD will do a fine job of keeping you company until they hit the road 
again. I'm Katherine Cole. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>