<DOC>
<DOCNO> VOA19981124.1600.0775 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
In U.S. news, House Judiciary Committee Chairman Henry Hyde says he 
hopes to wrap up the impeachment inquiry involving President Clinton 
within three weeks. A committee vote approving one or more articles 
of impeachment against the president would set up an impeachment vote 
in the House of Representatives for only the third time in U.S. history. 
National Correspondent Jim Malone reports that, while a committee 
vote against the president is likely, what happens after that is far 
from certain. Republicans hold a 21-to-16 advantage over Democrats 
on the House Judiciary Committee. It's expected that, sometime in 
the next few weeks, the committee will approve by a party-line vote 
at least one article of impeachment against the president for lying 
under oath. At that point, the impeachment matter would be referred 
to the full House of Representatives. A simple majority vote would 
impeach the president, but at least six House Republicans have said 
publicly they won't support impeachment, and several more could defect, 
meaning the impeachment effort would likely fail. Given that possibility, 
some lawmakers from both parties, including the next speaker of the 
House, Bob Livingston, are raising the possibility of censuring the 
president for his misconduct. Censure would take the form of a public 
rebuke of the president approved by the Congress. Democrat Charles 
Schumer is a member of the House Judiciary Committee. He says the 
president's behavior cries out for some sort of punishment short of 
impeachment, and he says censure would be appropriate. I don't want 
my children or grandchildren reading in the history books that someone 
lied under oath, which I think the president did, and was not rebuked 
for it. Even some of the president's advisers are hinting that censure 
might be an acceptable outcome. White House Counsel Greg Craig is 
coordinating the president's defense in Congress. The American people 
are very much in favor of some alternative to impeachment, opposed 
to impeachment but also looking for some kind of consequence, and 
it's got to be a bipartisan resolution, I think, to be satisfying 
to the American public. But many conservative Republicans reject censure, 
calling it the congressional equivalent of a mere slap on the wrist. 
Republican Lindsey Graham is one member of the House Judiciary Committee 
who's likely to vote for impeachment. I believe the president of the 
United States went into a grand jury in front of your grand jurors, 
took an oath six and seven months after this whole affair started, 
after being begged by everybody in this country to come clean, lied 
again. But Congressman Graham acknowledges public opinion polls, which 
indicate most Americans don't want the president impeached by the 
House and removed from office by the Senate. He says public outrage 
must accompany any move toward impeachment, outrage, which Congressman 
Graham says, is simply not present at the moment. Longtime Washington 
journalist and commentator Joseph Fromme has also been watching the 
opinion polls and the November 3rd election results in which Democrats 
made modest gains. He covered the Watergate scandal of the mid-1970s 
that eventually forced President Richard Nixon to resign, and he says 
much of the public sees a difference between that scandal and the 
one involving President Clinton. In Watergate, there was a general 
sense that really important issues were at stake here and that the 
president's behavior was undermining constitutional law in America, 
whereas here, even though the lying charge for a grand jury may be 
true, it was all related to, I think, what most of the public regards 
as a trivial sexual peccadillo by the president that in no way affected 
the governance of the country. If the House fails to impeach the president, 
the matter could end there. If the House does vote to impeach, the 
matter would then be referred to the Senate for a trial. But both 
Republicans and Democrats say conviction in the Senate is unlikely, 
given that Republicans only hold a 55-to-45 seat edge and 67 votes 
are required to convict the president and remove him from office. 
On the other hand, a move to censure the president after a House vote 
on impeachment would likely to draw support from both parties and 
could resolve an issue most Americans say they want to bring to closure. 
Jim Malone, VOA News, Washington. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>