<DOC>
<DOCNO> VOA19981124.1600.3181 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Here in the United States the cost of post-secondary education has 
risen to the point where many parents fear they will not be able to 
send their children to college. But members of the Mashantucket Pequot 
Tribe in Connecticut need not worry because the tribe will pay the 
bill. VOA's Susan Logue reports. The Mashantucket Pequots are a small 
tribe who have made a fortune with their gambling casino, which is 
the largest in North America. The funds from that casino have provided 
for a number of community resources on their reservation in Connecticut, 
a police force and fire department, a daycare center, and a multimedia 
museum and cultural resource center that opened this summer. Tribal 
dollars are also paying college tuition and buying textbooks for people 
like Alba Sebastian Murdoch. I'm just so thankful that I can -- we 
are able to do this because a lot of people are not. Miss Murdoch, 
who is 43 years old, dropped out of high school when she was a teenager. 
She came to the reservation about a year ago and, since then, she 
has completed her GED, the equivalency of a high school diploma, and 
begun studies at New Testament Bible College. She says she hopes to 
become a counselor. That way we could be able to come back to the 
tribe and be able to counsel the children or maybe even some adults, 
and that's one of the proud things to me, is that we are able to get 
our education and come back and give back to the tribe. Ten years 
ago when the Mashantucket Pequots began footing the bill for tribal 
members to continue their education, seven students took advantage 
of the program. Now 92 are pursuing some type of post-secondary education. 
Once students have been accepted to a college, Tanya Corbet, director 
of higher education for the tribe, says they only have to meet two 
qualifications to receive the scholarship. They must have live in 
the State of Connecticut and have been an enrolled member of the tribe 
for at least one year. When they receive their degree, she says, they're 
expected to work for the tribe. When they're done with their education, 
they're giving back to the tribe by being a part of the tribe, working 
in their area of expertise, whatever they went to college for. We 
have a lot of enterprises and departments, so it's really what their 
interests are, you know, their aptitude. We have some that are going 
to art school, some that are going to become lawyers. It's actually 
the individual choice of the tribal member. In addition to the Foxwoods 
Casino, which features hotels, restaurants, shops, and a large theater, 
the tribe owns and operates two golf courses, the ship works company, 
a pharmaceutical distribution company, a country inn and spa, and 
a hotel in nearby Mystic, Connecticut. The financial success of the 
tribe has brought increasing numbers of members back to the reservation. 
Twenty-five years ago, there were only 55 enrolled members of the 
Mashantucket Pequot Tribal Nation. Today, there are more than 10 times 
that number. The future of the tribe is in their hands, and Bonnie 
Buestrum, chief of education for the tribe, wants to ensure they are 
prepared for that responsibility. The membership has to have the skills, 
the capabilities, and the competencies to steward this entire organization 
-- the government, its enterprises, and its future -- and although 
I would think that higher education is not always the necessary requisite 
to do good thinking, it certainly sharpens it. Miss Buestrum says 
it is therefore the responsibility of the tribe to afford every possible 
opportunity for every person who wants to achieve at a higher level. 
That means more than providing money for tuition and textbooks. The 
tribe also provides guidance counseling and moral support to help 
students succeed, something Alba Murdoch says was very beneficial 
to her. Whatever you're interested in, they try to connect you with 
that person or with that department so that you will be able to have 
the opportunity to go and sit and talk with the person and also that 
you can set up visits at the campuses and everything so that way you'd 
be able to go sit in the classes and you get a general idea of -- 
and the feel of how it would be to, you know, attend the class, and 
I really -- you know, I'm grateful for that as well. Thanks to the 
efforts of the tribal education office, Alba Murdoch is confident 
she will earn her college degree. She looks forward to returning to 
the Mashantucket Pequots when she does, so she can provide counseling 
and support to other tribal members. I'm Susan Logue. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>