<DOC>
<DOCNO> ABC19981211.1830.1338 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> CAPTION </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
This week we've been taking a closer look at getting older in America. 
A whole generation of people is now closer to retirement than the 
college. We just assumed that baby boomers are getting more mature, 
but they're not leaving everything behind them. They are still devoted 
to the music of their earlier days. Do you know that baby boomers 
spend $7 billion on records every year? With those kind of number, 
maybe rock 'N' roll is really here to stay. Here's ABC's Michele Norris. 
This week, the freedom hall Arena in Louisville, Kentucky, was a Giant 
time machine. 77 back in the saddle again Aerosmith has been screaming, 
prancing and guitar slashing since the 1970s. Here we are some years 
later and year still neck deep in all of that excitement. You know, 
a few good songs come out, and kids, whether they're 40 or 13, love 
a good song. The first concert I went to see was in evansville in 
1977. This is her first one. She's my daughter. Makes you feel like 
you are ung again. You got to grow up, but you don't have to grow 
old. Hope I die before I get old. Rock 'N' roll. It was the soundtrack 
for an entire generation. And as those 78 million baby boomers now 
March toward middle age, they are still fiercely loyal to the music 
of their youth. Instead of throwing out their stereos like their parents 
did, they are buying new stereos. And they're putting them in their 
cars and they are staying close to their music. They won't let go. 
For the past 50 years, teenagers have always had the most influence 
on the music business. After all, we as teenagers bought most of the 
records. And now we still do, even though we're older. Today, more 
than half of all music sales are made to people older than 30. For 
the first time in history, adults have more clout in the rock 'N' 
roll business than teenagers. I mean, who would have thought? While 
younger bands come and go,ockers who are fast approaching retirement 
age are consistently some of the industry's biggest moneymakers -- 
The rolling stones, Bruce springsteen, pink Floyd and Fleetwood Mac. 
I think it was timeless. I think it was good in the '70s and '80s. 
And I think people will always go back to it. And business is capitalizing 
on that loyalty. Commercials have begun using former badn. Once limited 
to nostalgia films, vintage rock soundtracks are now everywhere in 
the movies. I don't want to fall asleep because I miss you baby And 
a long-floundering music channel has finally found success by shifting 
its focus to retro rock. Bruce springsteen is a legend. This is his 
story. As long as they can create music, we are going to go see them. 
These are our guys and we are hanging with them. So will it come to 
this? Perhaps. But right now, these 40-something rockers have more 
pressing concerns, like calling home to tell the baby-sitter that 
the concert is running late. Michele Norris, ABC News, New York. Line. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>