<DOC>
<DOCNO> ABC19981211.1830.0228 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> CAPTION </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
We'll go up to the hill to talk to cokie Roberts in a moment. The 
president's remarks were made minutes before the house Judiciary committee 
passed that first crucial article of impeachment. The one that gets 
it to floor. They've been at each other's throats all day long. Linda 
Douglass is on Capitol Hill. Mr. chairman. The committee members fought 
for hours over whether the article of impeachment charging that the 
president lied to the grand jury about his relationship with Monica 
Lewinsky ought to include specifics. We are not going to get any specificity 
in any of these referrals because the allegations are so outrageous, 
so flimsy, so ridiculous that they dare not put it in writing. They 
dare not write it down. The committee chairman was obviously reluctant 
to talk about the details. When he was specifically asked "whether 
oral sex performed on you is within that definition as you understand 
it." The president responded "as I understand it, it was not, no." 
There is so much here that I really don't care to read, but it's available. 
Republicans succeeded in keeping the specifics out of the article 
of impeachment and passed it on a party-line vote. While the fight 
raged on in the committee room, another more critical battle under 
way behind the scenes about what will happen when the full house votes 
next week. The capitol switchboard has been flooded with calls to 
members who have not decided how to vote. His position right now is 
undecided. The office of republican congressman Bob Ney of Ohio has 
been inundated. The speaker pro tempore: Mr. Ney is from a swing district, 
where president mi Clinton is fairly popular. But most of his calls 
from home are from conservatives urging to vote for impeachment. The 
polls may show a majority of voters are against impeachment, but those 
in favor are more vocal. Conservative passion is putting enormous 
pressure on fence-sitting republicans who are worried they might lose 
their seats in two years about they vote no. Today, three more moderate 
republicans, three more came out and said they will vote for impeachment. 
The congressional GOP leaders are simply telling the members to vote 
their conscience, they say, but the unspoken message, Peter, is, your 
conscience should be telling you to vote yes. Thanks very much, Linda 
Douglass. Let's talk more about conscience and politics. When the 
president came out today to the rose garden, there was enormous anticipation 
as to whether he might say something that would really convince people 
on Capitol Hill to change their minds. ABC's cokie Roberts is in the 
Washington bureau. Change any minds, cokie? I don't think so, Peter. 
In fact, one member said to me, it didn't even give people cover to 
vote for the president, against impeachment, if they were looking 
for that cover. Maybe what the members are asking for is impossible 
for the president to deliver. Which is that they want limb to say, 
"I did it." To come clean, in their words. And obviously, legally, 
that's a problem for him. It might be a problem for him in terms of 
his own perception. But that is what they're waiting for. This was 
not it. In fact, it made it harder. I said earlier, that despite the 
Tone, it was an historic day. Did it feel like it there today? I think 
it had that feeling. I think you looked at the faces of the members 
as they were voting on that first article of impeachment, there was 
a sadness there and a sense of moment. But I do think that one of 
the things that they have been saying is, you know, this is momentous 
and the American people haven't really caught on to the moment of 
it, and that is likely to happen next week. And the effect of that, 
will be something that might have a lot more bearing on how members 
vote than anything the president can say. Cokie, thanks very much. 
You say something very important there about whether the American 
people have caught on or they have caught on and have a completely 
different attitude. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>