<DOC>
<DOCNO> APW19981211.1263 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Israeli troops opened fire Friday on hundreds of Palestinian stone-throwers, 
killing two and injuring dozens in a new outbreak of violence just 
a day before U.S. President Bill Clinton's arrival in the region. 
Israeli Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu, meanwhile said he would 
not budge from his demand that the Palestinians must meet a list of 
conditions before he will withdraw troops in the West Bank, as he 
pledged to do in the Wye River agreement. Netanyahu suggested that 
even Clinton would not make him change his mind. ``We do not change 
our opinions, our positions on account of this or that circumstance,'' 
Netanyahu said in an interview with Israel TV's Channel One. The new 
violence and Netanyahu's tough talk made it more likely that Clinton's 
three-day visit, intended to usher in the second stage of the Wye 
agreement, will not go smoothly and that the president will be drawn 
into the bitter disputes between Netanyahu and Palestinian leader 
Yasser Arafat. A senior White House official said Clinton will not 
be deterred from making the trip. ``I do not think the president has 
had second thoughts for a minute about going on this trip,'' said 
Sandy Berger, his assistant for national security affairs. Monday's 
gathering of the Palestine National Council, the Palestinians' top 
decision-making body, has the greatest potential for trouble. During 
the session, the PNC is to ``reaffirm'' earlier decisions by lesser 
bodies declaring provisions in the PLO founding charter calling for 
Israel's destruction null and void. Netanyahu insists that the PNC 
abrogate the charter by vote, while the Palestinians say that under 
the Wye accord they are not required to do so. Instead, they say they 
will approve the charter changes by acclamation. Netanyahu reiterated 
Friday that he will settle for nothing less than a vote. If Clinton 
validates the PNC decision despite Israeli misgivings, Netanyahu said 
he will not attend a three-way meeting with Arafat the Americans are 
trying to arrange immediately after the PNC session. The Israeli leader 
also accused the Palestinian Authority of orchestrating West Bank 
riots to pressure Israel into releasing more Palestinian prisoners 
held for anti-Israeli activities. In all, four Palestinians have been 
killed and scores injured this week in widespread clashes with Israeli 
troops. The violence erupted after marches pressing for the release 
of prisoners. In the West Bank town of Qalqiliya, about 500 Palestinians, 
most of them supporters of Arafat's Fatah faction, marched to the 
outskirts of town Friday afternoon and began throwing stones at Israeli 
troops. Soldiers standing only about 10 meters (30 feet) away from 
the crowd fired tear gas and rubber-coated steel pellets. Witnesses 
said troops also used live ammunition, a claim denied by the Israeli 
army. Rubber bullets, when fired from a short distance, can be fatal. 
Two 18-year-old Palestinians, Mohammed Suleiman and Kamal Adwan, were 
killed by live bullets in the head, said Dr. Ramsey Abu Yaman at the 
U.N. clinic in Qalqiliya. Thirty protesters were hurt by rubber bullets, 
two by live rounds and 40 were treated for tear gas inhalation, clinic 
officials said. Suleiman's father, Ismail, sat on a hospital bed, 
chain-smoking and shaking after learning about his son's death. The 
50-year-old, an officer in the Palestinian police, said he supported 
peace with Israel, but was having second thoughts. ``My son didn't 
endanger them,'' he said. ``Why did they kill him? Peace won't come 
if Israeli soldiers keep shooting live bullets.'' Earlier this week, 
after the most widespread West Bank clashes in months, Netanyahu ordered 
troop commanders to take ``a firm hand'' against rioters. Arafat's 
West Bank security chief, Jibril Rajoub, said Palestinian police would 
make sure there will be no violence during the Clinton trip. ``I can 
assure you the situation will be quiet,'' he said. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>