<DOC>
<DOCNO> APW19981211.0286 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Just days away from the historic launch of their common currency, 
European Union leaders attempted Friday to map out the next big steps 
on the path to greater unity. The 15 leaders started the EU's year-end 
summit with new impetus behind plans to forge a common defense strategy 
less dependent on the United States. But there are deep divisions 
over how to bring in new members from the former Soviet Bloc and end 
Europe's postwar divisions. The two-day summit, dominated by the socialist 
leaders who now run 11 of the 15 EU nations, also brainstormed over 
getting the Union's 16.6 million unemployed back to work. Meeting 
amid the imperial splendors of the Hofburg Palace from where Austrian 
emperors once ruled much of Eastern Europe, the leaders are sure to 
restate a pledge that up to 12 candidate nations can join the Union 
someday. The EU has already opened membership talks with the frontrunners 
_ Poland, Hungary, the Czech Republic, Slovenia, Estonia and Cyprus 
_ who hope to join early next decade. To applicants' chagrin, the 
EU won't set a timetable for expansion. Its reluctance is over differences 
in the pace and scale, and over who covers the costs of accepting 
poor neighbors. Before the enlargement, the EU must overhaul its annual 
dlrs 100 billion budget, over 80 percent of which goes to subsidies 
for farmers and aid for poorer EU regions. If left unchanged, those 
costs will skyrocket when the easterners join. Poland alone has 4 
million farmers, over half the number in the whole of the current 
EU. All the eastern European candidates are poorer than the poorest 
EU member _ Greece. Germany and other rich EU nations want to freeze 
spending at current levels so they do not have to pay more for the 
enlargement. Other nations are also defending their corners to ensure 
they don't have to pick up the tab for expansion. ``We don't want 
to solve Europe's problem with a German check book,'' Chancellor Gerhard 
Schroeder told reporters. Schroeder said there was ``growing understanding'' 
for Germany's position, but he was sure to run into Spanish opposition. 
Spain is leading other poorer EU members who fear they will lose out 
when EU funds start flowing eastward. They insist on an increase that 
will add dlrs 24 billion to the EU budget by 2006. On the eve of the 
summit, Prime Minister Jose-Maria Aznar promised to resist what he 
called an assault ``on the bastion of solidarity'' between rich and 
poor nations within the EU. Schroeder acknowledged agreement in Vienna 
was impossible, but officials said without some progress at the summit, 
the Union risked missing a March deadline for wrapping up the budget 
review and be forced to delay the enlargement. Complicating the issue 
are divergences over how many should be allowed in. Britain, Denmark 
and Austria support a review that could see Slovakia, Latvia, Lithuania 
and Malta open formal membership talks next year. Germany and France 
disagree. There's more unity on defense, following Britain's decision 
to back plans for cooperation so Europe can respond to crises like 
those in Bosnia and Kosovo without having to rely on the United States. 
Prime Minister Tony Blair and President Jacques Chirac are expected 
to explain the recent Franco-British agreement to develop defense 
ties and seek support for widening the ideas on an EU level. As always, 
unemployment will feature prominently. Blair and Aznar have appealed 
to other leaders to join them in cutting red-tape on business, overhauling 
welfare and simplifying hiring and firing. ``Reform is essential if 
Europe is to maximize the positive employment effects of growth,'' 
Blair and Aznar wrote. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>