<DOC>
<DOCNO> APW19981211.0663 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
President Aleksander Kwasniewski said in a letter made public Friday 
he will propose a new bill on opening communist era files to replace 
the controversial measure he vetoed last week. In the letter sent 
to political leaders Thursday, Kwasniewski said he wanted to correct 
``legal errors'' in the bill passed by parliament in September that 
would allow victims of the former secret police to see their files. 
His veto brought heavy criticism from rightist Solidarity politicians, 
who accused Kwasniewski, a former communist, of trying to protect 
former communist agents. The Solidarity-led governing alliance lacks 
the necessary 60 percent support in the Sejm, the lower chamber of 
parliament, to override Kwasniewski's veto. If it fails to get additional 
support from other parties, Solidarity leaders intend to resubmit 
the measure next year. The bill calls for setting up an Institute 
of National Remembrance to manage communist files from 1944-89, as 
well as documents of Stalinist and Nazi crimes. The institute would 
make the files available to victims and reveal who informed on them. 
It also would have the power to launch investigations intended to 
establish those responsible for persecution or political murders. 
Kwasniewski's letter said he would propose his own version, which 
would allow all Poles to see their secret police files and change 
the way the members of the institute are chosen. His draft would have 
the institute's nine-member board elected to seven-year terms by both 
chambers of parliament _ the Sejm and the Senate _ as well as the 
National Judicial Council. Under the parliament bill, the Sejm would 
choose board members to nine-year terms. Solidarity leaders say secret 
files should be open to victims to ensure historical justice and make 
sure criminals of the past no longer hold power, even if that forces 
out top political leaders. They also warn that former agents could 
be blackmailed by criminal gangs or foreign governments if the truth 
remains hidden. Former communists say the files are incomplete and 
unreliable, a result of uncontrolled work by the dreaded Security 
Service of the communist era. Some also argue opening the files could 
cause political turmoil, like the first attempt to deal with the matter. 
In 1992, the rightist government of Jan Olszewski was toppled on a 
no-confidence vote after it released an unconfirmed list of alleged 
communist agents. In October, Kwasniewski signed another law that 
requires government officials, judges and others to declare if they 
ever worked for or collaborated with the former security service. 
Under the law, which took effect last month, those making false declarations 
can lose their jobs. Solidarity leaders say opening the files to everyone 
would allow former agents now in positions requiring a declaration 
to check their files beforehand. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>