<DOC>
<DOCNO> APW19981211.1222 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Parliament moved Friday to limit the amount of money the government 
can print, part of an effort to rein in inflation that's at 70 percent 
this year and threatening to spiral out of control. As Russia wrestles 
with its economic crisis, one of the trickiest questions is how much 
money President Boris Yeltsin's government should inject into the 
economy. More money helps stimulate the weak economy, but it also 
stokes inflation. Since a financial meltdown in August, the government 
has pumped billions of rubles into the economy in a bid to revive 
ailing banks and pay off state workers whose wages are months overdue. 
Despite these huge obligations, the government may print only 25 billion 
rubles (dlrs 1.3 billion) in the final quarter of this year, according 
to the bill that won overwhelming approval in parliament's lower house, 
the State Duma. The government printed 13.5 billion rubles (dlrs 650 
million) total in October and November without approval from parliament, 
which it was supposed to seek. Central Bank Chairman Viktor Gerashchenko 
told parliament he endorsed the plan approved Friday and would seek 
to maintain ``the stability of the ruble,'' which has fallen sharply 
over the past four months. Many economists predicted the government 
would flood the economy with additional cash, and the country's money 
supply has gone from about 160 billion rubles (dlrs 8 billion) when 
the crisis struck to more 190 billion rubles (dlrs 9.5 billion) Friday, 
according to government figures. Still, the increase is less than 
many economists had forecast and so far has not been a major contributor 
to inflation, according to some analysts. However, the economists 
say it will be more difficult for Russia to rein in spending in coming 
months because it faces ever larger debts and shrinking revenues. 
The Duma passed the bill Friday on its second reading. It must be 
approved one more time before going to parliament's upper chamber, 
where it's also expected to win passage next week. In another development 
Friday, the government said that the economic crisis had virtually 
halted the sale of major state assets to private investors, and revenues 
this year were only a fraction of those forecast. The government had 
hoped to earn 8.1 billion rubles (about dlrs 400 million) by auctioning 
off state property, but it has earned only 1.4 billion rubles (dlrs 
70 million) through October, the Finance Ministry said. The country's 
economic downturn has chased away foreign investors, and the government 
has decided to put off auctions of two large companies, the Rosneft 
oil company and the Svyazinvest communications firm. The government 
is still planning to auction off a 2.5 percent stake in the gas monopoly 
Gazprom later this month. One possible buyer is the German gas distributor 
Ruhrgas, which delivers Gazprom's gas to German consumers. Russia's 
Cabinet approved a draft budget Thursday and planned to send it to 
parliament Friday. In previous years, the government and parliament 
have wrangled over the budget for months. But Prime Minister Yevgeny 
Primakov has good relations with all the leading parliamentary factions, 
and has said that rapid passage is necessary to deal with the economic 
crisis. Russia's economy is expected to contract 5 percent this year, 
and has been shrinking throughout this decade in one of the worst 
depressions ever suffered by an industrialized nation. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>