<DOC>
<DOCNO> CNN19981211.2130.0223 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> CAPTION </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
President Clinton is due to board air force one before dawn tomorrow 
for a Flight to the mideast. Aides say he will try to shore up the 
wye peace agreement during his three-day visit. Today, there was another 
setback to peace as two Palestinian teenagers were fatally shot when 
Israeli troops opened fire on people throwing stones in the West Bank. 
The Palestinians were protesting Israel's refusal to release some 
prisoners. Jerrold Kessel has more. Palestinian schoolgirls in support 
of the 100 men and women here who are on hunger strike for Palestinian 
prisoners. All day people come to show their support here for the 
more than 2,000 prisoners whose hopes so far have been dashed. The 
Palestinian leadership looks to the upcoming presidential visit to 
push the accord forward and boost hopes of statehood. But here, solidarity, 
not sovereignty, is the key word. How we have the country and we have 
a peace without the releasing of the prisoners? It's nonsense. This 
woman, a Gaza nurse and mother of six, reflects the palestinian anxieties. 
Her brother-in-law is serving a life term. Her brother, who spent 
nine years in Israeli jails, the one of the hunger strikers they have 
come to support. "So long as the prisoners go on with their hunger 
strike, we will continue continue our protest here." She says President 
Clinton's visit to Gaza will only be historic if the prisoner issue 
is resolved. We hope that he will affect the government to release 
the prisoners. All must be released from the prisons, because we have 
signed the peace agreement. So all the prisoners, the people who fight 
for the freedom, they will be at the first line. They will be released. 
But the frustration is not just with Israel. We are angry with all 
of them with all of them, yes. With Arafat and with Clinton and with 
Netanyahu. All we are angry. The mothers, the wives, the children, 
all of them angry, because this is not fair. Because the one who struggles 
and like the peace, are still in prison. Arafat doesn't officially 
support the protest. He doesn't mind them for a base of official demands 
for release. This serves as a counterbalance to the official Palestinian 
institutions which will be welcoming President Clinton. Less than 
five minutes' walk away, another pro-prisoner demonstration marches 
past the hall where Mr. Clinton will be addressing top Palestinians 
on Monday. No one here really imagines that they'll have the opportunity 
to put their demands directly to President Clinton, but they do hope 
that their message will echo down the road when he meets there on 
Monday with the Palestinian leadership. Jerrold Kessel, Gaza city. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>