<DOC>
<DOCNO> CNN19981211.1130.0021 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> CAPTION </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
The impeachment inquiry may be making headlines in America, but it's 
barely on the radar screen in many places overseas. And some of the 
international reporters who are covering the story say they can't 
help but shake their head. Jim bitterman reports. In the newsroom 
of the "international Herald tribune," a Newspaper that circulates 
in 180 countries, editors were picking the stories that will be read 
by nearly 250,000 people. And there was no question that the impeachment 
hearing would be the lead story. It's major play for us, the lead 
story in the paper. No mistaking it, when you pick it up in the morning. 
But if it was big news in the American-owned press, it was old news 
elsewhere. Russian, Italian and any number of other European TV channels 
gave the impeachment hearings no coverage at all. One outlet that 
was going live with the story was Germany's all news channel ntv. 
Its correspondent says he spends much of his air time trying to explain 
why the Clinton impeachment proceedings go on and on. Some people 
in your country are still living in the days of the pilgrim fathers, 
so we started some kind of inquisition. Congressmen's thoughts were 
also very much on the mind of David smith, correspondent for Britain's 
channel 4 news. "Impeach and destroy" some republicans are saying, 
"impeach and destroy." David Smith, channel 4 news, Washington. One 
commentator said the Clinton scandal has gone from amusing and amazing 
to appalling and amazing. Some wonder at how Washington, with America's 
friends and enemies looking on, has lost sight of its leadership role 
in the world. Japan's nhk played the story that way just before the 
evening sportscast, showing Christmas at the White House while suggesting 
international affairs being neglected. Not much different for feelings 
of a commentator on Europe's rtl radio. This thing is completely weakening 
the presidency. How long will it last? Where do they want to go? Do 
they really want to punish the man all the way? What will come out 
of it? Indeed, before one one Israeli newscast detailed the proceedings 
before detailing his upcoming visit to Israel. The impeachment vote 
could have a crucial effect on the president's peace effects in the 
region. He may have misled the American people. But this is not really 
a crime which justifies removing him from office and plunging the 
whole world into a period uncertainty. Still, some in the media here 
may find certain advantages in the U.S. president's continuing predicaments. 
It has been more than a month since a French satire program has been 
able to trot out its Bill Clinton puppet and ridicule the way Washington 
works. The ongoing impeachment hearings may provide plenty of new 
material. John bitterman, CNN, Paris. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>