<DOC>
<DOCNO> CNN19981211.1600.0694 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> CAPTION </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
We understand is about to make his statement. As anybody close to 
me knows, for months, I have been grappling with how best to reconcile 
myself to the American people, to acknowledge my own wrong doing and 
still to maintain my focus on the work of the presidency. Others are 
presenting my defense on the facts, the law, and the constitution. 
Nothing I can say now can add to that. What I want the American people 
to know, what I want the Congress to know, is that I am profoundly 
sorry for all I have done wrong in words and deeds. I never should 
have misled the country, the Congress, my friends, or my family. Quite 
simply, I gave in to my shame. I have been condemned by my accusers 
with harsh words. And while it's hard to hear yourself called deceitful 
and manipulative, I remember Ben Franklin's admonition that our critics 
are our friends, for they do show us our faults. Mere words cannot 
fully express the remorse I feel for what our country is going through, 
and for what members of both parties in Congress are now forced to 
deal with. These past months have been a process of coming to terms 
with what I did. I understand that accountability demands consequences. 
And I am prepared to accept them. Painful though the condemnation 
of the Congress would be, it would pale in compareson to the consequences 
of the pain I have caused my family. There is no greatering any. Like 
anyone who faces the shame of wrongful conduct, I would give anything 
to go back and undo what I did. But one of the truths I have to live 
with is that is simply not possible. On old and dear friend of mine 
recently sent me the wisdom of a poet who wrote, "the moving finger 
writes, and having writ, moves on. Nor all your piety nor wit shall 
lure it back to half a line, nor all your tears wash out a word of 
it." So nothing, not piety nor tears nor wit nor torment can alter 
what I have done. I must make my peace with that. I must also make 
peace with the fact that the public consequences are in the hands 
of the American people and the Congress. Should they determine that 
I require rebuke and censure, I am ready to accept that. Meanwhile, 
I will continue to do all I can to reclaimant the trust of the american 
people and to serve them well. We must all return to the work, the 
vital work of strengthening our nation for the new century. Our country 
has wonderful opportunities and challenges ahead. I intend to seize 
those opportunities and meet those challenges with all the energy 
and about and strength God has given me. That is simply all I can 
do. The work of the American people. Thank you very much. Mr. president, 
can a reasonable person conclude that you lied under oath, sir? Do 
you agree with your attorney's assessment of that? So the president 
has apologized for his actions in the Monica Lewinsky matter. He said, 
I am profoundly sorry for all I have done wrong in words and deeds. 
He said, I should never have misled the country and I am prepared 
to accept the consequences. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>