<DOC>
<DOCNO> CNN19981211.0130.0028 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> CAPTION </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
The house Judiciary committee is edging toward a momentous vote on 
whether to impeach President Clinton. At least one of the four proposed 
articles of impeachment is expected to pass the committee on a party 
line vote, which could come late Friday or sometime Saturday. The 
full house is expected to begin debating impeachment, as well as the 
possible alternative of censure, next week. Thursday, the Judiciary 
committee's republican and democratic counsel made their presentations 
for and against impeachment. Both played excerpts from President Clinton's 
previously unaired deposition in Paula Jones' lawsuit. Republican 
counsel David schippers tried to use the tape to substantiate the 
charge of perjury. And I'd like to you listen to the president's deceptions 
for yourself. At any time have you and Monica Lewinsky ever been alone 
together in any room in the White House? I think I testified to that 
earlier. I think that I have no specific recollection, but it seems 
to me that she was on duty on a couple of occasions working for the 
legislative affairs office and she brought me some things to sign 
on the weekend. I have a general memory of that. Do you remember anything 
that was said in any of those meetings? No, we'd just have conversations. 
I don't remember. Democratic counsel abbe Lowell argued the deposition, 
as well as conversations between Monica Lewinsky and Linda Tripp, 
showed there was little evidence to warrant impeachment. And he pleaded 
with the Judiciary committee not to send the matter to the senate. 
If you try to rewrite history by contending that the house is merely 
the body that accuses and the Senate is the body that tries, you forfeit 
the double protection that the founders intended to exist. Contrary 
to having the house be a mere rubber stamp for sending allegations 
of wrongdoing to the Senate, the constitution actually requires that 
the house as well as the Senate look to the same evidence with the 
same standard. After the counsel presentations, Judiciary committee 
members began making ten-minute statements that stuck clearly to party 
lines. Leaping out of the mass of documents, and those boxes and all 
the testimony, is the recurring theme of perjury -- falsehood, under 
oath. We can't escape, no matter what allegations you bring against 
Dave schippers or against abbe Lowell or any member of the committee 
or the independent counsel, perjury still resounds as regards As regards 
to the basic concept of what constitutes an impeachable offense. For 
me, the logic applies. I know it when I see it. Given the totality, 
this isn't it. In fact, the reasonable people may disagree, I don't 
think it's a clots call. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>