<DOC>
<DOCNO> MNB19981211.2100.1558 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> CAPTION </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
As we mentioned, there are three articles of impeachment approved. 
The vote was yes. They are in the books. The fourth comes up for consideration 
tomorrow morning. All of the votes so far have been straight party 
line with the exception of one. When it came to the second article 
of impeachment, congressman Lindsey Graham, republican of South Carolina, 
voted no. In other words voted with the democrats. He's with us right 
now from the hill tonight. Congressman, why did you vote the way you 
did on number two? I have been saying for a long time, Brian, that 
I thought the deposition perjury allegation against the president 
was substantiated in the fact that he gave false testimony but the 
crime of perjury requires a materiality element, not only that you 
lie under oath but that it be a material lie. Once judge Wright deemed 
the deposition indismiss I believe in the underlying case that it 
would never have went to the jury for review, I think there's a legitimate 
argument that materiality for the crime of perjury was lost I gave 
the president the benefit of the legal doubt. My colleagues have agreed. 
There's a lot of case law supporting that you could in fact be prosecuted. 
Congressman, your vote got a lot of attention. A lot of people talking 
tonight, but you had the safety, the cushion of the majority knowing 
it was going to pass anyway. Would you have voted the way you did 
if it tipped it the other way and you didn't get a second article? 
The best way to figure out what somebody would do if you're being 
spun or not is look how consistent they've been and I'm telling you 
that for weeks, how long we've been doing this, seems like years I 
know to everybody, including myself, I've been saying from the get-go 
that I think materiality was lost when she made a ruling, and that 
was from the very early part of this hearing. I believed it then, 
I believe it now and I voted the way I believe. Congressman, I have 
to ask, it got rough in there at times today and at times tonight. 
When the gavel sounds and you go back in the cloakrooms and hallways, 
do you folks get along in both parties? Yeah, we do. Actually I've 
come close to my colleagues on both sides of the aisle, and it's just 
sort of like in the Marine corps. I guess every Marine has a common 
bond. This had been a tough time for all of us. I really do respect 
the members of the committee on the other side. I've become friends 
with several of them, and I don't think that would have happened without 
some event like this to bring us together, so we're fighting for our 
beliefs. We've fighting for our conscience, what we think is the right 
thing for the future of this country, but when it's all over, I have 
a great respect and we do have civil conversations. It's been a long 
day I thank you for making time to talk to us this Friday night. Congressman 
Lindsey Graham, republican of South Carolina, thank you very much. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>