<DOC>
<DOCNO> MNB19981211.2100.3074 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> CAPTION </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
The impeachment proceedings have both captivate and -- -- -- captivated 
and paralyzed this city. We have a panel of editors from some of the 
country's leading newspapers. Sue O'Brien is the editorial page editor 
of the "Denver post" which called for the president's resignation 
but does not favor impeachment. Mindy Cameron of the Seattle times. 
With us from San Francisco, editorial page editor of the "San Francisco 
examiner," Jim finefrock. He has been against censure or impeachment 
all hay long. Sue, "it is time, Mr. president, to resign," a quote 
from August. Is it realistic for your newspaper? I think it's pretty 
obvious that the president is not seriously considering resignation. 
Yes, that is still the position that we take. We still believe that 
had he resigned or if he were still to resign, the nation would be 
spared an incredibly divisive and partisan battle that we're obviously 
in the throes. Mindy, how does the view of your paper differ from 
that? Not a lot other than we did call for his resignation in September. 
We haven't continued to beat that dralm. That's clearly the most unlikely 
of all scenarios. We will be making the case this Sunday for censure, 
a hardishly worded censure, really reflecting the will of the people 
in so many ways. Jim, can you tell me what's your theory on why this 
doesn't matter as much as it used to? The weight of a newspaper itorial 
page used to be enormous, and now it just doesn't have the impact. 
I think as we see tonight among the three of us there are several 
opinions about what should be done in this case. The "examiner" has 
come out early and consistently for a posture of dropping the entire 
impeachment proceeding until and unless more serious evidence arises. 
I think the other thing that happens is that unlike Watergate, unlike 
the early days of this scandal, there simply isn't a revelation today. 
It's a rehash. I think people are simply growing weary of it. You 
think that reflects the opinion of San Francisco generally? I think 
so. This is a very liberal and very tolerant city, a city where in 
some ways aberrant behavior is mainstream. People here think that 
sexual behavior is no business of government's. Couldn't have put 
it any better, nor will I touch that. Sue O'Brien, how do you hear 
back? It's not like talk radio where you're listening to the audience 
on a constant basis. The activists write letters to the paper. How 
do you hear how your page is going over with the readers? It's really, 
really interesting. Before in November election we were hearing from 
the zealots on both sides, if you L both the people who thought we 
were being too soft on Clinton and those who are absolutely appalled 
that we asked for his resignation. What's fascinating to me is that 
the mail about impeachment has really tailed off, including reaction 
to our own opposition to impeachment. There's almost a burnout in 
the public since November. That surprising me. I don't know what the 
last two days will do to that mail volume. But at this moment T. mail 
is quiet. Mindy, should we be preparing for a day when the country 
collectively almost takes a walk into the shower, wakes up, and realizes, 
look where this process is, my God we're about to remove a president? 
I think that could very well happen. I think it may be beginning to 
happen as we go into the weekend. We're beginning to get letters again 
and some sense that this is really getting to historically significant 
moment and it's time to pay attention. It's kind of a level of awareness 
and serious that's -- seriousness that I would suspect we'll begin 
to see and hear from readers. We have had a lot of news break on our 
walk this evening. We must cut our conversation short. To sue, mindy, 
and Jim thank you all for coming in and talking to us and representing 
your newspapers. We appreciate it. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>