<DOC>
<DOCNO> MNB19981211.2100.1802 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> CAPTION </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
The lead counsel for the democrats who made his case, most agree, 
very forcefully yesterday before the house Judiciary committee is 
with us on the broadcast here tonight, having sat through a day of, 
as we said at the top of the broadcast, not always high-minded debate 
from both sides. Abbe Lowell. Good to see you. Thanks for coming on. 
Good to see you, Brian. Thank you. At what point do you look around 
fellow democrats and ask, what is the use? We are spending hours debating 
fait accompli, articles of impeachment? Look, I didn't have a lot 
of hope that my presentation or any of the others were going to change 
many minds the committee. I'm still hopeful that there are a lot of 
people on the floor have open minds and are going to understand the 
message that you don't put the Senate and the country through a trial 
based on what's happening here. Why is this happening? Yesterday you 
were very forceful in saying, to use the metaphor of the fire extinguisher, 
don't break the glass. There's too many reasons. I'll give you a few. 
One reason it's happening is because the Judiciary committee doesn't 
necessarily mirror the way the House of Representatives or the country 
is. It is a small events and they are a large event. Consequently 
what you're hearing in there doesn't reflect American people. We know 
that because we're watching your and other people's poll also. It 
doesn't even reflect the kind of division in the full House of Representatives. 
They are more partisan, more fervored about what's going on. For another 
reason, it's like emergency room trauma doctors. In that room there's 
been a trauma. I think they've grown somewhat immune to what's been 
going on. When they put on it the floor of the house they're going 
to say oh my God this is really an imagine. Do you think the house 
will approach it that way, really? Are you confident that the president 
will have what he needs in the house? Here's my only concern. I took 
the republican leadership at their word when they said it was a vote 
of conscience and we're not going to whip it. Now I've seen the news 
report that say that that was not truthful, that they are whipping 
it. If republicans like Americans are free to look at this objectively, 
I'm very confident I'm going to sleep for the first time in a few 
nights and rest easy. If Mr. delay and others are whipping this as 
a vote of confidence for the republican I'm scared for history and 
I'm hoping that's not what's going on. Abbe, a numeric chance of backfire, 
meaning they are going to put all their chips on the impeachment. 
What's the chance that it blows up in the G.O.P.'s face, the president 
gets off with nothing? Well, I don't know if that would happen on 
the floor. Right now Mr. Hyde has as such will come up here. I think 
the house is trying to say to the republicans and democrats we're 
not going to give you a censure alternative. That has to be seen for 
what it is. The reason the republicans don't want a censure vote on 
the floor is because many of the republicans want that. If not given 
that option they have no choice but to vote for impeachment. That's 
a partisan ploy. If Americans fom forward and call their members and 
say wait out of conscience alone you've got to give the members a 
choice. A long day's journey into night again on the hill this evening. 
Abbe Lowell has been kind enough to join us live this evening. Thank 
you very much. My pleasure. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>