<DOC>
<DOCNO> MNB19981211.2100.2296 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> CAPTION </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
We now have an extended look at what was said and debated throughout 
the course of a long day here on Capitol Hill. We are joined by NBC 
news correspondent chip Reid. Tomorrow morning they start. They'll 
have more statements. That is the way last night ended. It's the way 
this morning started. Yes, it did, Brian. It began with a form of 
political receively, a call from the democrats for America to wake 
up to what is happening in this committee. Wake up, America! Because 
if they can do it to the president, they can do it to you. If this 
committee supports an article of impeachment for abuse of power, they 
will be saying that any American who goes into court and claims their 
constitutional protections is at risk. How unamerican! But they are 
going to impeach him anyway and extend our national nightmare for 
another year by sending this weightless case to the Senate for trial. 
But republican Mary Bono said there is a simple way to avoid a national 
nightmare and it's in the president's hands. So I say to the president 
today, if you really believe that this process will cause our nation 
irreparable harm, I ask you for the good of the nation resign and 
spare our country a lengthy and divisive impeachment process. And 
Brian, speaking of divisiveness, you can imagine tensions were extraordinarily 
high today. There were more than the usual number of political Pie 
fights. Your unanimous consent request is -- Before you deny it, I 
have read the presentation. I have listened to it and thought about 
it. In fact all of last night, and in that presentation -- Mr. chairman 
-- Well, I -- The gentleman wishes to muscle me, that's fine. In fact 
Schumer and the democrats were not muscled at all. That was the beginning 
of a debate that lasted most of the afternoon. The question -- whether 
it was fair for the republicans not to include the specific words 
of the president that the republicans said were lies. The vagueness 
is purposeful, and you heard this from the gentleman from South Carolina. 
The reasons for impeaching the president under perjury are what he 
touched and when he touched it, and that's the problem they have. 
They do not want to take that to the floor of the House of Representatives 
and to the Senate, because it all comes down to when you ask the specifics 
that Monica Lewinsky said he touched her in several places and to 
corroborate it told several of her friends. They cannot be specific, 
because if they are specific, they are trivial and if they want to 
be portentious they have to be vague. That's the choice. Now what 
the other side is doing is, of course, very clever but very disen 
general with us. What they are seeking as the gentleman from Wisconsin 
noted a few moments ago, they are seeking not to do what they appear 
to be doing and that is to provide sufficient data, sufficient information 
for the president to know what he is charged with. He knows darn well 
what he's charged with. There will be as part of the record that goes 
to the Senate, tens of thousands of pages of evidence, hours of testimony 
here, hours of debate here -- that will all be the record that will 
go there. What they are seeking to do is to limit in advance what 
the Senate can do. They are trying to tie the hands of the Senate. 
I'll tell you, Brian, the way Mr. Barr was talking, he was almost 
sure this was going to go all the way to the Senate and in fact the 
momentum appears to be in that direction. Now, chip, all of us here 
this morning woke up to a huge profile story of Henry Hyde, front 
wage "Washington Post" that was in the end almost sad, solitary life 
after the wife of his -- after the death of his wife. Alone in his 
apartment with his books most of the time. How is he likely to emerge 
from this? His humor is certainly helping him and the members, even 
the ones who so caustically go after him sometimes seem to have a 
lot of affection for him. Here is one interaction today. Maxine waters 
and he have a kind of strange and extraordinary relationship it seems. 
Here is Maxine waters pleading with him to be fair and a response 
that he gave at a different point in the day. You are going to vote 
aye on something and when your grandchildren that you keep referring 
to every day -- when your grandchildren ask you what did you vote 
on, what was the lie, what are you going to tell them? I don't know. 
It was kind of general. There were a lot of things. We attached a 
report. No, it didn't comport with what Kenneth Starr said but we 
had this idea. We're trying to finish this decently, honorably, fairly, 
within a time constraint, because I don't want this to spill over 
into next year. I don't want this to be an endless process. I think 
it's in the interest of the country to finish it, and we have tried 
our level best, and I have tried to grant every request the democrats 
have made. Maybe we haven't succeeded but I have certainly tried. 
So Brian, he has tried and he has a lot of affection and he has been 
distinguished through most of it, but this has been a very partisan 
process, and that could tarnish his reputation. Chip Reid, thank you 
for your review of it after a long day on the hill. We appreciate 
it. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>