<DOC>
<DOCNO> MNB19981211.2100.0498 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> CAPTION </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
A look at what's going on beneath the surface and a prognosis for 
the days to come, incomes political analyst norah O'Donnell. She covers 
the hill for "roll call," the newspaper of Capitol Hill. Norah, in 
the 20 minutes between the announcement that the president would give 
his speech and the actual speech, at least one analyst said this is 
being delivered for just 25 people on the hill. This is in lieu of 
a round of phone calls by the president. Is that cynical or accurate 
or both? Well, it's accurate. Moderate republicans were still sitting 
on the fence watched the president's address tonight. Ones I spoke 
with said it did very little to change their mind. In fact one top 
aide to one of these members said why can't he just say the four words 
-- I'm sorry, I lied. The president hasn't gone far enough to convince 
many of the moderate republicans and in fact tonight republican leadership 
sources tell me there are now nine more of these moderate republicans 
who say they will vote for impeachment. That narrowed this significantly, 
as the White House needs at least 15 republicans to vote to switch 
over to the democratic side to avoid the president being impeached. 
That's love movement in a very short period of time. What caused that? 
It's not necessarily tied to the president's remarks today but it's 
a combination of things -- the solemnity based on the hearings today. 
Many people at crunch time realizing it's all but inevitable. Since 
this house has voted on some articles of impeachment, they have been 
ready to make public their decision that they will vote on articles 
of impeachment. This is a stunning move, of course, because again 
we have them now publicly saying there aren't as many fence sitters 
there for the White House to lobby. People have heard a lot about 
the next step in the process, the full house. It's not too early to 
think about the numbers in the Senate. It's not too early. There are 
55 republicans in the Senate, 45 democrats. What we do know is that 
democratic senators are already crafting together a censure resolution 
in case this comes to the full Senate. So that they would be ready 
to sort of avoid any sort of impeachment trial. Today the Senate majority 
leader Trent Lott and the democratic leader Mr. Daschle said, hold 
on, we're not going to make any official statements until the house, 
the full house votes on it. And tells us whether we have any constitutional 
duty at this point. So they're not saying anything publicly, they're 
saying let the house do their business. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>