<DOC>
<DOCNO> MNB19981211.2100.0269 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> CAPTION </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Now the White House angle. The president apparently made his decision 
suddenly to make a brief speech in the rose garden apologizing yet 
again but not admitting to certain aspects of the case that has now 
resulted in articles of impeachment against him. All but asking for 
censure from the house. These are nervous, near desperate times for 
the Clinton White House, and the president leaves just hours from 
now for the Middle East. NBC's David Bloom is with us tonight from 
the north lawn. Good evening to you. Good evening, Brian. The President 
I go -- ignored the advice of some of his closest confidants today. 
It is his last chance that he should have gone further, that he should 
have said in effect I lied under oath. The president refused to do 
so again today because as one of his top advisors put it, he doesn't 
think he did. The rose garden apology was a last-minute decision, 
a belief, aides said, that if the president waited until he returned 
from the Middle East next Tuesday it might be too late. What I want 
the American people to know, what I want the Congress to know is that 
I am profoundly sorry for all I have done wrong, in words and deeds. 
I never should have misled the country, the Congress, my friends, 
or my family. Quite simply, I gave in to my shame. White House aides 
said Mr. Clinton's goal was to show his personal pain to directly 
apologize to Congress and to say publicly and for the first time that 
he is prepared for their condemnation. I must make my peace with that. 
I must also be at peace with the fact that the public consequences 
of my actions are in the hands of the American people and their representatives 
in the Congress. Should they determine that my errors of word and 
deed require their rebuke and censure, I am ready to accept that. 
From the republican leading the impeachment charge, a predictable 
response. Congressman Tom delay saying in a written statement that 
-- Of course Tom delay is someone the White House had written off 
a long time ago. They're hopeful that the moderate republicans might 
be listening but tonight one of the president's closest advisors acknowledged 
there is an eerie silence out there, and he also said it's unknowable 
whether Mr. Clinton will in fact survive next week's vote on the full 
house floor, and more than one presidential aide has said this may 
not have been the last word today from President Clinton. Brian? David 
Bloom from the White House tonight 
</TEXT>
</DOC>