<DOC>
<DOCNO> MNB19981211.2100.1022 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> CAPTION </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
With us this evening from Washington, Alan baron, who was chief minority 
counsel during the Senate campaign finance investigation. He also 
served as special impeachment counsel of the house at a time when 
two federal judges were impeached. With us from our MSNBC studios, 
Jay severin republican strategist, MSNBC political analyst. Jay, I'd 
like to begin with you. Remember the PrimeTime speech the president 
gave, his first apology. He was no sooner finished with today's speech, 
and it was said again about the following quotes -- I have been condemned 
by my accusers with harsh words. It's hard to hear yourself called 
deceitful and manipulative. The charge was that what he couldn't help 
was the part of him that wanted to make this about him instead of 
falling on his sword. I think that's right, Brian. Keep in mind the 
context of this is this is a presidential address. This is something 
that the power of the presidency has that no one else has. You should 
husband it and use it wisely. It was used today I think in a blunder. 
It was use NT a way that was not carefully crafted. Couldn't conceivably 
have helped any republicans move his way, perhaps quite the opposite. 
And here we are only hours later, not asking how well a presidential 
strike like this worked, but why and what are the reasons it hasn't 
worked because I believe that was the immediate consensus. This lacked 
the elements that were required to do the only reason you do it, which 
is to move people to you. I think with one not so deft move the president 
may have wasted some equity here, made it harder for republicans to 
come over to him, and maybe even harder for democrats to defend him. 
But Alan baron, somewhat amazingly there is already talk tonight that, 
well, this time didn't quite work, perhaps we'll tweak the message 
and try again when he lands in the Middle East. Is that believable? 
I think the president will continue to try to persuade that middle 
group, those moderate republicans that seem to exist in at least people 
talk about that group ooze -- as existing to try to persuade them 
that this is really the wrong thing, that he really is contrite, that 
he really acknowledges his wrongdoing, and that we should not dumb 
down the impeachment process in order to make the point that he did 
something wrong. He's acknowledged that. I think he will continue 
to try to do it. I'm not sure anything's going to work at this point. 
The 800-pound gorilla is out of the cage and nobody knows how to stop 
it. Jay seff Vin, think of televised presidential moments. Lyndon 
Johnson saying he will not run, just blowing up newsrooms around the 
country with that news. This president according to one analyst this 
afternoon has made presidential apologies a separate genre. It's a 
series. It's going to be seen later like "gilligan's island." Late 
at night. It's falling short half he needed to do 7 it's a tremendous 
problem for him. He's throwing mashmallows at an oncoming locomotive 
and just making things more difficult for himself. Why he finds it 
possible to say the words, look, I lied and to take that kind of responsibility, 
most of these moderate republicans that are most often talked about, 
many of them are former clients or -- and friends of mine. I've talked 
to many of them in the last few days. They want a reason. They need 
a rationale or political cover to be able to oppose impeachment. He 
didn't give it to them today. Alan baron, what -- what is that magic 
bullet? If you're advising this president and no one is saying that 
you are, what do you tell him that they absolutely need to hear? Well, 
I think what they want to hear is him literally atoning and really 
going beyond apologizing. Atonement almost in the Bible Cal sense. 
The kind of thing Joe Lieberman was talking about in the remarkable 
speech he gave some time ago and I think people seem to be saying 
we need to hear you say that you lied and to accept that responsibility. 
I don't know that this president is prepared to do it for a myriad 
of reasons, not the least of which is the concern about a possible 
prosecution of him in some later point in time. That does seem to 
be the talisman that moderate republicans are turning to as -- I hate 
to think of it as an excuse not to vote against impeachment but that 
may be what it is. But that's what they want to hear. As we look at 
the back of Henry Hyde, a man described by "The Washington Post" today 
as looking so run down it appears he owes someone a lot of money. 
Jay severin, without reducing this to a sporting contest, the last 
question to both of you is going to be predictions. I think the way 
it looks right now, this is something that we'll pass. I think perhaps 
one or two articles will pass the house. Maybe by as many as 10 or 
15 votes. I would predict half of those votes in that margin will 
be democrats. Alan baron? Well, based on the latest things I'm hearing, 
particular what will norah O'Donnell said earlier tonight, I think 
you may see an article. I don't think it's going to be that wide a 
margin. I think we're talking about three votes but it could go the 
other way if some last minute efforts are successful. But it's going 
to be very close and right now what I hear is that it's tilting slightly 
in favor of impeachment. And this is the time when the White House 
has to count up all the friends they've made over what is rapidly 
approaching two full terms. It will be very interesting. Jay severin, 
Alan baron, thank you, gentlemen. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>