<DOC>
<DOCNO> NBC19981211.1830.0073 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> CAPTION </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Good evening. For only the third time in history, the house Judiciary 
committee has voted to send articles of impeachment against the president 
of the United States to the full house, which could very well send 
the charges onto the Senate for trial. President Clinton made a somber 
appearance outside the oval office to say he would accept censure, 
but it is what he didn't say that swing members of congress are pondering. 
We begin tonight with NBC's Gwen Ifill on Capitol Hill. Gwen? Good 
evening, Tom. Over the strenuous objection of every democrat present, 
the house Judiciary committee today voted to impeach the president 
on two counts of perjury -- Mr. Smith votes aye. After hours of debate, 
they recommended the removal of a sitting president for the third 
time in history. It's an assault on the rule of law. It cheapens the 
oath. It is a breach of promise to tell the truth. We have calculated 
lawlessness, which takes us for fools. Article one, that Mr. Clinton 
gave false and misleading testimony to the grand jury investigating 
his relationship with Monica Lewinsky. Approved on party lines -- 
21 republicans for. I believe the case we are discussing is a manifestation 
of president clinton's disregard for the rule of law. 16 democrats 
against. They have trivialized the founding fathers' standard of treason, 
bribery or other high crimes and misdemeanors. The vote came after 
a day of debate and only ten minutes after the president appeared 
in the rose garden to say he would accept congressional rebuke and 
censure. Democrats crowded into an office near the committee chamber 
to watch. But the president's remarks appeared to change few minds 
on Capitol Hill. Not in the Judiciary committee. This simply cannot 
be wished or censured away. And not for two moderate republicans who 
told NBC news that the president did not go far enough. Today's vote 
came after democrats complained about the wording of the perjury charge 
which they say is too vague. That same tactic, used 24 years ago, 
but by republicans arguing against the impeachment of Richard Nixon. 
But this committee is preparing to take a giant step beyond their 
watergate-era colleagues. The impeachment articles bar the president 
from ever holding office again. The White House has enlisted corporate 
leaders, lobbyists and former members of Congress to contact lawmakers 
-- with the president himself, sources said, calling around for advice. 
Moments ago the committee voted a second count of perjury, this one 
a civil charge involving the president's testimony in the Paula Jones 
deposition. They will vote on obstruction of justice charges and work 
this weekend on an abuse of power charge. tom? Gwen Ifill on Capitol 
Hill tonight, thanks very much. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>