<DOC>
<DOCNO> NBC19981211.1830.0883 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> CAPTION </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
NBC news "in depth." Tonight, the biggest vote of their lives and 
the extraordinary efforts under way to get every member of the house 
back to Washington for the impeachment fight. In the 1990s, the house 
voted an average of 567 times during each congressional session. But 
without question, this is the most important single vote in more than 
20 years. "In depth" tonight, NBC's Lisa Myers reports on what they're 
willing to do to make sure everyone is there for the roll call. You 
might call it the political battle of the century. And getting the 
wounded to the front lines is critical. For democrats, that means 
moving George Miller -- flat on his back in california today from 
hip surgery. The problem -- Miller can only travel lying down. So 
democrats may send a military jet or a hospital plane. We just need 
some level of medical support for the trip is what we're being told 
right now. Republicans could have a bigger problem -- finding Jay 
Kim of california, now on probation. After pleading guilty to accepting 
illegal campaign money. No one answers at Kim's congressional offices. 
His probation officer last heard from him a week ago. Still, republicans 
insist they'll find Kim in time. On these kinds of votes, nothing 
is too much trouble -- an air force jet or an ambulance. They go to 
enormous lengths to get people here on time, to get the vote in. They've 
shown up on hospital stretchers, wheelchairs. I mean, whatever it 
takes to get them in on a vote like this. In 1868, during the impeachment 
trial of President Andrew johnson, a senator Grimes of Iowa -- too 
ill to walk -- was carried into the Senate to cast a pivotal vote 
to save Johnson. 13 years ago, senator Pete Wilson left his hospital 
bed and, still in his bathrobe -- What are you guys all doing up this 
late? -- cast a key vote for President Reagan's budget. According 
to Senate Lore, one of the most heroic votes ever cast was by a Senator 
dying from brain cancer. He could no longer talk and voted by pointing 
to his eye, which meant yes. No one expects such heroics this time. 
The focus mostly is on finding members scattered around the country 
and the world. So far, democratic leaders have located about 60% of 
their troops and today began calling the rest. Minority leader Richard 
Gephardt makes the most delicate calls to democrats who might break 
with the party and vote to impeach the president. For 41 members defeated 
or retiring, these will be their last house votes. Three of them are 
moving onto the Senate and will get to vote again if there is a trial. 
For many, the most important vote of their careers. Everybody in their 
district is going to know how they voted. And it's going to be remembered 
for a long time. Still, on this close a vote, no one gets a pass. 
This one you have to show for duty. For an historic vote that no one 
will ever forget. Lisa Myers, NBC news, Washington. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>