<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981211.0355 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
The lawyers who represented the first states to settle with the tobacco 
industry over health care costs were awarded $8.2 billion in fees 
Friday, the richest legal payday in the nation's history. The money, 
which will be divided among dozens of lawyers who represented the 
states, Florida, Mississippi and Texas, is the first to result from 
a series of tobacco cases that culminated last month in a $206 billion 
settlement between tobacco companies and 46 states and five U.S. territories. 
That broader settlement, which did not include Florida, Mississippi 
and Texas, appears likely to produce billions more for plaintiffs' 
lawyers. The three states settled their suits for a total of $34.4 
billion to be paid by cigarette makers over 25 years. The legal fees 
awarded Friday were determined by an arbitration panel set up under 
an agreement between tobacco producers and plaintiffs' lawyers. The 
panel also will be used to award legal fees from the larger settlement 
last month. The fees will be paid by cigarette makers. The payouts 
will not affect the amounts received by the states. Cigarette makers 
are likely to pass on the fees, like the rest of the recent $206 billion 
settlement, to smokers. In awarding $8.2 billion, the arbitration 
panel gave the lawyers credit for taking the risks of being first 
to test the legal strategy of suing the tobacco industry to recover 
Medicaid costs related to smoking. And it awarded far less than some 
of the lawyers had claimed; five trial lawyers hired by Texas, for 
example, wanted $25 billion for negotiating that state's $17.3 billion 
settlement. But the size of the awards _ those five Texas lawyers 
will get about $3.3 billion _ quickly provoked criticism from legal 
experts who said the huge recovery by the states did not justify traditional 
contingency-style rewards. ``Twenty-five percent of $1 million is 
one thing,'' said Geoffrey Hazard, a professor of law at the University 
of Pennsylvania who earlier opposed payment of large fees to the Texas 
lawyers. ``Twenty percent of $1 billion is another thing.'' In determining 
fees, the arbitrators started by awarding lawyers in the three states 
10 percent of their state's settlement. Then the panel multiplied 
those figures 1.9 to 3.5 times depending on what it perceived to be 
the risks and work undertaken by the lawyers in each state. Under 
those formulas, lawyers hired by Florida received about $3.4 billion 
for reaching a $13 billion settlement last year and lawyers for Mississippi 
got about $1.4 billion for forging a $4.1 billion settlement last 
year. The Mississippi lawyers got the highest percentage award, 33 
percent, after the panel determined that they had taken the greatest 
risk by representing the first state to sue the tobacco industry in 
1994. In the tobacco litigation, state attorneys general hired lawyers 
to pursue their claims against tobacco producers under contingency-style 
contracts that gave the lawyers 10 percent to 25 percent of a state's 
recovery. But in reaching the three state accords and the recent $206 
billion settlement plan, the tobacco industry and plaintiffs' lawyers 
agreed to submit the lawyers' fee claims to arbitration for resolution. 
For each settlement, fees would be determined by a three-member panel, 
one member selected by the tobacco companies, one by the plaintiffs' 
lawyers and the third by common agreement. Cigarette makers had championed 
arbitration as an equitable way of resolving fees. But they quickly 
chafed last week when they reviewed fee requests from plaintiffs' 
lawyers, and the arbitrator they selected sharply dissented Friday 
over the size of the awards. In a statement, that arbitrator, Charles 
Renfrew, a former U.S. District Court judge, said that although he 
believed the results achieved by the lawyers were outstanding, the 
awards exceeded all reasonable limits and that some lawyers had not 
even keep time records. ``Each of the three state awards rendered 
by the majority is clearly excessive and to me incomprehensible,'' 
Renfrew wrote. The neutral member, John Calhoun Wells, said in a telephone 
interview that the unhappiness of tobacco and plaintiffs' lawyers 
over the awards indicated that the arbitration process had worked. 
The situation of the three states was special because tobacco producers 
had formally agreed not to argue against the lawyers. Industry lawyers 
said no such agreements exist with lawyers representing other states 
and Wells said that bar would be far higher for the next lawyers seeking 
fees. ``These three states were of a totally different cast,'' he 
said. ``They were trailblazers.'' In Minnesota, where the state and 
a health insurer settled their cases this year for $6.5 billion, tobacco 
companies agreed to pay the plaintiffs' lawyers $427 million, or about 
7.1 percent of the recovery. Those lawyers were highly regarded by 
many observers and the size of Minnesota's settlement increased the 
recoveries by Florida, Texas and Mississippi and, as a result, awards 
to those lawyers. The biggest winners in Friday's awards and others 
to come soon from the arbitration panel are Dick Scruggs, a plaintiffs' 
lawyer from Pascagoula, Miss., and Ronald Motley and Joe Rice, who 
work in the same law firm in Charleston, S.C. Along with shares of 
the Texas, Florida and Mississippi cases, the men represented more 
than 30 other states in cases against the tobacco industry. Steven 
Yerrid, a plaintiffs lawyer in Tampa, who had helped represent Florida 
in its case said he believed that the $3.4 billion paid to him and 
his colleagues were justified. He said the costs came from industry, 
rather than the state, and added that he would have received nothing 
if the lawsuit had failed. ``We just wanted everyone to live up to 
the bargain,''said Yerrid. The state lawsuits were based on novel 
legal theories that asserted that cigarette makers were responsible 
to pay the health care costs created by their products. To pursue 
the claims, some lawyers spent tens of millions of dollars and invested 
years investigating cigarette makers and producing thousands of previously 
secret documents. All the cases, however, were settled. John Coffee, 
a law professor at Columbia University, said the agreement between 
industry and plaintiffs' lawyers to arbitrate fees privately was an 
effort to avoid potential political roadblocks over the issue. In 
the congressional debate over a $516 billion Senate tobacco bill that 
failed this year, several amendments were offered that would have 
sharply limited lawyers' fees. Coffee said that his concern was not 
so much with size of the fees but the fact that some state attorneys 
general had hired trial lawyers who had contributed to their campaigns. 
``I think we need plaintiffs' attorneys but we need the process in 
which they represent the public to be purged of political overtones,'' 
said Coffee. ``This was probably the biggest pay-to-play issue of 
all time.'' 
</TEXT>
</DOC>