<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981211.0428 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
In the most significant lockout news of the week, pro basketball players 
announced a charity game in Atlantic City, N.J. They were then criticized 
for waffling on the beneficiaries. At first, it was said that the 
proceeds would go to charity, with some going to players who have 
been financially pinched by the lockout. Facing howls of criticism, 
mostly from the news media, the players backed off and announced that 
all the proceeds would go to charity. The commentators had been indignant 
that salaried employees making a minimum of $275,000 would need to 
be bailed out. This criticism is troubling on two counts. In the ``Father's 
Knows Best''/Dr. Huxtable world in which the critics apparently live, 
things always turn out all right: a white picket fence with freshly 
baked cookies. Money is rarely an issue, never a problem. In the real 
world things are not so genteel. The father in ``Father Knows Best'' 
attended Alcoholics Anonymous during the making of the show. Dr. Huxtable's 
alter ego disclosed that he had had an extramarital affair. In real-life 
families overspend, live on a fragile economic precipice. Three or 
four missed paychecks can wreck a world. Or come close. Jerome Stanley, 
the agent for Keyshawn Johnson of the Jets, also represents the NBA 
players Gerald Madkins, Todd Day and Lucious Harris _ hardly household 
names. ``Between them they have 12 dependent children, 12 dependent 
adults,'' Stanley said Friday. At first glance, the negative media 
reaction is simply a response to an ill-conceived game. More subtly, 
it is an indirect rebuke of the players for not saving for a rainy 
day. But the criticism runs deeper than that and cuddles up to a deep-seated 
paternalism that often places the news media closer to management 
than to players. It's all right for players to make money for owners, 
to keep the plantation lit and warm. But take a step _ even an uncertain 
baby step _ toward autonomy, and the whip-wielders crack the whip. 
Tell the players to get back, move back where they belong. And they 
move back. In backing off charity, the players ignored an ancient 
principle: Charity begins at home. The players have a right _ an obligation 
_ to use their skills to make money for themselves, to hold each other 
together, to bail each other out and to give the public what it wants: 
professional basketball. The more crucial concept is autonomy. The 
NBA as it exists today is the successor to a string of leagues and 
associations that failed, crumbled and were put back together. As 
ill conceived as the proposed Dec. 19 exhibition game may be, it is 
the germ of a good idea. Players need an infrastructure, and the infrastructure 
needs players _ to a greater extent, perhaps, than the owners realize. 
During the 1987 National Football League strike, the striking players 
staged a game in Los Angeles at the Coliseum. The game flopped. The 
owners countered with games using replacement players; those were 
more successful. But football relies on licensing and uses anonymous 
images colliding every 25 seconds as background music. In professional 
basketball, by contrast, the players are essential. The owners, under 
the commissioner's direction, have created a league based on a collage 
of images. Fans won't pay to see David Stern make presentations, or 
for Pat Riley to prance up and down the sideline. They might not pay 
for isolated all-star games, either. Fans, as Stanley correctly noted, 
``want the whole thing.'' ``They want the team, the colors, the logo, 
the history,'' he said. ``That's something the players can tap into.'' 
Games organized by the players will draw a different type of fan, 
a fan whom the players have largely lost direct contact with, a fan 
they see _ some of them see _ only during the summer. Fans will come 
to see Shaquille O'Neal and Kobe Bryant wearing purple and gold, leading 
a team simply called Los Angeles, against a team from New York, led 
by Patrick Ewing, in orange and blue. Fans will pay to see Scottie 
Pippen in a modified uniform of red and black play an Indiana team 
led by Reggie Miller in yellow and blue. Fans will pay to see players 
playing hard in games that count, with professional officials and 
coaches. Secure a contract to televise games on cable, devise an abbreviated 
playoff system. Would the mainstream media outlets cover such games? 
Are pro games legitimate only under the auspices of the NBA? We shall 
see. In any event, the games are all about charity, of one kind or 
another. One comes through the front door, the other comes through 
the back. The indisputable truth is that players need owners, owners 
need players. And in the real world, everyone needs money. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>