<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981211.0225 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Five decades later, it's still a sensitive issue. Should Jews and 
members of other groups persecuted by the Nazis avoid buying products 
made by German companies like Volkswagen or Siemens? David Harris, 
executive director of the American Jewish Committee, said he often 
polled audiences on the issue at his speaking engagements. There was 
a time when the idea of buying a Mercedes was anathema to many American 
Jews, some of whom fled Europe before the Holocaust. But the sentiment 
recedes with each passing year, Harris said, as younger Jews find 
themselves part of a global economy in which German companies are 
major participants. ``There remains a core group of elderly and middle-aged 
Jews who categorically would never set foot in Germany or buy German 
products,'' said Harris, 49, who doesn't count himself among that 
group. ``But I've seldom seen a young American Jew balk at buying 
a BMW.'' The relationship between American Jews and German companies 
has come to the fore again through a collision of two trends: a wave 
of big mergers between German and U.S. companies, and a growing number 
of lawsuits against the some of the same German companies, as well 
as others, seeking compensation for Holocaust-era wrongs. Most recently, 
New York City Comptroller Alan Hevesi called on federal and state 
regulators to block the proposed takeover of Bankers Trust by Deutsche 
Bank until the German bank resolves accusations that it profited from 
the Nazi war machine. Some American Jews were also displeased when 
Daimler-Benz, the maker of Mercedes automobiles, merged with Chrysler, 
forming DaimlerChrysler. Roman Kent, the chairman of the American 
Gathering of Holocaust Survivors, said his organization's members 
still did not buy German products. ``For us survivors, time is not 
the best medicine,'' said Kent, who was imprisoned in several concentration 
camps. ``Now that I'm older, when I have more time to reflect, the 
memories come back and hound me more than they did when I was making 
a living and having a family.'' But some people involved in the growing 
wave of claims against German banks and manufacturers offer a different 
perspective. Elan Steinberg, the 43-year-old executive director of 
the World Jewish Congress, which began the campaign that forced Swiss 
banks to search for dormant accounts opened by people who perished 
in the Holocaust, said he had no problem buying German products. In 
addition, while many of the lawyers representing Holocaust survivors 
and their families are Jewish, many Jewish lawyers and business people 
can also be found among those defending the companies from which compensation 
is being sought. Curtis Hoxter, president of Hoxter Inc., a public-relations 
and marketing company based in New York, found himself with the unenviable 
task of explaining the posture of Swiss banks to reporters as the 
controversy over the dormant accounts exploded. Hoxter, who fled Germany 
as a teen-ager in 1938, has spent much of his career representing 
German and Swiss companies, a role he says his first wife, now deceased, 
viewed with displeasure. ``She wouldn't buy a German car,'' Hoxter 
said. ``She originally protested, `How could you work for a Germany 
company?' But in general, I have no problems with it.'' At times, 
Hoxter says, his job has allowed him to extract his own small measure 
of vengeance. He was once introduced to a Porsche official whose name 
sounded familiar. Hoxter, a U.S. intelligence officer during the war, 
said he awoke that night and remembered who the man was: an organizer 
of a murderous sneak attack in which German infantrymen disguised 
themselves in U.S. uniforms. Hoxter said he told Porsche about the 
man's wartime role, and the man was dismissed. Harris, of the American 
Jewish Committee, said his views on buying German were changed by 
his first trip to Israel. To his surprise, he saw that all the taxis 
and buses were Mercedes models. ``I couldn't understand it'' at first, 
Harris said. ``Then I came to understand that Germany is Israel's 
closest friend in the world after the United States.'' 
</TEXT>
</DOC>