<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981211.0342 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Bill Clinton and Henry Hyde, usually so astute about managing the 
media, bungled what should have been their moments of televised drama 
Friday. On a half-hour's notice, the president arrived in the Rose 
Garden and gave a speech that echoed one of his least successful moments 
during his impeachment crisis, the non-apology apology he delivered 
after his grand jury testimony on Aug. 17. Minutes later, Hyde, chairing 
the House Judiciary Committee, didn't take a breath between wrapping 
up a relatively minor vote on amending the first article of impeachment 
and before jumping into the historic vote on whether to pass that 
article on to the full House of Representatives. The committee and 
the cable news channels had been building up to this vote for days, 
yet it arrived not with the weighty aura of a prophecy fulfilled, 
but with the unsettling sense that a stranger had slipped in a side 
door when no one was looking. ABC, CBS and NBC scrambled to get back 
on the air minutes after signing off from the president's speech, 
and joined the vote in progress. Anti-climactic though they were, 
these events accurately reflect how the impeachment crisis has been 
unfolding in recent days, with a sense of ratifying predictions rather 
than making history. The cable channels gave full coverage to the 
arguments in the committee room, but with the vote a foregone conclusion, 
the subtexts seemed more significant than anything that was said. 
And there is plenty of subtext to read. By now, the coverage is fraught 
with awareness of the previous months of scandal. As Wolf Blitzer 
pointed out on CNN, the Rose Garden was a safer setting for the president's 
than the Oval Office, with its reminders that the Clinton-Lewinsky 
trysts had taken place nearby. When Clinton spoke, looking somber 
and tired, his delivery had the perfunctory, I'm-forced-to-do-this 
quality of his much-derided August 17th speech. He reiterating his 
sorrow and added that he would accept Congress' censure (something 
his lawyers and advisers had already made clear). But the most telling 
moment came when he turned and walked back into the White House, head 
down, ignoring two shouted reporters' questions about whether he would 
admit to having lied under oath and whether or not he would resign 
if the impeachment process reached the senate. The unanswered questions 
said more about the president's position than anything he had verbalized. 
Commentators had led into it wondering whether Clinton would satisfy 
the wavering Republicans who most likely will be decisive in the House 
impeachment vote expected next week. Would he admit to, if not perjury, 
at least lying under oath? The speech was quickly declared a failure, 
and conveniently set off a new round of speculation. Did he change 
any minds? Will he give another speech on Wednesday? If he had talked 
a few minutes longer, Clinton's address and the committee's first 
vote would have overlapped, calling for one of the most momentous 
split screens in American history. Hyde flummoxed the networks with 
his quick move to the crucial vote on article 1, perjury during the 
grand jury testimony. Leaping in without any fanfare, the networks 
watched as, one by one, the members voted as expected. In two minutes 
it was over. ``You were here for history,'' Peter Jennings said, signing 
off ABC's coverage, but it didn't seem that way. History was what 
had played out through the afternoon on the cable channels: a tedious, 
hours-long debate about whether the charges of perjury had to be defined 
more specifically in the impeachment article. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>