<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981211.0274 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
At Scheels Ace Hardware in Fargo, N.D., they cannot even give the 
snow blowers away. Even though temperatures have dropped into the 
30s from the mid-40s a week ago, people ``just walk right by'' the 
bright red machines, said Tom Molm, an assistant manager. ``Typically 
there'd be two, three, four people every day looking and buying. This 
weekend, there was one person looking at a used one.'' Don't even 
ask about ice melt, car survival kits or sleds. For retailers around 
the country, especially in the Midwest and Northeast, balmy temperatures 
in recent weeks _ often 20 to 30 degrees above normal _ have dampened 
buying interest in a host of winter items. Tires, down-filled jackets, 
ice-fishing gear, skis, snowboards, sweaters, and gloves, as well 
as full-length coats _ all are frozen to the shelves. The summer-like 
breezes spawned more sunbathing than window shopping, tightening the 
screws on department stores and other chains, which count on robust 
holiday sales to turn a profit for the year. Some industry consultants 
and stock analysts, as a result, have lowered their sales forecasts 
for the holiday season as huge markdowns on items such as coats have 
done little to spur spending. Now, with temperatures falling, retailers 
are hoping the gusts of cold air _ not to mention the approach of 
Christmas _ will send shoppers scrambling to pick up neglected winter 
items and resuscitate holiday sales. ``Who wants to buy woolen sweaters 
and scarves and ski parkas when temperatures are 70 degrees and there's 
no snow?'' said Kurt Barnard, president of Barnard's Retail Trend 
Report, a forecasting company in Upper Montclair, N.J. ``It's not 
on your mind,'' said Barnard, who has lowered his sales forecast for 
the season to a gain of about 3 to 4 percent, down from 5 percent. 
Sales at specialty stores in shopping malls fell eight-tenths of 1 
percent in the week ended Dec. 6 from the corresponding week last 
year, according to the International Council of Shopping Centers, 
a trade group. The steepest declines were seen in apparel sales, down 
4.1 percent. Home furnishings, meanwhile, rose a strong 5.3 percent. 
The junior women's coat department at the midtown Manhattan flagship 
store of Macy's, a unit of Federated Department Stores, was a sea 
of coats recently, with many sales racks dotted with discount tags 
in hopes of enticing buyers. A few women lingered in the department, 
trying on short coats and jackets or all-weather trench coats, showing 
little interest in the longer coats across the aisle. Sales of other 
winter items, like sweaters and flannel pajamas, have also been sluggish, 
said Carol Sanger, a Federated spokeswoman. The downturn contributed 
to a 1.5 percent decline in November sales at Federated, which also 
owns Bloomingdale's. At the Ritz Furs shop in Manhattan, cashmere 
capes with fur trim, shorter coats and lighter-weight items are popular, 
said Keith Tauber, the manager. In Dallas, Neiman Marcus is seeing 
similar interest in its short coats, and ``anything with a piece of 
fur on it is selling,'' said Ralph Romberg, a vice president and divisional 
manager. Shunning heavier wools, customers are scooping up cashmere 
coats and leather jackets as well as mink- and fox-trimmed capes and 
fur stoles. Fur coats that are selling include short, close-fitting, 
high-priced designer fashions. Elsewhere at Neiman Marcus stores, 
cashmere sweaters and other lighter-weight knits and scarves, especially 
those of cashmere and silk blends, have sold well. Fashion boots have 
also eclipsed heavier utilitarian styles. Neiman Marcus is a unit 
of Harcourt General. Despite the slip in sales, ``we're very optimistic 
about the rest of the month,'' Romberg said. While the store is planning 
to cut prices on many winter items in hopes of clearing store shelves 
before Christmas, margins should not be hurt much, said Hubert Mullins, 
an executive vice president. Instead of buying clothing this year, 
many shoppers are concentrating on their homes, buying furniture, 
lamps and dishes, or adding splashes of color with pillows, and new 
shower curtains. They have also been spending more time sprucing up 
home exteriors, said Cliff Hambleton, district manager for Lowe's 
in Fort Wayne, Ind. People are putting on roofs, replacing windows 
and doors, remodeling bathrooms, projects not typically tackled in 
winter. One item that has not been hurt by the warm weather: sport 
utility vehicles. In November, sales of sport utility vehicles increased 
about 8 percent, to 236,297, according to Ward's Autoinfobank, a publication 
of Ward Communications, a research firm. ``Pretty much as soon as 
the dealers get them, they sell them,'' said Nancy Hubbell, a spokeswoman 
for Lexus, the Toyota Motor division that makes two sport vehicles. 
Lexus dealers have seen more people milling around showrooms, she 
said, adding that ``sometimes when the weather turns bad, that's when 
SUV sales go up.'' Tires, however, are not selling. Business has slowed 
from last year at the Firestone Tire &AMP; Auto store in St. Paul. 
Minn. ``We do not sell too many tires when it's not snowing,'' said 
Dale Wohnoutka, a store manager. Colder temperatures would also mean 
that more cars break down and repair business increases, he added. 
Firestone is a unit of Bridgestone. While it may not have felt like 
Christmas in recent weeks, it certainly looks like it now, as customers 
have splurged on outdoor decorations. ``The Christmas trim has gone 
like crazy,'' Hambleton and other retailers said. Strings of exterior 
light sets, colored floodlights and plastic Santas, snowmen and Winnie 
the Pooh's have disappeared from store shelves, along with extension 
cords, plugs and socket adapters. But don't try to interest anyone 
in the space heaters, shovels, snow scrapers or weather stripping. 
``It's a little difficult to get them to spend their Christmas dollars 
on that,'' Hambleton said. And at sporting goods stores, while rollerblades 
are hot, few customers are clamoring for skis, said Ellen Waite, president 
of Waite Sports Specialist, a 67-year-old store in Concord, N.H. ``We've 
had some people who know the snow is going to be coming and they prepare 
in advance,'' she said. ``But most people have been waiting. They 
make do with what they have.'' Still, Ms. Waite is optimistic about 
the rest of the season, feeling confident that the cold weather will 
come and lift sales. ``Oh, yeah, I really think so,'' she said. ``You 
know what they say: `You come from New Hampshire. You wait a day. 
It will get cold.''' 
</TEXT>
</DOC>