<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981211.0442 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Before his final game as a Texas Longhorn, Ricky Williams needed 63 
yards to best Tony Dorsett's 22-year-old NCAA Division I career-rushing 
record. His coach, Mack Brown, was worried. The Longhorns were playing 
hated rival Texas A&AMP;M and Brown knew Heisman Trophy voters needed 
one final push to cast their vote for his splendid runner. But Williams 
wasn't worried. ``Coach, I'll get the 63 yards. I'm going to get 135 
because that breaks the 2,000-yard mark,'' Williams told Brown a few 
days before the game. ``And the record I really want is 263 yards 
because that would break Napoleon McCallum's record for all-purpose 
yards.'' Then he asked Brown for the first time all season for some 
special consideration. If he was close to McCallum late in the game, 
Williams asked, would Brown let him return a kickoff? It never came 
down to that. With eight minutes left in the Longhorns' 26-24 upset 
victory, Williams owned Dorsett's and McCallum's records and all or 
part of 14 other National Collegiate Athletic Association Division 
I marks. He would finish with 259 rushing yards and 36 receiving against 
the Aggies to close out a career that saw him rumble for 6,279 yards 
on the ground and 7,206 overall, including kick returns. ``Coach, 
I don't need that kickoff,'' he told Brown on the sidelines that day 
in a bit of understatement that made both smile. ``I'm going to be 
fine.'' More than that, he was going to be honored. So far this week, 
Williams has been presented the Maxwell Award as college football's 
outstanding player and a second consecutive Doak Walker Award for 
best running back _ both of which will find a place alongside the 
Walter Camp Foundation and Associated Press Player of the Year trophies 
already on the shelf in his mother's apartment in Austin, Texas. But 
it is the Heisman Trophy that has brought him to New York and the 
Downtown Athletic Club, where in a national telecast Saturday evening 
he is expected to be awarded the most coveted honor in college football. 
For Williams, it is almost certain to be a far different Heisman ceremony 
from last year's. For one thing, Williams will be center stage, unlike 
a year ago, when he finished fifth in the voting and wasn't even invited 
to attend the Heisman announcement, a snub he called ``heartbreaking.'' 
Second, Williams is expected to be the overwhelming choice in the 
Heisman voting, whereas a year ago Michigan defensive back Charles 
Woodson upset Tennessee quarterback Peyton Manning by a 1,815-to-1,543 
margin. When the announcement is made Saturday night, Williams will 
be sharing the podium with the other three top candidates _ all of 
them quarterbacks who have put up spectacular numbers and have garnered 
their share of postseason honors. UCLA's Cade McNown was in Louisville, 
Ky., on Friday accepting the Johnny Unitas Award after throwing for 
3,130 yards, 23 touchdowns and leading the Bruins to a 10-1 regular 
season that ended painfully with a 49-45 loss at Miami. The senior 
threw for 5 touchdowns and 531 yards that afternoon, but couldn't 
muster one more comeback in a season full of them that would have 
put UCLA into a national-title game in the Fiesta Bowl. Instead, UCLA 
will play Wisconsin in the Rose Bowl. Likewise, Kansas State's Michael 
Bishop's final regular season ended in depressing fashion when the 
Wildcats got bounced from the Fiesta Bowl because of a 36-33 overtime 
loss against Texas A&AMP;M in the Big 12 Championship. Bishop won 
the Davey O'Brien National Quarterback Award this week after passing 
for 2,844 yards and 23 touchdowns, running for 14 more and leading 
a team with little football tradition to the brink of a national-title 
game. He, too, had a heroic final outing _ 442 total yards against 
the Aggies _ but it was his fourth-quarter fumble that allowed Texas 
A&AMP;M to force overtime. The Wildcats' (11-1) loss, combined with 
the need of bowl organizers to sell tickets, dropped Kansas State 
out of the major bowls all the way to San Antonio and the Alamo Bowl 
against an 8-4 Purdue team. The only underclassman in the Heisman's 
top four is the Kentucky quarterback, Tim Couch. In an all-out passing 
attack dubbed ``Air Raid'' in the Bluegrass State, the junior threw 
for 4,275 yards and 36 touchdowns this season. The Wildcats (7-4) 
will face Penn State in the Outback Bowl, but Couch's real reward 
will come later. He is expected to be a first-round choice, but has 
not decided if he will declare early or return for his senior year. 
The contending quarterbacks' selection for the Heisman Trophy? Each 
has cast his vote for Williams and, having done so, is intent on enjoying 
the trip to New York. ``He runs hard and I kind of like the guy anyway,'' 
said McNown, whose team beat Texas early in the season. ``While he 
gives credit to his teammates, they have really asked him to carry 
the load and he has responded. When teams have focused on him, he 
has managed to shake off defenders and make some big runs. I don't 
think there are many guys who are as valuable to their team as he 
is.'' Like Couch, Williams faced a critical decision this time last 
year. He was projected as a top-five draft pick and, after the Longhorns 
suffered through a disappointing 4-7 season, thought hard about leaving 
college. Instead, he returned for his senior year and rushed for 2,124 
yards, and the Longhorns went 8-3 in Brown's first season as coach. 
They will meet Mississippi State in the Cotton Bowl. And that, he 
says, means far more than the crowded shelf of hardware. Almost. ``I 
came back to win games, not to win awards,'' he said of his final 
season with Texas. ``But I thought I had good numbers last year and 
wasn't invited, so it would be nice to win.'' 
</TEXT>
</DOC>