<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981211.0195 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Making his first appearance in public since his arrest two months 
ago, Gen. Augusto Pinochet, the former Chilean dictator, sternly told 
a London court Friday that he did not acknowledge the right of any 
court outside his own country to consider charges against him. Pinochet 
uttered his defiant claim at the end of a hearing on a Spanish order 
seeking his extradition to Madrid to stand trial on charges of crimes 
against humanity. ``With respect to your honor,'' the general said 
in Spanish, reading from a sheet of paper he held throughout the 20-minute 
session, ``I do not recognize the jurisdiction of any other court, 
except in my country, to try me against all the lies of Spain.'' With 
a wave of his hand, he looked up and said, ``That is all I want to 
say.'' Clive Nicholls, one of his lawyers, followed up with assurances 
that no disrespect to the court's authority was intended. ``I hear 
what he says,'' Graham Parkinson, the chief metropolitan stipendiary 
magistrate, said. ``My duty is to conduct this proceeding in accordance 
with the extradition act passed in England, and I must do so. I do 
not take any disrespect.'' Pinochet's wife, Lucia, told supporters 
at a hotel rally on Thursday night that her husband would ``never 
lack the strength of mind to hold his head high in the name of Chile,'' 
and the general looked grimly determined to keep that pledge from 
the moment he entered the spare and cramped hearing room. Dressed 
in a dark brown business suit, off-white shirt and gold tie, the 83-year-old 
general was seated in the wheelchair he has used since undergoing 
back surgery in early October, with his hands folded across the top 
of a wooden walking stick held between his knees. At the routine question 
to give his name, he drew himself up and said: ``I am Augusto Pinochet 
Ugarte. I was commander in chief of the army, captain general of Chile, 
president of the Republic, and actually I am at the moment a senator 
of the Republic.'' When Parkinson said he had not heard the translation 
properly, the general was asked to identify himself again, and he 
gave a word-perfect repetition with the same set jaw. In legal terms 
Friday's session was a simple bail hearing, but it was also a day 
of high drama. Hundreds of supporters and protesters chanted slogans 
and beat drums as the police convoy bearing the man who once wielded 
absolute authority in his country sped into the dreary Belmarsh courthouse 
next to a maximum security prison in a bleak lowland area known as 
Plumstead Marsh. A beige coat was pressed against the back window 
of his van to try to block any view of him. With the general glowering 
from his position in front of the dock while an interpreter whispered 
in his ear, Parkinson crisply read out the charges against him: attempted 
murder, conspiracy to murder, torture, conspiracy to torture, hostage-taking 
and conspiracy to take hostages. At strategic points about the crowded 
room were armed police officers in bulky bulletproof tunics. In response 
to a question from one of his lawyers, his bail conditions were amended 
to permit him to take exercise in the garden of the rented home in 
suburban Surrey where he is living under police guard. ``It would 
be inhumane to stop the senator walking in the garden as and when 
necessary,'' Parkinson said. Then, after several minutes of consulting 
daily agendas, a new date, Jan. 18, was set for the next hearing, 
a procedural session that will not require the general to be present. 
He was then wheeled out a side door, and minutes later the motorcade 
left the court grounds and turned onto the highway, a police helicopter 
tracking its passage back to Surrey, 40 miles away. Spain wants Pinochet 
extradited to face charges of mass murder, torture and terrorism in 
connection with the more than 3,000 people who died or disappeared 
during the 17 years he ruled Chile. A new legal clash occurs on Tuesday 
when a committee of the Law Lords of the House of Lords takes up a 
request by the Pinochet lawyers to reconsider their judgment last 
month that the general does not have immunity from arrest in England. 
It was that Nov. 25 decision, a surprise reversal of a High Court 
verdict in his favor a month earlier, that set the Pinochet case on 
its present course, which could stretch on for more than a year. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>