<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981211.0419 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Everyone knows what not to do with a gift horse. But who knows how 
to handle charity from a hood with a heart of gold, a reputed mob 
figure who wants to donate $1 million he has raised for medical research? 
If you care about sick people, you do not turn such donors away, said 
Allan Weinberg, director of the National Leukemia Research Association, 
an organization that has relied for 12 years on the fund-raising acumen 
of William Cutolo, a man whom law-enforcement authorities list as 
a captain in the Colombo crime family. ``My only obligation is to 
say thank you,'' said Weinberg on Friday as he prepared for his group's 
annual dinner in Brooklyn on Saturday night. ``I want a man that can 
help. I want one thing _ to raise money and eradicate leukemia.'' 
But the charity's relationship with Cutolo, who sits on its board 
of directors and has been its Man of the Year, has got the organization 
entangled in the widening investigation into corruption in New York 
City's largest municipal union. Investigators studying Cutolo's relationship 
with the union, District Council 37, have questioned whether contributions 
he solicited from labor leaders for leukemia research ever made it 
to medical professionals, according to lawyers familiar with the inquiry. 
Weinberg insists they did. ``I watch this charity like a hawk,'' he 
said. The charity inquiry represents just one thread of the Manhattan 
district attorney's broad investigation into accusations of kickbacks, 
embezzlement and voter fraud within the district council, an umbrella 
group of 56 locals that represent 120,000 city workers. A broader 
question being pursued by investigators, the lawyers said, is whether 
organized-crime figures, including Cutolo, were able to secure no-show 
jobs for their friends and a share of kickbacks from vendors who did 
business with several blue-collar locals. Union officials have also 
told investigators about incidents in which infighting among organized-crime 
factions for control of union spoils led to violence and intimidation 
against union leaders. In one incident several years ago, recounted 
by several union officials speaking on the condition that they not 
be identified, Frank Morelli, then the district council president, 
was confronted in his office by several men who threw furniture, broke 
a television set and threatened him. Morelli is one of four officials 
of the district council or its parent union who have been honored 
as men of the year by the leukemia association _ largely, Weinberg 
acknowledges, because labor honorees are usually able to fill tables 
and sell advertisements in the charity's dinner journal. Weinberg 
estimates that the charity, which is based in Garden City, has received 
as much as $40,000 from the union and its officials over the years, 
much of it solicited by Cutolo. Weinberg said that when he first met 
Cutolo at a charity dinner years ago, he did not know of the organized-crime 
allegations against him. But by themselves, he said, they were not 
sufficient reason to bar him from the charity board. ``I would not 
put on someone convicted of a crime,'' he said, ``but accused _ that 
is something else.'' Doctors who have either received grants from 
the charity or supervise their distribution said that much of the 
money raised is spent on medical research. Several said they were 
stunned both by the suggestion that there was anything amiss about 
the charity and by the idea that their research might be underwritten 
with the help of organized crime. ``You've got to be kidding me,'' 
said Dr. Peter Wiernik, an oncologist at Our Lady of Mercy Medical 
Center in the Bronx, who has helped review the charity's grant proposals 
for 20 years. ``All I can say is that I'm given a budget for research 
proposals. They are reviewed in a standard peer review process, and 
when we make recommendations, they are funded.'' The charity's federal 
income-tax returns show it has raised a little more than $1 million 
over the last three years. About $400,000 has gone to finance direct 
grants to doctors or to individuals with leukemia. As is the case 
with many charities, the rest of the money is listed as having been 
spent on support services for the programs, for fund-raising expenses 
or for administrative overhead, like rent, insurance and salaries. 
The group maintains that 88 percent of its 1997 expenditures were 
directly related to its programs. One grant recipient, Dr. Faith Marie 
Young, a Harvard Medical School graduate who received $20,000 in 1996 
for research with genetically engineered mice, said the charity seemed 
legitimate. ``The work they are doing is important,'' she said. Cutolo 
is far from the first reputed organized-crime figure to become publicly 
involved with a charity. ``A lot of mob guys want to be legitimate,'' 
said Bruce Mouw, a retired supervisor with the FBI who specialized 
in tracking organized crime. But as Mouw noted, Cutolo's claim to 
fame has hardly been philanthropy. Within mob circles, Mouw said, 
Cutolo is better known for having been a major player in the violent 
internal war within the Colombo family. ``His crew was very active 
trying to kill the Persico side and was responsible for several murders,'' 
he said. Cutolo was charged with murder and racketeering as a result, 
but was acquitted in 1994 after a federal trial. He has never been 
convicted of a crime, although in 1990 he was expelled from the Teamsters 
union, in which he headed a local, because of his reported connections 
to organized crime. Cutolo's lawyer, James LaRossa, denied that his 
client had a role in any wrongdoing, and described as ``ridiculous'' 
the suggestion that his client had any improper role in influencing 
actions within the district council or the charity. Cutolo is expected 
Saturday night at the charity's annual dinner, which will be held 
at the Embassy Terrace, a catering hall where he was the host of his 
son's wedding reception three years ago. Weinberg said the charity 
was expecting about 300 people to attend the $200-a-head dinner. But 
so far, he said, he has not seen any checks from officials at District 
Council 37. ``I don't think they are showing up this year,'' he said. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>