<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981211.0443 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
The tobacco industry's trade group acknowledged Friday that it had 
spent far more than it had disclosed on an unsuccessful effort to 
persuade the state government to scale back anti-smoking laws adopted 
by New York City and other localities. The Tobacco Institute originally 
reported that its lobbying expenditures in 1995 were $110,132. Friday, 
in settling a complaint before the state lobbying commission, it acknowledged 
the total was actually $553,204. Under New York lobbying laws, the 
trade group was not penalized, prompting the commission's chairman 
to concede that the rules needed to be toughened. After New York City 
and some nearby localities banned smoking in most restaurants in 1994-95, 
the tobacco industry took its fight to Albany. It hoped to get the 
state to approve relatively lax rules that would supersede the local 
ones. The tobacco industry formed a coalition with the Empire State 
Restaurant and Tavern Association. Some smoking opponents at the time 
questioned whether the industry was funneling some of its lobbying 
money through its ally. Friday, the Tobacco Institute essentially 
confirmed those suspicions. The commission, known as the New York 
Temporary State Commission on Lobbying, began its investigation after 
receiving a complaint from three groups _ the New York Public Interest 
Research Group, Common Cause New York and the League of Women Voters 
of New York. The groups sent the commission a copy of a document that 
was contained in court papers in the lawsuit that Minnesota filed 
against the tobacco industry. The document showed the industry's lobbying 
expenditures for 1995, including those for New York State. The amount 
was far higher than that which the trade group had disclosed to New 
York regulators. The Tobacco Institute, which declined to comment 
Friday, did not dispute the complaints or the commission's findings. 
But under state law, the group was able to avoid any penalty simply 
by amending its disclosure forms. According to the findings, the Tobacco 
Institute funneled $443,072 in 1995 to the Empire State Restaurant 
and Tavern Association with the intent of having the association use 
the money to lobby the Legislature on what was known as the smoking 
pre-emption bill. As part of the settlement, the restaurant association 
acknowledged under-reporting its lobbying by $383,285, which the commission 
determined was the amount of Tobacco Institute money that was actually 
spent by the restaurant association on lobbying. The restaurant association 
was not penalized. Scott Wexler, executive director of the association, 
said it was not admitting that it had broken the law, but merely seeking 
an expeditious way of ending the matter. He said the association still 
believed that it had spent the money from the Tobacco Institute on 
items, such as polling, that did not come under the lobbying law. 
The lobbying commission's chairman, Milton Mollen, said the tobacco 
case demonstrated that the legislature should heed the commission's 
longstanding request for more power. ``The laws should be clarified 
and expanded,'' he said. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>