<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981211.0404 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Listening to Philip M. Condit and Harry C. Stonecipher talk about 
the difficulties facing the Boeing Co., the global aerospace powerhouse 
and national icon they jointly run, oddly brings to mind the feminist 
battle cry of the 1980s: They just don't get it. After an awful year 
of monumental production foul-ups, $4 billion in unexpected accounting 
charges and lots of talk about illusive recovery plans, the news from 
Boeing only seems to get worse. Earlier this month, the company stunned 
investors and its 232,000 employees, more than 40 percent of whom 
reside here in the Puget Sound area, with the announcement that it 
would cut as many as 48,000 jobs by 2001 _ and still make only a negligible 
profit. The news from the nation's single largest exporter rippled 
across the country like the storms that pour rain on this city and 
then head east. President Clinton weighed in with his concerns about 
the company's health. And on Wall Street, shareholders _ who had been 
led by Boeing to believe the worst was over _ began selling in anger, 
even disgust. Boeing stock closed at $33.125 a share on Friday after 
selling for as much as $56.25 in April. ``This is one of the great 
American industrial franchises of the 20th century,'' said John Hayes, 
an analyst at Independence Investment Associates, an institutional 
money manager that sold its stake of several million Boeing shares 
last year. ``For the business to be in this kind of disarray is unfathomable. 
These guys have been doing this a long time. They should know how 
to build planes at a profit.'' Yet in their first interview since 
announcing the latest cuts, Condit, the chairman and chief executive, 
and Stonecipher, the president and chief operating officer, spoke 
last week as if Boeing had no choice but to make the decisions that 
have laid it low _ to sell hundreds of airplanes at cut-rate prices 
in 1995 and 1996 and then to nearly triple production rates, from 
18 airplanes a month to the current record rate of 51. ``No one could 
have run this place successfully for the last year,'' said Stonecipher, 
the former chief executive of McDonnell Douglas, who joined Boeing 
after it acquired McDonnell last year for $16 billion, creating a 
national monopoly in large passenger jets and the world's biggest 
military contractor and aerospace company, with more than $56 billion 
in revenues expected this year. ``The systems were overloaded to the 
point where it doesn't matter who was in charge,'' he said. ``You 
could have worked it a lot of different ways; the result would have 
been the same.'' Condit's credibility seems especially weak, because 
he has had to revise so many of his public positions in the last year. 
Yet while contrite, he still has trouble, even in hindsight, viewing 
the company's actions as a colossal blunder. ``I think we were very 
close to making it,'' he said of the ill-fated ramp-up in production. 
``So it isn't, gosh, you can look back and say, `It was clear you 
wouldn't have.' '' Boeing's 13-member board is set to meet Monday 
in the wood-paneled boardroom where Condit and Stonecipher were talking. 
And for the first time in anyone's memory, as The Seattle Times pointed 
out in an editorial last Sunday, the ouster of a Boeing chief executive 
is being openly discussed by employees and on Wall Street. ``If I 
was on the board, I would be taking a hard look at whether to keep 
him,'' said Bill Whitlow, an analyst at Safeco Asset Management in 
Seattle and manager of a fund that holds 67,500 Boeing shares. Seven 
of the outside board members declined to comment; three did not respond 
to telephone messages and one other board member could not be reached. 
While Condit acknowledged that he was in the hot seat, he said that 
he was working harder than ever and that he didn't think a change 
at the top made sense. ``I think we are better together than either 
one of us would be alone,'' he said, referring to Stonecipher, adding 
later, ``I could not imagine a better partner.'' Still, if Condit's 
days are numbered, Stonecipher, 62, may be positioned to cap his long 
career as Boeing's next chairman. That idea rankles many employees 
of the old Boeing _ ``heritage Boeing,'' in the company's post-merger 
parlance _ because after years of bruising competition they, not McDonnell 
Douglas, had prevailed in the marketplace. ``I have heard internal 
comments that, `Hey, we won, but now they are running the show,' '' 
Whitlow said. Boeing loyalists especially resent what they see as 
the heavy hand of Stonecipher, a blunt talker who became popular on 
Wall Street first by turning around the Sundstrand Corp., a maker 
of aerospace components, and then by sharply improving McDonnell's 
financial performance before selling that company to Boeing. As Boeing's 
problems worsened in the last year, Stonecipher's power appears to 
have grown. He, rather than Condit, 57, is seen as the man behind 
the departures of a number of Boeing executives with whom Stonecipher 
is said to have clashed, including the longtime chief financial officer 
and the head of the commercial airplane division. Stonecipher, who 
had a large stake in McDonnell Douglas, is now one of Boeing's largest 
shareholders; so is John F. McDonnell, the son of one of McDonnell's 
founders, who like Stonecipher is on the Boeing board. Condit, like 
other board members who came from the old Boeing, owns relatively 
little stock. Investors and analysts credit Stonecipher with sharpening 
Boeing's focus on shareholder value. Boeing's decisions to increase 
greatly its communication with Wall Street, disclose earnings targets, 
announce large job cuts and buy back up to 15 percent of its stock 
all echo Stonecipher's previous stints at Sundstrand and McDonnell. 
Stonecipher is also seen on Wall Street as a strong executive who 
holds his charges accountable, while Condit is widely viewed as a 
talented engineer who is out of his element running the country's 
11th-largest industrial company. In the interview on Wednesday, Condit 
and Stonecipher dismissed talk about differences between them as idle 
gossip. Condit said that they leaned on each other and often swapped 
roles, but that Stonecipher's job was to focus more on day-to-day 
operations while he concentrated on longer-term strategy. Few people 
privy to the inner workings of Boeing's executive suite would comment 
on relations between the men. Current and former Boeing executives 
are reluctant to criticize them. The two men could not be more different. 
Stonecipher is tough-talking, quick-tempered and unsentimental. He 
was raised modestly in the coal-mining regions of eastern Tennessee 
and worked his way up through General Electric for 27 years, rising 
to become head of its jet engine business before spending seven years 
at Sundstrand and three at McDonnell Douglas. He has been married 
to his Tennessee sweetheart for more than 40 years. Condit grew up 
comfortably as an only child in San Francisco, where his father was 
a chemist for Standard Oil. He joined Boeing in 1965 after getting 
a master's degree in aeronautical engineering from Princeton and was 
quickly identified as a golden boy destined for greater things within 
the company. In addition to doing engineering work on a variety of 
airplanes, Condit had stints in sales and marketing. He was named 
president of Boeing in 1992, rising to chief executive in 1996 and 
to chairman last year. He is currently going through his third divorce. 
While Stonecipher is feared, Condit, who is known for his people skills, 
is genuinely liked. ``I'm a little more aggressive than Phil,'' Stonecipher 
told a group of potential investors in New York last year. ``I'm more 
likely to shoot you and then ask you your name. Phil is likely to 
ask you your name and then shoot you.'' Condit's crowning moment was 
in the early 1990s, when he led the team that designed the 777, Boeing's 
newest and most modern jetliner. In the course of that project, he 
promoted an uncharacteristic degree of teamwork that he has since 
tried to spread to the entire company. A self-described lifelong learner, 
Condit received his PhD last year from the Science University of Tokyo. 
He is also not afraid to help Boeing executives _ not the most introspective 
group _ get in touch with their feelings. Four years ago, he hired 
David J. Whyte, a poet and motivational speaker, to run workshops 
with top managers. In one meeting at Condit's home, the executives 
were asked to write down negative stories about Boeing and toss them 
into a bonfire so that only positive, inspirational stories would 
remain. These days, executives would likely be tossing Boeing's last 
five quarterly earnings reports into the blaze. The company's difficulties 
building commercial jets have prevented it from capitalizing on one 
of the biggest sales booms ever. Though Boeing has only one competitor 
left _ Airbus Industrie, the European consortium _ and is building 
more jets than ever, it says it will make hardly any money for the 
next two years from selling them. Analysts say that by the time Boeing 
fixes its problems, demand will have dried up. In acquiring McDonnell 
Douglas, Condit wanted his rival's large military operations. Along 
with the space business of Rockwell International, which Boeing bought 
for $3.2 billion in 1996, they were supposed to help Boeing balance 
the ups and downs of the notoriously cyclical passenger airplane market. 
But even with all those new businesses, Boeing expects to earn only 
$1 billion this year, a meager 1.8 percent return on sales. In hindsight, 
it seems obvious that Boeing's commercial airplane business was headed 
for trouble, given what the company was trying to do. Two years ago, 
when demand for new planes began to pick up after a drought in the 
mid-90s, Boeing made a bold bid to gain market share by offering steep 
discounts. Executives believed that plans to overhaul Boeing's production 
systems _ which date to World War II and are still largely paper-based 
_ would allow the company to lower the unit cost of each jet by 25 
percent, so that it would make a profit even at the low prices. As 
orders poured in, Boeing was forced to increase production to 40 planes 
a month, from 18, in a year and a half. Rather than help, the efforts 
to consolidate 400 separate computer systems, track millions of parts 
and digitize thousands of drawings added to the rising confusion. 
Parts shortages developed, and work fell behind schedule as thousands 
of new workers _ hired to replace older, skilled laborers who took 
early retirement during the previous down cycle _ could not handle 
the load. At the same time, Boeing was trying to introduce several 
new models, each of which required certification by regulators in 
Washington and Europe, adding to the delays. In addition, many of 
its new orders were from new customers, which meant tens of thousands 
of hours of engineering work to customize the planes to their specifications. 
By early October last year, Boeing's assembly lines around Seattle 
had seized up. The company said it would halt production of its 747 
and 737 jets for a month to catch its breath. Along with costly changes 
on the new 737, that resulted in a stunning $2.6 billion in accounting 
charges. Investors were angry; Boeing had been insisting for months 
that reports of production difficulties were exaggerated. Over the 
next year, as the airplane division struggled to recover, a pattern 
developed. Executives led by Condit would try to put the best face 
on the situation. But just when it seemed things were turning around, 
the company would drop another bombshell. A low point came in July, 
when Boeing released its second-quarter earnings and, for the first 
time, offered earnings guidance to Wall Street analysts. While most 
analysts were estimating that Boeing would earn $1.64 a share this 
year and $3.24 a share in 1999 _ down from as high as $5 before the 
production difficulties arose _ Condit said the company expected to 
make $1.01 a share in 1998 and $2.02 a share in '99. Boeing's share 
price plunged, and analysts were irate. The next day, when Condit 
met in Boston with institutional investors and analysts, one analyst 
all but called him a liar. At a similar session in New York the next 
day, another analyst implied that Condit was deliberately trying to 
drive down the price of the stock to buy it on the cheap. Shaken, 
Condit, returned to Seattle and told colleagues he never wanted to 
be put in such a position again. But his credibility has continued 
to deteriorate. In the spring, Condit strongly defended Ronald B. 
Woodard, the head of the commercial airplane division, when many people 
were calling for his head. Five months later, he ousted Woodard, who 
had been in line to become Boeing's president. Insiders now say that 
Condit's mistake was not firing Woodard sooner. Boyd E. Givan, Boeing's 
chief financial officer for 32 years, was also forced to resign after 
reportedly clashing with Stonecipher. ``I thought they shot the messenger,'' 
said Dean Thornton, a retired Boeing executive. Givan will be replaced 
by Deborah C. Hopkins, former chief financial officer for General 
Motors Europe, who starts work Monday. Condit said that if he finds 
fault with himself, it is in underestimating the challenge of transforming 
Boeing from a company of the Cold War era, which valued engineering 
performance above all, to one that also values financial performance. 
Now, he said, ``we have unhooked ourselves from market share intentionally 
and said what we are about is running a profitable company.'' Condit 
and Stonecipher said that the bad news this month was unavoidable, 
because the economic downturn in Asia had forced the company to cut 
back its production in 2000 far more than it had thought. The explanation 
is puzzling: For more than a year, the company's assessment had been 
much less pessimistic than those of outsiders; now, when some experts 
are beginning to say that conditions in Asia are improving, Boeing 
is saying the situation is worse than ever. ``I think most of the 
world is really in denial about what's going on in Asia,'' Stonecipher 
said. What really alarmed investors about Boeing's recent disclosures 
was the company's acknowledgment that margins on its commercial airplanes 
would be even lower in 2000 than in 1999. Boeing attributed the deterioration 
to expectations that it will sell more of its new models, which command 
lower margins than older planes. But the announcement raised analysts' 
concerns that it will take Boeing longer than anticipated to make 
its assembly lines more efficient. Already, Alan Mulally, the new 
head of the commercial airplane division, has delayed the production 
modernization program; instead, the company will try to deliver planes 
on time and avoid penalties. ``We are probably the least efficient 
we have ever been making airplanes,'' Mulally said in an interview 
last week. Thousands of extra workers are on the payroll simply to 
get planes out the door, he said. With this month's layoff warning, 
many of those people are fearing for their jobs, even as Boeing depends 
on them to help it out of a jam. ``It's a helluva Christmas present 
to give Boeing employees,'' said Bill Johnson, president of the machinists 
union local that represents 39,000 Boeing workers. The union, which 
struck Boeing for 69 days in 1995, is gearing up for negotiations 
next August, and it believes it has Boeing over a barrel. The company 
wants to introduce a new workweek to cut overtime and institute co-payments 
on health insurance. The union will have none of it. ``We are not 
going to be mean,'' Johnson said. ``We are just going to make sure 
we get the things we want. They cannot afford a strike in September. 
I see them somewhat on the defensive already.'' Can Condit ride out 
the current storm? On paper, the odds look to be in his favor. Only 
4 of the 13 board members, including Stonecipher, came from McDonnell 
Douglas. Eight are Boeing holdovers, presumably with loyalties to 
Condit, including such pillars of the Northwest as George Weyerhaeuser, 
the paper magnate, and Charles M. Pigott, the former chairman of a 
truck maker, Paccar Inc. Even with Stonecipher in the executive suite, 
there is no clear succession plan. He would be popular with investors, 
but faces mandatory retirement in less than three years. The only 
other obvious candidate within Boeing is Mulally, 53, who has his 
hands full turning around the jet business and is not yet considered 
seasoned enough to be chief executive. Bringing a new leader into 
Boeing from outside would be a dramatic step for the proud company. 
But it could hasten changes that Condit and his predecessors have 
talked about implementing for the last decade, with little apparent 
progress. ``Boards really aren't very compassionate,'' Stonecipher 
said. ``The moment the board decides that somebody else can get this 
thing done for them, we will be out of here the next day.'' Is Boeing 
at that point today? Stonecipher did not hesitate to answer. ``No,'' 
he replied. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>