<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981211.0333 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
D. Tennant Bryan, founder of Media General Inc., the Richmond, Va.-based 
newspaper, television and communications company, died Wednesday at 
his home in Richmond. He was 92. Bryan began his career in 1928 as 
a reporter for The Richmond News Leader, the family-owned afternoon 
newspaper, which later merged with the morning Richmond Times-Dispatch. 
He was a third-generation newspaper publisher, and his newspapers 
were a leading voice against school desegregation in Virginia in the 
mid-1950s. His role in the 1980s as the builder of a company with 
a large television component might have surprised publishers who heard 
Bryan address the American Newspaper Publishers Association in 1960. 
Nearing the end of two years as president of the association, Bryan 
warned that the troubles of the broadcasting industry, which was experiencing 
a quiz-show scandal and other problems, were caused by its inability 
to separate the influence of advertisers from programming. Newspapers' 
editorial independence from the influence of advertisers was crucial 
to maintaining credibility and dominance, Bryan said. ``It has now 
become abundantly clear that neither television nor any other existing 
medium can displace the newspaper, which along with food and utilities 
remains an indispensable daily service in the home,'' he said. Bryan 
was not above hedging his bets, however. In 1966, Richmond Newspapers 
Inc., the family holding company, sold stock to the public, and three 
years later Media General was created as a holding company for the 
family's expanding interests. Today, in addition to 21 daily newspapers, 
including The Tampa Tribune in Florida and The Winston-Salem Journal 
in North Carolina, Media General owns 14 broadcast television stations, 
including WFLA-TV in Tampa, and cable operations with about 235,000 
subscribers in Virginia. Media General also has interests in newsprint 
plants, recycling operations and online communications. Bryan's son, 
J. Stewart Bryan III, became publisher of the newspapers in 1978 and 
succeeded his father as chairman of Media General in 1990. A Bryan 
family trust has maintained control of the company through its ownership 
of a majority of a special class of shares. He is also survived by 
two daughters, Mary Tennant Bryan Perkins of Richmond and Florence 
Bryan Fowlkes of Chevy Chase, Md.; three grandchildren and a great-grandson. 
His wife, Mary Harkness Davidson Tennant, died in 1987. David Tennant 
Bryan was born on Aug. 3, 1906, in Richmond. He attended the University 
of Virginia for three years before joining The News Leader. After 
working his way up through positions meant to prepare him to be publisher, 
Bryan resigned as vice president and general manager of Richmond Newspapers 
in 1942 to join the Navy. He served as an officer in the Pacific. 
While Bryan was on active duty in 1944, his father, John Stewart Bryan, 
died, and two years later Bryan returned to Richmond Newspapers as 
publisher and president. He remained chairman of Media General from 
its founding until July 1990 and was a board member until last year. 
Bryan was known in the newspaper industry as a fierce defender of 
access to government information. In 1966, he led a trade group's 
fight against a proposal by a panel of the American Bar Association 
to sharply restrict the access of the press to pretrial hearings and 
information about individuals charged with, but not yet tried for, 
crimes. In 1968, the proposals were adopted by the bar association's 
House of Delegates and by the Judicial Conference of the United States. 
Despite the company's expansion across the Southeast, Bryan remained 
closely identified with Virginia. His newspapers were leading supporters 
of the campaign of ``massive resistance'' to racial integration in 
public schools in the mid-1950s. The News Leader and its conservative 
editor, James J. Kilpatrick, now a syndicated columnist, advocated 
total defiance of the Supreme Court's integration edicts, backing 
Gov. J. Lindsay Almond Jr.'s determination to preserve separate schools 
for white and black students. But Bryan was said to have later renounced 
the position. A biographical article in The Richmond Times-Dispatch 
this week said, ``In recent years, Mr. Bryan and Kilpatrick acknowledged 
that they had gone too far'' in their opposition to integration. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>