<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981211.0423 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
The New York Times said in an editorial for Saturday, Dec. 12: Fifty 
years ago this week, the United Nations adopted the Universal Declaration 
of Human Rights and the Genocide Convention. The world of 1948, impressed 
by the Nuremberg Tribunals, seemed ready to enforce international 
laws to prevent new acts of genocide and crimes against humanity. 
But nothing happened _ until 1993, when the international tribunal 
for Bosnia became the first of several new attempts to enforce these 
laws. One important reason for the change is the participation of 
citizen-activists, who have initiated some of the cases and played 
a major role in shaping the new courts. The case against Gen. Augusto 
Pinochet of Chile began with private citizens. An organization of 
Spanish lawyers filed a complaint accusing him of human rights abuses. 
The laws of Spain and many other nations allow judges to investigate 
complaints from the public and open a case if the evidence warrants. 
The 1994 French conviction of Paul Touvier for crimes against humanity 
in Nazi-occupied France also began as a complaint by the son of a 
victim, and the work of Nazi-hunters such as Beate Klarsfeld was instrumental 
in the 1987 conviction of Klaus Barbie. The only cases in U.S. courts 
against foreign human rights violators are suits brought by private 
citizens against figures such as the Bosnian Serb leader Radovan Karadzic. 
Activists outside government have also influenced the new international 
courts. The international criminal court would not have been endorsed 
last summer by 120 nations without the work of human rights groups, 
which mobilized citizens, lobbied leaders and wrote and analyzed drafts 
of the court's statutes. Governments have been more receptive to their 
arguments since the end of the Cold War, which had provided many of 
the world's worst criminals with political patrons. Leaders were also 
more willing to act because they failed to prevent genocide in Bosnia 
and Rwanda. The new court can aggressively prosecute rape and sexual 
enslavement, as the Bosnia and Rwanda tribunals have. This is largely 
due to international women's groups, which lobbied the governments 
writing the courts' statutes and raised prosecutors' awareness of 
the issue. Outside pressure was unable to persuade Washington to join 
the court. Private citizens cannot push leaders where they refuse 
to go. But they have breathed life into the documents their governments 
signed 50 years ago. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>