<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981211.0218 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
There was no epiphany, Dr. Ralph Roughton recalls, no precise moment 
of realization. But there came a point, two years ago, when he looked 
around at his profession and recognized that the need for secrecy, 
for pretending to be someone that he was not, was no longer so urgent. 
He sat down at his word processor and wrote a letter to the 28 other 
psychoanalysts on the faculty of the Emory University Psychoanalytic 
Institute. ``The time now feels right for me to answer the unasked 
questions,'' he said in the letter, ``and I am writing to each of 
you so that you will hear it directly from me.'' What they heard was 
that Roughton, then 63 _ a supervising analyst and former director 
of the institute, with 41 years of marriage behind him _ was gay. 
``It felt risky,'' Roughton said, ``but it also felt very freeing.'' 
He did not have to wait long for a reaction. Soon after mailing his 
declaration, he began receiving calls and notes from his colleagues. 
They congratulated him on his courage. They said they felt they knew 
him better now. They even sent him more referrals. The response, many 
psychoanalysts say, is a measure of just how much has changed in a 
field that for more than a half century viewed homosexuality as an 
illness and deemed homosexuals unfit to become psychoanalysts. And 
in an unusual illustration of this turnaround, the American Psychoanalytic 
Association at its annual meetings in Manhattan next week will present 
an open forum, ``Homophobia: analysis of a `permissible' prejudice,'' 
featuring Rep. Barney Frank, the gay congressman from Massachusetts, 
Roughton and others as speakers. As part of the forum, Roughton said, 
the association, which was founded in 1911 by American followers of 
Sigmund Freud and remains the dominant psychoanalytic organization 
in the United States, plans to acknowledge its own past homophobia, 
though ``we won't dwell on it at length or do a lot of breast beating,'' 
he said. Nothing happens quickly in psychoanalysis, and the shift 
in attitudes about homosexuality is no exception. Unlike the American 
Psychiatric Association, which removed homosexuality from its list 
of mental disorders in 1973, psychoanalysts persisted well into the 
1980s in describing homosexuality as a ``perversion,'' and analysts 
continued to speak of their ability to ``cure'' the ``serious character 
disorders'' of their gay patients. Roughton himself went through two 
long analyses, he said, in an effort to become heterosexual. ``My 
perspective was the same as the whole analytic community, that this 
was something wrong with me that needed to be changed,'' he said. 
Even a decade ago, an admission of homosexuality by a senior analyst 
often meant a damaged career and a chilly reception from other analysts. 
In ``Becoming Gay'' (Pantheon, 1996), Dr. Richard Isay, a New York 
analyst, wrote bitterly of his experience of ``coming out'' in the 
analytic profession in the 1980s. Until 1991, when the psychoanalytic 
association adopted a policy prohibiting training institutes from 
discriminating on the basis of sexual orientation, homosexual applicants 
were summarily turned away; many, aware of the prevailing view, did 
not even bother to apply. Eventually, however, things began to change, 
spurred by the arrival of new leaders, the constant badgering by Isay 
on the issue, and the greater visibility and acceptance of homosexuality 
in American culture as a whole. There are now 35 to 40 openly gay 
and lesbian candidates training in 29 psychoanalytic institutes around 
the country, and 15 of about 1,000 faculty members are openly gay, 
according to members of the psychoanalytic association's Committee 
on Issues of Homosexuality. A welcoming reception was held for gay 
and lesbian participants at meetings in San Diego in May. And last 
December, an executive committee passed, by an overwhelming majority, 
a resolution asking states ``not to interfere with same-gender couples 
who choose to marry.'' To be sure, there remain some among the 3,200 
psychoanalysts who make up the national association who disapprove 
of these changes. In 1992, a group of analysts, led by Dr. Charles 
Socarides, founded the National Association for Research and Therapy 
of Homosexuality, an organization that advocates therapy to change 
homosexuals into heterosexuals. Dr. Houston MacIntosh, a Washington 
psychoanalyst who has presented papers at the association's meetings, 
said the group ``provides a counterbalance to the current rush to 
embrace the gay political agenda by the leadership of the American 
Psychoanalytic Association.'' But most analysts view the Socarides-led 
group as extreme. ``Those who still pathologize homosexuality are 
a distinct minority,'' said Dr. Marvin Margolis, past president of 
the psychoanalytic association, ``and they are gradually decreasing 
in number and influence.'' Freud himself was tolerant of homosexuality. 
Though he described it as ``an arrest of sexual development,'' he 
argued that homosexuals should not be prevented from becoming analysts 
purely on the basis of their sexual orientation. ``Homosexuality is 
assuredly no advantage,'' he wrote in a famous 1921 letter to an American 
woman concerned about her son, ``but it is nothing to be ashamed of, 
no vice, no degradation. It cannot be classified as an illness.'' 
In the United States, however, prominent psychoanalysts, many of them 
Europeans who immigrated just before or after World War II, took a 
much more rigid stance, classifying homosexuality firmly as a neurosis 
in need of treatment. At least one analyst, Dr. Edmund Bergler, ventured 
far beyond clinical detachment. ``Homosexuals are essentially disagreeable 
people regardless of their pleasant or unpleasant manner,'' he said 
in a 1956 paper. ``Like all psychic masochists, they are subservient 
when confronted with a stronger person, merciless when in power, unscrupulous 
about trampling on a weaker person.'' Still, Dr. Paul Lynch, a Boston 
analyst who in 1993 was one of the first two openly gay candidates 
to begin analytic training, said he thought that for most analysts, 
prejudice was born of life within a sheltered profession rather than 
active bigotry. ``Many of these analysts didn't know a gay person 
as a friend or a social acquaintance, or somebody they were able to 
talk about it with outside of their offices,'' Lynch said. His own 
experience when he entered the institute was positive, he said. ``I 
was worried when I first joined because there were so few of us. But 
there really does seem to be a hunger for people to know more about 
this.'' In his second year in training, Lynch said, he realized that 
negative attitudes toward homosexuals laced much of the analytic literature 
he was reading for his courses. When he raised the issue, the institute 
took steps to change the curriculum. ``They really went to work and 
thanked me for exposing this,'' he said. Although attitudes have changed, 
the theory most psychoanalysts rely on to guide them in treating patients 
lags far behind. Classical psychoanalytic theory held that the path 
of normal development led children to be attracted to the opposite 
sex parent and to compete with the same-sex parent: the drama of the 
Oedipus complex. Homosexuality represented a derailment of this sequence, 
a so-called developmental arrest. And while Freud viewed the cause 
of homosexuality as a mystery, later theorists attributed it to early 
traumas and failures in parenting. With the changing climate and advances 
in scientific knowledge about human sexuality, a number of analysts 
now are trying to develop new theories that take account of homosexuality 
as an expression of normal development. Dr. Richard Friedman, clinical 
professor of psychiatry at Payne Whitney Clinic at New York Hospital-Cornell 
Medical Center and co-author of ``Male Homosexuality: A Contemporary 
Psychoanalytic Perspective'' (Yale University Press, 1990), for example, 
integrates psychoanalytic theory with findings from genetics and neurobiology. 
Current science, Friedman said, indicates that sexual desire begins 
somewhere between the ages of 5 and 10, later than Freud believed, 
and that it is not primarily directed at either parent. ``As a result,'' 
Friedman said, ``homosexual men are not on an abnormal developmental 
track: they were never destined to be sexually attracted to their 
mothers in the first place.'' Isay has also written about male homosexual 
development from a psychoanalytic viewpoint, and he argues that analysts 
who fall back on traditional theory in treating homosexual patients 
are doing more harm than good. ``I've done a number of consultations 
with people who are seeing traditional analysts,'' Isay said, ``and 
it seems to me that there's still an adherence to heterosexual theories.'' 
Two Chicago analysts, Dr. Robert Galatzer-Levy and Dr. Bertram Cohler, 
have undertaken a comprehensive review of scientific work on homosexuality, 
with the hope of helping consolidate and extend psychoanalytic thinking. 
In their report, which was financed by the American Psychoanalytic 
Association and will be published in book form sometime next year 
by Chicago University Press, they conclude, Galatzer-Levy said, that 
``homosexuality is not associated with any psychopathology in any 
way'' and that ``there is no evidence that any form of therapy, including 
psychoanalysis and the Christian therapies, can change sexual orientation.'' 
Yet the Chicago analysts also found that the case for homosexuality 
as purely biological in origin was still inconclusive and that the 
field still awaited a single coherent theory. ``We simply don't have 
enough good information,'' Galatzer-Levy said, ``and one of our major 
points is to emphasize and to be comfortable with how much we don't 
know.'' 
</TEXT>
</DOC>