<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981211.0264 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
On Monday, Jan. 4, Europe's new single currency, the euro, will be 
introduced in 11 nations with some 290 million people. But this old 
steel town, with a population of 250,000 and a tendency to attract 
unwelcome mockery of its provincialism, has beaten the rest of Europe 
to the punch. While Britain itself has rejected initial participation 
in the single currency, the business leaders of Rotherham (pronounced 
ROTH-er-um) decided that for a week in mid-November, they would introduce 
the ``Rotherham euro'' _ a voucher with a nominal value of 70 pence 
($1.12), roughly what one euro was worth at the time. Two months before 
the euro's debut in cross-border transactions and more than two years 
before real euro bills and coins will be available, some 90,000 euro 
vouchers were given out to the people of depressed South Yorkshire 
to let them know what the euro-fuss is all about. In American terms, 
its equal would have been, say, a mock-dollar redeemable in only Akron, 
Ohio. The Rotherham euro was a matter of ``some hype,'' acknowledged 
Phil Davies, a marketing consultant involved in the project. But he 
added that it ``was hype, with substance'' because, in its modest 
way, the experiment drew attention to a debate that is growing more 
ferocious in Britain even as it watches the inception of the euro 
from the sidelines. It is a debate in which economic issues have long 
been colored by a fierce nationalism, driven by conservative newspapers 
and politicians. Yet it is also coming to reflect a more basic philosophic 
conflict between the freewheeling, market-driven ethos that Britain 
models on the United States and the big-government priorities of a 
Continent pressed to the left by the recent elections in France and 
Germany. Many business leaders argue that Britain cannot afford to 
delay joining the euro, saying that it will revolutionize European 
markets and that British exports will lose competitiveness if the 
country remains outside the euro zone. But others worry that monetary 
union would also mean higher taxes and heftier labor costs in line 
with the rest of Europe. ``You cannot operate a single currency for 
long without a unified fiscal policy,'' argued Kevin Gardiner, an 
economist with Morgan Stanley Dean Witter in London. `'So the question 
has to be raised: Do the British people want to cede fiscal sovereignty?'' 
The latest flare-up in the debate over the euro concerns ``harmonization,'' 
the notion promoted by France and Germany that the euro will be undermined 
if some countries within the monetary union offer tax and labor incentives, 
drawing investment and money away from others, in much the same way 
as states in the United States compete for businesses. But such talk 
is alarming in Britain, which cherishes its status as a magnet for 
banks and other companies that find the Continent too pricey. Compared 
with the 11 nations _ Austria, Belgium, Finland, France, Germany, 
Ireland, Italy, Luxembourg, the Netherlands, Portugal and Spain _ 
that will make up ``Euroland,'' Britain generally has weaker labor 
unions and lower taxes. Germany, for example, has a maximum tax rate 
of over 60 percent, compared with 40 percent in Britain. France and 
Germany deny that they are seeking uniform income-tax rates across 
Europe, saying what they want is a withholding-tax on cross-border 
savings and an end to tax havens in countries like Luxembourg. While 
the British government says it, too, is against unfair tax regimes, 
it also does not want to alarm London's financial district, the prime 
marketplace for Europe _ euro or no euro. ``What we want,'' said Gordon 
Brown, Britain's chancellor of the exchequer, ``is tax competition, 
not tax cooperation.'' The battle over taxation levels is one of several 
economic issues intertwined with the fiercely nationalistic political 
debate that has forced the Labor government, like its Conservative 
predecessor, to adopt a wait-and-see policy. It says a decision on 
joining the euro will not be taken until after a referendum to be 
held following the next national election, which must be called at 
the latest by 2002. But, the single currency's promoters maintain, 
the longer Britain stays out, the less its influence will be and the 
more conditions in Europe will be dictated by others. (In a way, Britain 
has already had a taste of that: When the central banks of the euro 
nations lowered interest rates on Dec. 3, the Bank of England was 
a spectator. On Dec. 10, Britain's central bank lowered its benchmark 
rate a half-point, to 6.25 percent _ but still double the Euroland 
norm.) For critics of the euro, being outside Euroland is a plus, 
not a minus. Britain, they say, is at a different point in the economic 
cycle and has nothing to gain by exposing its strengths _ cheaper 
labor, lower taxation and flexibility _ to any further dictates of 
common European policies. At its most visceral level, the political 
debate is driven by such euro-skeptic institutions as Rupert Murdoch's 
mass-market newspaper The Sun. A front page of The Sun, for instance, 
described Finance Minister Oskar Lafontaine of Germany as the most 
dangerous man in Europe, and hinted at a vulgar expletive to tell 
him what to do with his tax proposals. So deep is the nationalistic 
vein that there has already been a debate about whether Queen Elizabeth's 
head would appear on the euro _ as it does on the pound _ even though 
Britain is not a member. (Under current plans, an image of her head 
would be allowed.) For many euro advocates, though, Britain has already 
waited too long. ``Too many people in Britain have spent the last 
few years deluding themselves, some hoping that if we all shut our 
eyes tightly enough, the single currency would simply go away,'' said 
Niall Fitzgerald, the chairman of Unilever, the British-Dutch consumer 
products company. ``Others arrogantly assumed that if Britain didn't 
like the idea, it just wouldn't happen.'' On Nov. 23, 114 business 
leaders took out a full-page advertisement in The Financial Times 
to urge a speedy embrace of the new currency. An earlier survey cited 
63 per cent of business respondents as saying they favored the euro. 
Why? Ask Julie Kenny, managing director of a security company employing 
some 200 people in an industrial park on the outskirts of Rotherham. 
Mrs. Kenny started the business in 1986 with a start-up stake equivalent 
to $32,000 from the sale of a house, with a further $13,000 in outside 
capital. These days, its annual sales, she said, are around $18 million, 
and her company, Pyronix Ltd., is seen as a local success story. Since 
1992, when the European Union introduced its single market, knocking 
down nearly all the remaining barriers to trade, finance and travel 
within Europe, Pyronix has exported some 40 percent of its output, 
the bulk of it to the Continent. But in recent years, as the pound 
has strengthened against the German mark and French franc, Pyronix's 
Continental customers have complained about rising prices, while its 
British market has been undercut by cheaper imports. ``The exchange 
rate has meant tremendous pressure,'' she said. The cost of a strong 
pound ``has got to be found in reduced profits.'' Like other small 
British exporters, Mrs. Kenny's company has already set up a euro 
bank account to deal with clients who want to pay in euros _ only 
Siemens, the German electronics giant, has so far said it will _ and 
it will put out a euro price list in January, when the currency comes 
into use in electronic transactions. Rotherham's biggest employer, 
British Steel, is also prepared to use the euro. `'We are going to 
allow our customers to decide which way they want to do business,'' 
said Colin Jackson, a British Steel manager. Mrs. Kenny now believes, 
with some qualifications, that Britain should join. ``If it's successful 
and the Europeans are trading extensively in euros, then we as businesses 
have to be on the inside, playing on the same terms as everyone else, 
rather than on the outside looking in,'' she said. The 114 signatories 
of business leaders' advertisement made similar points. The euro ``will 
promote low and stable interest rates and low inflation, and encourage 
prudent fiscal management,'' they wrote. But even business leaders 
worry that there may be negative consequences if Britain joins. For 
instance, Continental labor laws make it harder to lay off workers. 
Personal and corporate taxes are generally higher. As a proportion 
of national output, British tax revenues account for only 40 percent 
compared with some 50 percent in continental Europe. If Britain were 
forced to emulate other European nations, Mrs. Kenny said, it would 
mean ``higher prices, and more companies going bust.'' Indeed, Ralph 
Robins, the chairman of Rolls-Royce PLC, told an audience in Australia, 
``The last thing we want in Britain is some of the European labor 
laws appearing in the United Kingdom, and I'm not just saying that 
for Rolls-Royce; I'm saying it for every industrialist in the UK.'' 
A move in that direction is unlikely, because Britain retains a veto 
over having to impose such measures adopted by the 15-nation European 
Union. But the anxieties touch the core of Britain's euro debate, 
fueling the argument that, by joining, Britain would cede control 
over taxes and government spending to policy-makers in Brussels, Belgium. 
The counter-argument advanced by Brown, chancellor of the exchequer, 
is that taxes need not be uniform. ``You have a single currency in 
the United States, but they have different income, corporate and sales 
taxes right across the U.S.A.,'' he said after meeting with other 
European finance ministers in Brussels. ``So there is no reason why 
the single currency requires the same tax rates for businesses to 
be able to work.'' But there is no denying that joining the euro means 
giving up control over interest rates. That leaves individual countries 
unable to rely on monetary changes to counter economic ups and downs 
when they are out of step with the rest of Europe, as Britain is today. 
``There's going to be a single euro interest rate set by the European 
Central Bank,'' said an economist in London. ``While that may be appropriate 
for Europe as a whole, it may not be appropriate for individual countries.'' 
In Rotherham, some of the arguments seemed arcane, particularly for 
those who are, as Davies, the marketing consultant, put it, ``still 
getting over decimalization,'' when Britain abandoned pounds, shillings 
and pence in favor of decimal currency. That was in 1972. John Redwood, 
a Conservative Party foe of the euro, dismissed the Rotherham euro 
as a `'ridiculous stunt.'' Not so, Davies replied. The point was to 
show that obscure places like Rotherham are ready to deal with euros 
when necessary. ``The issue of whether we join or not,'' he said, 
``is for another day.'' 
</TEXT>
</DOC>