<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981211.0273 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Sometimes corporate earnings matter to investors, and sometimes they 
don't. Last week they mattered again. These shifting sands make investing 
in the stock market mighty exasperating today. Since the market came 
back to life in October, investors have felt safe buying stocks, regardless 
of the earnings outlook. Their focus was on the positive effect that 
three Federal Reserve interest rate cuts would have on stock prices. 
But with further Fed easing unlikely before February, all eyes are 
on earnings. Last week, fears about lower corporate profits knocked 
down shares in Coca-Cola, the Ciena Corp. and Ralston-Purina. The 
Dow Jones industrial average fell 2.1 percent on the week. Not much 
has changed in the earnings picture. Sure, fourth-quarter profit warnings 
have begun. But investors seem to think that the glass they see is 
half-empty, not half-full. One thing that may be confusing investors 
is the extreme difference in opinion between investment strategists 
and industry analysts about what 1999 holds for profits. According 
to First Call, Wall Street market strategists think earnings at Standard 
&AMP; Poor's 500 companies will rise an average of 4.2 percent next 
year. But when First Call compiles estimates of individual industry 
analysts, the earnings-growth forecast jumps to 18.7 percent. Although 
the gulf between the two groups is often large, it has not yawned 
this wide since First Call began tracking the data five years ago. 
Of course, investors could shrug off the bad news on profits, as they 
have done before. But there are several reasons that earnings may 
continue to nag at investors' psyches. One is that a glut in almost 
everything _ from commodities like oil to finished goods like computers 
_ means that companies cannot raise their prices. Though a plunge 
in commodity prices provides an initial benefit to some companies 
by lowering their costs, it also makes it difficult to raise prices 
on finished products. So profits will be under pressure. Ed Hyman, 
a founder of International Strategy and Investment in New York, has 
identified a relationship between commodity prices and corporate earnings 
that may presage a big decline in 1999 profits. Tracking year-over-year 
changes in both the S&AMP;P 500's operating earnings and the Commodity 
Research Bureau's commodity index, Hyman found that the moves had 
a 64 percent correlation. With the commodity index down 17.5 percent 
this year, corporate earnings could be vulnerable next year. Another 
possible threat to earnings lies in consumer spending. Although consumer 
confidence has rebounded from its nose dive earlier this fall, it 
has started to slip again. The University of Michigan consumer sentiment 
index dropped from 102.7 in November to a preliminary 100.7 this month. 
And while retail sales have been strong this holiday season, Jason 
Trennert, vice president at ISI reports that retailers say their pricing 
power is extremely weak _ 4.2 on a scale of 0 to 100. Even when business 
is good, profits are tougher and tougher to come by. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>