<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981211.0298 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
By word and deed, in answering pollsters' questions and in casting 
midterm ballots last month, a majority of the voters of America have 
made it pluperfectly clear that they do not wish to see President 
Clinton removed from office through the impeachment process. Yet the 
Republicans on the House Judiciary Committee are charging down the 
road that leads to precisely that. Nothing anyone has said or done, 
not the harsh words of some of the president's defenders on the committee, 
not the softer words of his lawyers testifying before it, not even 
Clinton's own 11th-hour statement Friday afternoon, stayed the Republicans' 
hands. Rep. Lindsey Graham, an iconoclast from South Carolina, said 
before Clinton spoke that he might opt for censure instead of impeachment 
if the president admitted in some way to ``criminal wrongdoing.'' 
But in a short, subdued four-minute speech, Clinton came nowhere near 
to doing that. Instead, he said he would accept censure _ something 
his aides have been saying for days _ reiterated his remorse over 
his conduct _ something Graham had derided before the fact as ``another 
lip-biting apology'' _ and called again for everyone to buckle down 
to doing the nation's work. Anticlimax perfumed the air a few minutes 
later when Graham and the 20 other Republican committee members voted 
for the first article of impeachment to come before them, which accuses 
Clinton of perjury. All but one voted for a second perjury article 
early Friday evening, with Graham breaking ranks on that occasion. 
White House nose-counters have told the president he stands no better 
than an even chance of avoiding impeachment on one article by the 
full House next week, which would set up a Senate trial in January. 
It was a historic day, of course, as everyone kept saying, but banal 
as well, utterly lacking in the soaring language and high-minded debate 
that transfixed the nation a quarter-century ago, in July, 1974, when 
the committee voted articles of impeachment against Richard Nixon. 
At one point members picked nits with each other over whether Clinton 
had been properly sworn for his grand jury testimony in the Monica 
Lewinsky investigation. The session had the compelling drama of a 
debate on a highway bill. Some spectators' seats were empty. Network 
television gave it a pass. That could be accounted for, at least in 
part, by the almost universal belief in Washington that the Republicans 
will fail to muster the two-thirds vote that would be needed to convict 
Clinton and remove him from office. In a sense, the Judiciary Committee 
Republicans had a free play, like a quarterback who can throw a pass 
without fear of interception when a penalty against the defensive 
team has been whistled before he releases the ball. Rep. Tom DeLay 
of Texas, the House Republican whip, stated the thesis the other day. 
Impeachment, he said, is ``like a grand jury that looks at the evidence, 
and the House decides whether the evidence warrants sending it to 
the Senate for trial.'' Rep. Bob Barr, R-Ga., echoed his words Friday 
afternoon, telling his colleagues that what they were doing was ``similar 
to drafting an indictment'' in a criminal case. ``Impeachment in the 
House, acquittal in the Senate,'' said another Republican member, 
``is super-censure, the most effective we have.'' Some disagreed, 
of course. Rep. Barney Frank, the cerebral Massachusetts Democrat, 
said gruffly that in voting to impeach Clinton, the Republicans were 
``voting for a resolution that says you want him thrown out of office,'' 
like it or not. From the viewpoint of most Democrats, approval in 
the committee makes approval in the House more likely, and a Senate 
trial, regardless of the outcome, would take time and sully Clinton's 
reputation even further. He would be only the second president ever 
to face trial in the Senate, after Andrew Johnson, and his ability 
to function effectively, already eroded, would be further curtailed. 
Even now, he is neither trusted on Capitol Hill nor feared by Saddam 
Hussein and other enemies of the United States. Nevertheless, some 
Republican members who harbored private qualms no doubt took refuge 
behind the conviction that nothing they did Friday was final. That 
assumption, like so many others in this saga, may prove falacious, 
but at the moment it is pervasive. Yet the explanation for Friday's 
vote is more complicated than that. Some Republican representatives 
have seen Clinton as unfit for the presidency almost from the start 
of his term, and have never considered voting any other way than they 
way they voted Friday. Barr, the first member to call for impeachment, 
is described by his colleagues as falling into that category. He is 
not alone. Other Republicans members, especially outside the committee, 
have been offended by White House tactics. Once ready, or almost ready, 
to give Clinton the benefit of the doubt, they have hardened against 
him. When his party did far better than anticipated in the elections 
last month, Clinton and his advisers, like President Nixon and his, 
concluded that the impeachment campaign had spent its momentum. They 
mistook a break in the clouds for lasting sunshine. Abandoning their 
conciliatory tone, the president's lawyers sent provocatively unresponsive 
answers to 81 questions posed by the committee. Some were also highly 
critical of Clinton's efforts to mobilize business leaders in their 
districts to accuse them of harming the economy by pressing ahead 
with impeachment. The politics of the situation are complex and by 
no means always decisive. Rep. Marge Roukema of New Jersey, a moderate 
who might have drawn a conservative primary challenge if she had voted 
against impeachment, decided to vote for it. Rep. Amo Houghton of 
upstate New York, another moderate, was in a similar situation; his 
stand against impeachment evoked a threat from Jim Pierce, a heretofore 
marginal conservative candidate. Privately, some Republicans said 
they thought a vote to impeach would prove, in the long run, to be 
popular with the electorate and therefore helpful at election time 
in 2000. Others thought not, though several said that public opposition 
to ousting Clinton was combined with an indifference that had made 
it very difficult for the president to rally public support. Publicly, 
leading Republicans on the committee spoke of principle and of the 
necessity of doing one's duty without regard to the polls' verdict. 
Rep. Henry Hyde of Illinois, the committee's 74-year-old chairman, 
urged his colleagues to ``vote for our honor, which is the only thing 
we get to take with us to the grave.'' A similar tack was taken by 
Rep. Bob Inglis, a South Carolina Republican, in his own 10-minute 
statement. ``Thank goodness we're not a pure democracy,'' he said, 
because that would mean the majority always ruled, on every issue. 
If Baptists outnumbered Roman Catholics, he continued, they could 
outlaw Mass if they wished to. But instead, Inglis said, ``we're a 
constitutional republic,'' whose legislators owe allegiance to that 
document and not to public whim. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>