<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981211.0346 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Responding cautiously to warnings about the potential for widespread 
computer disasters in 2000, the first global convention of government 
representatives to deal with the so-called millennium bug ended Friday 
with an informal endorsement of regional cooperation. The concluding 
summary, issued by Ahmad Kamal of Pakistan, the head of the U.N. task 
force on information technology, also recommended that an organization 
be developed to coordinate information-sharing and contingency plans. 
The meeting attracted delegates from more than 120 countries, including 
some that had not set up national projects to deal with the problem 
until the invitations went out. Some last-minute attendees, notably 
France, have expressed skepticism about the extent of the threat. 
The problem arises because many computers, software programs and electronically 
controlled machines use two digits to record the year, like 98 for 
1998. Some read 00 as 1900 instead of 2000; others cannot interpret 
00 as a valid date. Computers could miscalculate or crash as a result. 
Delegates and observers said the meeting, most of it closed to reporters, 
was unusually unvarnished for such a diplomatic setting. Ronald Ball, 
a British Telecom official representing the International Telecommunications 
Union, a U.N. agency, bluntly named countries that had failed to respond 
to requests for information about how their telephone operations are 
being updated. Some who were present said Ball cited not only developing 
countries but also wealthy nations like Italy and, despite Kamal's 
prominent role, Pakistan. Other speakers warned that Global 2000, 
a group of banks working on the problem, would begin publicizing its 
rankings of different countries' preparedness in February, which could 
cause investors to avoid countries that are lagging. Both the bluntness 
and the networking opportunities for international technocrats delighted 
the U.S. delegation, which was led by John Koskinen, chairman of the 
President's Council on Year 2000 Conversion, and included senior congressional 
leaders. ``We have two years' worth of work to do in a year's time,'' 
Koskinen said. Acknowledging that some failures are inevitable, the 
group spent much of the day discussing how nations can develop contingency 
plans. One suggestion was to set up ``SWAT teams'' that could move 
swiftly into the hardest hit areas with technical assistance. The 
common assumption is that most of the world is far behind the United 
States in preparing for 2000. The Gartner Group, a consulting firm 
based in Stamford, Conn., reported that at the end of September, the 
only nations joining the United States in the ``lowest risk'' category 
were Australia, Belgium, Bermuda, Britain, Canada, Denmark, Israel, 
the Netherlands, Switzerland and Sweden. Gartner projects that 15 
percent of businesses and government agencies in low-risk countries 
will suffer at least one computer failure that significantly disrupts 
operations. By contrast, more than 30 countries, including Russia 
and China, fall into the highest-risk category. Gartner projects that 
two-thirds or more of all businesses and government agencies in those 
countries will run into at least one major problem. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>