<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981211.0229 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Placards in New York City subway cars used to advertise a paternity 
testing service. If you called DAD-SEARCH in a certain area code, 
the people there would help you determine who fathered your children. 
A valuable service, certainly, but could they trace the DNA of your 
car? Around Detroit, incestuous relationships and unholy alliances 
produce some curious offspring. Consider the progeny of Cadillac, 
a grand patriarch of the industry: In the 80s, the dignified family 
crest appeared on a small car, the Cimarron, that obviously shared 
its genes with a lowbrow Chevy Cavalier. More recently, Cadillac became 
the proud parent of a bouncing baby named Catera, which was short, 
muscular and continental, not oversized, swaggering and American. 
An amorous European _ face it, a common Opel _ was the absentee father. 
Now Cadillac is showing its latest charge, a strapping brute named 
Escalade, which even in fancy clothes seems more blue-collar than 
blue blood. It is practically a dead ringer for the GMC Denali, a 
black-tie version of the Yukon sport utility. No wonder some people 
at GMC feel that after they went through labor, Cadillac carted the 
baby home from the nursery and disguised him with a stick-on mustache. 
It was a kidnapping born of desperation. Dealers were demanding a 
sport utility, and they wanted one fast, having watched legions of 
customers defect to offerings from Land Rover, Lexus and Lincoln. 
Frivolous as they may seem to many people, leather-swathed $40,000-plus 
trucks are hotter than Palm Springs in July. And Cadillac was slow 
to develop its own home-grown, car-based sport utility, which won't 
be available until the 2002 model year. So the division cast jealous 
eyes at the Denali _ originally intended to be the fanciest sport 
utility from General Motors' newly fancy truck division. Since GMC 
had done the heavy lifting, Cadillac came up with its version in just 
10 months. That is not as impressive as it may sound, since differences 
are few: the Cadillac has a new grille; fancier ``Nuance'' leather; 
a wood-trimmed steering wheel; a simplified link to Onstar, GM's driver-assistance 
service, and a longer warranty (four years instead of three). Escalate? 
Escapade? No, it's Escalade, pronounced ESS-kuh-lade and defined by 
Webster's as ``the act of scaling or climbing the walls of a fortified 
place using ladders.'' Very loosely translated, it means that unless 
you're involved in the NBA lockout, you may not be able to climb in 
or bail gracefully. And while these trucks _ the first in Cadillac's 
96 years of existence _ are perfectly capable of scaling heights, 
many will venture no farther off-road than the valet lane at the yacht 
club. The Escalade's capabilities, like those of most status-utility 
vehicles, will rarely be explored. That is too bad, for even if its 
background is working class, the Escalade has good bones. Under its 
expanses of plastic lower-body panels, it _ like the Yukon/Denali 
_ is essentially a Chevrolet Tahoe. These are still among the most 
pleasing big utilities to drive, even if their design is getting old. 
Stable and secure, with reasonably good feedback from the steering 
and a dampened but well-controlled ride, the Escalade handles well 
for its size. Of course, it is not highly maneuverable. Nor is it 
spirited; with nearly 5,600 pounds to lug around, GM's formidable 
5.7-liter V8 bogs down on steep hills or in high-speed passing moves. 
Lincoln's Navigator, meanwhile, is getting a modern 32-valve V8 that 
produces 300 horsepower and 355 foot-pounds of torque (versus Cadillac's 
255 and 330 foot-pounds). The Navigator also wins on seating (it handles 
up to eight, compared with five in the Escalade), and in sheer presence 
(though one could argue that the relatively understated Escalade has 
more class). Given the possibilities for schlocky styling, Cadillac 
deserves a commendation for its restraint. But integrated running 
boards and luggage racks cannot obscure the age of the Escalade's 
platform, which made its debut with the last-generation Chevy pickup 
of 1988. It is a point driven home by test drives of the all-new '99 
Chevy trucks, which are smoother, more responsive and nearly as comfortable 
_ at least for two people _ as the Escalade, and they cost $25,000 
less. These new trucks will make a great foundation for the next-generation 
Tahoe, Yukon, et al., of 2000, raising this question: Why buy the 
last of the old ones? Take the instrument panel, essentially the same 
one in the battered pickup driven by the guy who mows yards around 
the neighborhood. The latest trucks have a far better dashboard, with 
big, well-placed controls. Or consider the back-seat windows, which 
retract only six inches. (Why not just seal them permanently?) Or 
the express-down window control, which worked (like the Denali's) 
about 25 percent of the time. There are other touches typical of trucks 
but unbecoming of Cadillacs. The Escalade lacks an automatic climate 
control, a sunroof or steering-wheel buttons for the stereo or cruise. 
The captain's chairs adjust in many ways, but the controls _ five 
buttons, knobs and toggles along the outside of the seat bottom, plus 
a recliner lever _ are inconvenient and confusing. Nor do the seats 
``remember'' preferred settings _ a must-have for many luxury-level 
shoppers. The new Onstar setup, three buttons on the overhead console, 
is an improvement over the previous system, which was integrated into 
a cell phone handset. Push one button and you are connected to eagerly 
helpful young adults in Michigan. They know your name and location, 
thanks to satellite positioning, and will help you find your way, 
get to a gas station or restaurant, or contact local emergency services. 
Onstar is free for a year in the Escalade. (It costs about $1,200, 
plus $20 a month, in the Denali.) I still find it disconcerting to 
chat with a disembodied voice who knows my every move, but I can appreciate 
Onstar's value for someone like, say, my elderly mother. The push-button 
four-wheel-drive setup worked well, but the brakes, like those of 
other older-design GM trucks, were disappointingly tentative; the 
mushy, long-throw pedal felt like the Stairmaster at the gym. There 
are no options, just a choice of color. The price, $46,525, is $2,370 
over the Denali; some dealers have complained that they get a smaller 
price break on the Cadillac. Escalade leases are running as much as 
$100 a month over the Navigator. Both Denali and Escalade are more 
than competent, though neither is truly compelling, given their old 
designs and new competition. After waiting 96 years for a truck, Cadillac 
could have held out for more. INSIDE TRACK: A 5,500-pound finger in 
the dike. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>