<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981211.0312 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Although at heart a bookish economist, Guillermo Ortiz rose to become 
one of the most powerful people in Mexico and as finance minister 
won acclaim for steering the country through the fiscal equivalent 
of a category 5 hurricane. Now he is the center of a controversy that 
has brought Mexico's young democracy to a high-risk impasse and severely 
tested the ability of the country's Congress to resolve issues through 
the dickering and deal-making of party politics. A major opposition 
group, the conservative National Action Party, or PAN, has demanded 
that Ortiz resign as head of the Banco de Mexico, the central bank. 
The party's lawmakers charge that as finance minister he violated 
the Constitution in putting together a $61 billion emergency program 
to rescue sinking banks during the economic crisis of 1995. The legislators 
argue that he should have obtained congressional approval when he 
financed the bailout with government debt. Ortiz responded that the 
program had been vetted by government legal advisers before they were 
carried out and had been repeatedly reviewed by Congress since then. 
President Ernesto Zedillo and his party, the Institutional Revolutionary 
Party, or PRI, closed ranks around Ortiz last week, firmly if belatedly, 
saying he would not resign. At stake is Mexico's continued financial 
stability. The ups and downs of the long bailout debate, which began 
in February, have shaken the country's markets, left the banks in 
limbo and rattled the nerves of international investors. The discussions 
have tied up the Congress for weeks, even pushing aside deliberations 
about the 1999 federal budget, which must be approved by Tuesday. 
Although the fight over Ortiz is couched in high-toned legal arguments, 
it is driven by plain old politics. The National Action Party has 
drawn up an ambitious proposal to reorganize the bailout program, 
which is believed by many taxpayers to have rescued crooked bankers 
at public expense. To pass the proposal, the party's lawmakers have 
been forced into an uneasy alliance with the governing party, which 
has the largest delegation in the lower house of Congress. But anxious 
to avoid appearing to voters as a handmaiden to a government party 
they consider corrupt, the National Action Party wants to exact a 
political price from Zedillo. It wants Ortiz's head, and the party's 
legislators say they will not even vote for their own bailout solution 
if they do not get it. The lawmakers' price is high indeed. If Zedillo 
lets Ortiz fall, he will tacitly admit that he also was at fault in 
the bailout, acknowledging an offense that would be impeachable were 
the president not protected by the Constitution from prosecution while 
in office. In addition, Ortiz, who is admired on Wall Street for his 
hard-headed approach, is the first official to start a full term as 
head of the central bank since it was endowed with new independence 
in 1994 in legislation written, interestingly enough, by the National 
Action Party. Under the new law, the president must open an impeachment 
trial against Ortiz to remove him, something he is not about to do. 
``No one is questioning my performance as head of the Banco de Mexico,'' 
Ortiz said in an interview. ``This is not about me; it is about preserving 
the autonomy of the central bank.'' One official familiar with the 
president's thinking said: ``Losing Ortiz would send a terrible message 
of weakness. It would signal the markets that the government bows 
to populist demands.'' Ortiz, who is 50, is an unlikely figure to 
provoke such a dramatic standoff. Trained at Stanford University, 
he is an economic pragmatist who never adopted the lordly manner of 
past finance ministers. But his career has been clouded by spectacular 
scandals involving Mexicans who bought banks from the government during 
a privatization campaign in the early 1990s. Ortiz was chairman of 
the committee that oversaw the sale of 18 banks. But three buyers 
_ Carlos Cabal Peniche, Angel Isidoro Rodriguez Saez and Jorge Lankenau 
Rocha _ misused the banks so badly that they now face criminal-fraud 
charges amounting to hundreds of millions of dollars. ``The government 
doesn't want to admit its responsibility,'' said Gerardo Buganza, 
a National Action lawmaker. ``It is just caprice on the part of President 
Zedillo to keep the man who did it wrong the first time.'' 
</TEXT>
</DOC>