<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981211.0302 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
A careworn President Clinton once more expressed regret for the actions 
that have brought him to the brink of impeachment and, for the first 
time in public, invited Congress to censure him. But on Capitol Hill, 
the Republican leadership rejected pleas for a vote on a resolution 
of presidential censure, insisting that he must face a floor vote 
on articles of impeachment approved by the House Judiciary Committee. 
Clinton walked slowly from the Oval Office to the Rose Garden at 4:11 
p.m. Friday to acknowledge his shame and to state his willingness 
to accept the rebuke and censure of Congress for his ``errors of word 
and deed.'' His face lined with apparent anguish, the president spoke 
for four minutes, apologizing for the torment to which he has subjected 
his family and the nation. ``Mere words cannot fully express the profound 
remorse I feel for what our country is going through, and for what 
members of both parties in Congress are now forced to deal with,'' 
Clinton said. ``These past months have been a tortuous process of 
coming to terms with what I did. I understand that accountability 
demands consequences, and I'm prepared to accept them. ``Painful though 
the condemnation of the Congress would be, it would pale in comparison 
to the consequences of the pain I have caused my family. There is 
no greater agony,'' the president said. He refused to respond to questions 
shouted by reporters after he finished speaking and strode silently 
back through the West Wing colonnade to his office. He had spoken 
as the Judiciary Committee prepared to vote on the first article of 
impeachment. Many panel members had left the hearing room to watch 
his remarks on televisions in staff offices, but they returned quickly 
to begin casting their votes. Nine minutes after his remarks concluded, 
the Judiciary Committee began the roll call on the first of four articles 
of impeachment, accusing him of false statements under oath before 
a federal grand jury hearing testimony on the Monica Lewinsky affair. 
Clinton's words were designed to address calls from members of both 
parties in Congress that he forthrightly confess his sins and apologize 
in unambiguous language. But rather than admit to the essence of the 
charges against him _ perjury, obstruction of justice, abuse of power 
_ Clinton left the explanation for his actions to his lawyers, who 
spent two days before the Judiciary Committee this week making his 
case. ``Others are presenting my defense on the facts, the law and 
the Constitution,'' Clinton said. ``Nothing I can say now can add 
to that.'' He continued: ``What I want the American people to know, 
what I want the Congress to know, is that I am profoundly sorry for 
all I have done wrong in words and deeds. I never should have misled 
the country, the Congress, my friends or my family. Quite simply, 
I gave in to my shame.'' But Clinton's remarks, largely a new formulation 
of earlier regrets, fell short of what many in Congress were demanding 
and failed to sway any minds, judging by their comments after he spoke. 
He may even have hurt his case with some members who wanted an unqualified 
confession. Rep. Bob Franks, a moderate Republican from New Jersey, 
said before the president spoke that he was waiting to hear what the 
president would say before deciding how to vote on impeachment. Franks, 
who is not a member of the Judiciary Committee, said after Clinton 
spoke that he was disappointed that the president had not admitted 
breaking the law. ``What was needed from the president today was an 
admission, not contrition,'' Franks said in a statement. ``The House 
Judiciary Committee has laid out a compelling case that the president 
committed perjury. Unless the president comes forward soon and admits 
his guilt, I am prepared to vote for articles of impeachment charging 
him with perjury.'' But a Democratic opponent of impeachment said 
that the president had accomplished one critical task that could help 
persuade members that censure, rather than impeachment and removal 
from office, was the appropriate penalty for his conduct. ``He put 
to rest that he is treating this proceeding in a cavalier manner,'' 
said Rep. Rick Boucher, D-Va., a member of the Judiciary panel. ``The 
sincerity was clear. It is obvious the president understands he has 
behaved wrongfully and will suffer the consequences.'' Clinton weighed 
for several days whether to talk to Congress and the public about 
the impeachment votes, deciding only this afternoon that he would 
speak. He rejected suggestions from some underlings that he go further 
in confessing misconduct. His lawyers have consistently refused to 
admit that the president lied under oath or broke other laws, fearing 
it would make him liable to criminal prosecution after he leaves office. 
A senior White House official said that those who are demanding that 
Clinton admit to illegal acts have already decided to vote for impeachment. 
Such an admission would not only subject him to legal jeopardy but 
would be politically futile, the official said. The president reviewed 
his comments with John Podesta, White House chief of staff, and with 
Gregory Craig, special counsel who is coordinating the president's 
impeachment defense, just before facing the cameras. The president 
departs for the Middle East early Saturday morning and wanted to address 
the matter before leaving Washington for the four-day journey, according 
to aides. ``We wanted to do it before the trip so it won't bedevil 
him while he is in Israel,'' said one senior White House official. 
``He is just loath to talk about it on foreign soil.'' The aide said 
the president did not expect immediately to change any impeachment 
votes with his remarks. But he hoped to ``freeze'' opinion while he 
was gone, leaving open the option of a second, more forceful appeal 
to undecided members of Congress when he returns late Tuesday. The 
House is scheduled to begin debate on the Judiciary Committee impeachment 
report on Thursday. Near the end of his remarks, Clinton cited four 
lines from Edward FitzGerald's translation of ``The Rubaiyat of Omar 
Khayyam'' as capturing his regrets. ```The moving finger writes and, 
having write, moves on. Nor all your piety nor wit shall lure it back 
to cancel half a line, nor all your tears wash out a word of it,''' 
the president read. ``So nothing _ not piety, nor tears, nor wit, 
nor torment _ can alter what I have done. I must make my peace with 
that,'' Clinton said with a bite of his lower lip and a note of resignation. 
``I must also be at peace with the fact that the public consequences 
of my actions are in the hands of the American people and their representatives 
in Congress,'' Clinton added. ``Should they determine that my errors 
of word and deed require their rebuke and censure, I am ready to accept 
that.'' 
</TEXT>
</DOC>