<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981211.0327 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
With a towering $41.5 billion bailout from the International Monetary 
Fund in the offing, world leaders and economists nervously scrutinized 
Brazil last week as its Congress faced an important vote on cutting 
pension deficits. But not everybody in Congress was thinking of reform. 
Unlike the case last year, when the Asian collapse prompted instant 
total congressional cooperation, the government of President Fernando 
Henrique Cardoso, whose coalition grew more fractious after recent 
elections, faces a tougher fight to push through unpopular economic 
measures. As the vote on the pension approached, some coalition allies 
jostled for Cabinet posts. Others fielded calls from opponents of 
the bill. One hundred additional legislators stayed away. When the 
unexpected defeat came, the nose dive in financial markets was instant, 
reminding Brazilians that the benefit of the doubt so readily granted 
to their enormous economy a year ago had been exhausted. Brazil is 
under immense pressure to convince investors that it can streamline 
its government to reduce its dependence on outside financing. A month 
ago the country seemed to be hovering near the brink of collapse and 
threatening to pull down the hemisphere with it. More than $30 billion 
flew from the foreign reserves, as investors who had been focusing 
on the potential for growth instead looked at the government budget 
deficit, swollen to 8 percent of the gross national product, and its 
debt of $530 billion. For economists and others the vote on Dec. 3 
highlighted the difficulties that Cardoso faces in his quest to slash 
spending and the variety of factions his administration will have 
to court. Chastened by the defeat, the government lobbied hard to 
win congressional approval for a measure to increase pension contributions 
from charities and small businesses. Although the private pension 
system's troubles are minor compared with the cavernous deficit in 
the public retirement system, the victory showed that the government 
could pick up the thread of change that it had dropped the week before. 
Financial analysts acknowledged that they might have overreacted to 
the congressional setback. The Sao Paulo stock market climbed back 
from the 8.8 percent ditch that it fell into the day after the defeat 
of the pension bill. But investors and economists also described the 
stock plunge as inevitable. It corrected a surge of unrealistic enthusiasm 
that followed the IMF commitment to Brazil and priced in the political 
uncertainties that investors had initially overlooked. In national 
elections two months ago government-allied parties increased their 
representation in Congress. But the new allies represented a wide 
range of interests that will force the government to make greater 
concessions to win support. Political analysts say the pension bill 
failed because the government, overly confident, neglected the legwork 
to rally support. The administration also packed too much into one 
measure, focusing on active and retired government workers along with 
other groups because of time pressure. ``This was not the classical 
opposition-led defeat but something that resulted from confusion and 
discontent within the government's own ranks,'' the chief equities 
strategist for Banco Icatu, Rodrigo Fiaes, wrote in a report about 
the vote. The bill would have raised pension costs for government 
workers who earned more than $960 a month and forced government retirees 
to contribute for the first time. It would have also stripped workers 
unemployed for long periods of an array of government protections, 
including accident, maternity, death and retraining benefits. Given 
the deepening recession, which is producing Brazil's worst unemployment 
in 15 years, the measure was bitterly attacked, underscoring the difficulty 
that the government will have in winning approval for austerity measures 
as hardships worsen. ``If you add together the ambition of the allied 
parties and the social crisis in Brazil, you're going to have a very 
explosive situation for the government,'' said Marcello Deda, leader 
of the opposition Workers' Party in the lower chamber of Congress. 
The tension erupted again this week, as the powerful president of 
the Senate, Antonio Carlos Magalhaes, offended that he had not been 
consulted, blocked Cardoso's efforts to convene a special session 
of Congress during the holidays to consider extending a tax on financial 
transactions and other austerity measures. The decision, Magalhaes 
told reporters in Brasilia, ``did not go through me.'' ``And a decision 
about an extraordinary session that doesn't go through me is worth 
nothing,'' the senator added. At the same time he pledged to help 
advocates of land reform who sought his support in blocking $600 million 
in budget cuts that would affect land distribution to the poor. Social 
Security Minister Waldeck Ornelas said the bill that Congress rejected 
last week would be presented again in February, when a new session 
convenes. Last month, before the IMF package was announced, the government 
won a significant victory toward trimming Social Security for public 
workers by establishing minimum retirement ages and a pension ceiling 
of $960 a month. Traditionally their generous retirement system guarantees 
benefits equal to a worker's highest salary for as long as he or she 
lives. It has been fueling a pension deficit that experts expect will 
exceed $40 billion next year, even with complete success for the changes, 
whose savings will be fully realized only in later years. This week 
the government was more successful. It neutralized a cluster bomb 
of measures to trim government pension benefits that had again been 
crammed into a single bill and successfully negotiated with the Workers' 
Party to win support. The government also agreed to weaken elements 
of the bill to counter opposition from legislators who draw tax advantages 
for private hospitals and schools that they own under the current 
rules. The bill this week would limit Social Security exemptions for 
nonprofit organizations, increase pension contributions by small businesses 
and raise pension costs for workers in risky and onerous jobs. Congressional 
sources estimated that the plan would bring in $1 billion in revenues 
next year. With the victory the government has so far won approval 
in Congress for measures that should supply more than $6 billion of 
the $23.5 billion in savings promised for next year. It remains for 
Congress to extend and increase a tax on financial transactions, which 
the government expects will raise $5.8 billion next year. The Congress 
would also have to pass the reduced budget, which Cardoso is counting 
on for $7 billion in savings. And it has to vote on the guidelines 
for laying off tens of thousands of Civil Service workers. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>