<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981211.0205 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
The European Union has always had grand plans, and great trouble agreeing 
on how to carry them through. It will start a new common currency 
to rival the dollar on world markets, the euro, next month. It has 
ambitions for a European foreign and security policy, with military 
means to back it up. In the next decade, it intends to take in formerly 
Communist countries, swelling membership from 15 nations to 20 or 
25, with a population and economy far larger than those of the United 
States. But what leaders of this supposedly united Europe are doing 
at a summit meeting here this weekend is squabbling, as they have 
been for years, about how much expansion will cost. The argument is 
about both money and the efficiency of procedures assuring vetoes 
of the original three small members of the 1957 European Economic 
Community _ Belgium, Luxembourg, Netherlands _ over decisions by the 
original three large ones, Germany, France and Italy. France and Germany 
both agree that without changes to cumbersome decision-making procedures, 
and to fat agricultural subsidies designed when France was a weak 
agricultural economy and Germany was a powerful industrial one, expansion 
will lead to political paralysis and financial chaos. European leaders 
tried but failed to agree on change at a similar meeting in Amsterdam 
in the summer of 1997. Now, on the eve of the emergence of the euro, 
officials said Friday that the most they expected to do here was to 
chart a course for more negotiations and hope for a breakthrough by 
next March, when a summit meeting is planned. ``Willingness to compromise 
and concessions by all the member states in all areas are absolutely 
necessary,'' President Jacques Chirac of France and Chancellor Gerhard 
Schroeder of Germany agreed before the meeting. But if they meant 
that Prime Minister Tony Blair should consider a cut in the British 
rebate from the European Union budget that Margaret Thatcher negotiated 
for Britain in 1984, they were disappointed Friday. Blair made absolutely 
clear that Britain intended to keep every penny of the rebate, which 
brought Britain's contribution to the nearly $100 million European 
Union budget down by $2.4 billion this year to $13.6 billion. ``It 
is fair,'' he said as he arrived here. His spokesman, Alistair Campbell, 
added, ``The point is, it is not negotiable.'' And France itself has 
no intention of making any changes to the $45 billion European agricultural 
support system that would require it to pay subsidies out of its own 
national budget. The agricultural policy now consumes nearly half 
the total European budget. The European Union Executive Commission 
in Brussels has proposed cuts of up to 30 percent in meat subsidies 
and 20 percent in grain subsidies to farmers before a new round of 
talks next year with the United States and other countries on agricultural 
policies. Even with those cuts and with member states taking over 
$5.85 billion of the costs of the agricultural policy, the Commission 
predicts that its cost to the European Union will rise to nearly $59 
billion by 2006, after the first few Eastern European countries come 
in. The system would become unworkable, the French agree, if changes 
of some kind are not implemented before Poland, with tens of thousands 
of inefficient small farms, becomes a member. But they have pronounced 
the Commission's proposals unacceptable. In the past, Germany always 
ended up coughing up money that France and other smaller, less wealthy 
states were unwilling to provide. But Schroeder now says that it is 
highly unfair that Germany pays 26 percent of the European Union budget, 
putting in nearly $13 billion more than it gets back from Brussels 
in agricultural, regional development and other European funds. ``Germany 
is being asked to do too much if fairness in contributions is not 
on the agenda,'' Schroeder said. As France's foreign minister, Hubert 
Vedrine put it recently, ``It looks insoluble.'' But, he said, the 
European leaders had no choice but to try. Not all was gloomy as they 
met Friday in the vast and ornate rooms of the Hofburg Palace, the 
seat of the vanished Austro-Hungarian empire. The european commissioner 
for economics, Yves-Thibault de Silguy, said that leaders this morning 
congratulated themselves on having created 1.7 million jobs in Europe 
in 1998, reducing the European-wide unemployment level to just below 
10 percent. And Europe, former Chancellor Helmut Kohl of Germany told 
the leaders Friday, should only partly be about wrangling over which 
countries should pay how much and how many Commissioners they should 
be able to name to Brussels. More important, he said, should be the 
political vision of Europe. The people in the east and southeast of 
Europe expected the west to keep its promise to recognize them, too, 
as a part of Europe, he said. The leaders named Kohl ``Honorary Citizen 
of Europe'' at lunch Friday in gratitude for his work toward European 
unity during the 16 years he was chancellor before Schroeder defeated 
him in September. He thanked them but said he had no wish to be treated 
as a monument. ``You know what happens to monuments when the ceremony 
is over,'' he said. ``The birds sit on them and do things.'' 
</TEXT>
</DOC>