<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981211.0183 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
I confess to a general dislike of flowering plants used as decoration 
for the winter holidays. Possibly this is because I've always lived 
in a temperate zone with four distinct seasons. Winter is by rights 
the bloomless one. December and January belong to evergreens and berried 
branches, to sprays of laurel and magnolia leaves where those plants 
can be grown, and to bowls of colorful fruit. Potted azaleas and narcissus 
are acceptable in February and March, when they anticipate spring, 
instead of mimicking it. In December, they strike me as anachronisms. 
I sympathize with the floral industry's desire to cash in on the buying 
season by persuading consumers that cyclamen should be a holiday tradition 
and that chrysanthemums aren't just for Halloween and Thanksgiving 
anymore. But azaleas blooming next to the Christmas tree or menorah 
make as much sense to me as a balsam wreath on the front door on Memorial 
Day. The poinsettia is a forgivable cliche. It's been around so long 
that it's practically synonymous with holly and pine cones, and in 
any case it isn't linked with any other season or occasion. No one 
runs out for a pot of poinsettias to brighten the picnic table for 
the Fourth of July. That might happen one day, though, if poinsettia 
breeders keep extending the color range beyond the traditional and 
appropriate red. There are now pastel pink and primrose yellow poinsettias, 
and mottled poinsettias in summery colors like hot pink and salmon. 
The colors are not unattractive, and there are those who prefer them. 
To me, a pastel poinsettia has as much character as a pale, out-of-season 
strawberry, which is another thing that should never be brought into 
the house outside its natural time. Amaryllis are tolerable as holiday 
plants, preferably ones with pure white or bold red flowers, which 
at least enhance the hues of the season. These bulb-grown plants are 
so popular as hostess gifts that it would not be wise to actively 
dislike them, even if that were possible. Amaryllis are too striking 
to dislike, with their stout stalks topped by a cluster of lilylike 
blooms. Technically, what is sold as amaryllis is in the species Hippeastrum. 
The only true amaryllis is A. belladonna, a hardy perennial that sends 
up straplike leaves in the spring, dies to the ground, and then reappears 
in the autumn as leafless stalks topped by pink blossoms. I've heard 
it called both resurrection lily and surprise lily. I think of the 
Christmas-season amaryllis as appropriate for the winter because it 
has no normal outdoor season in my Pennsylvania climate. If it were 
hardy enough to survive as a perennial, I might prefer to see it in 
bloom in May or June. There is one holiday bloomer that I like. It's 
the Christmas cactus, which is not really a cactus but a type of epiphyllum 
that is native to tropical rain forests. The species is properly Schlumbergera, 
for a botanist named Schlumberger who saw it hanging from the trees 
in Brazil and presumably recognized its ultimate worth as a holiday 
decoration, but it's usually identified as Zygocactus. What I like 
about the Christmas cactus is that it's around all year and blooms, 
with a little assistance, from late November through January. It's 
an easy-to-raise houseplant that can be parked outdoors during the 
summer. Its fleshy leaves are flat and scalloped at the edges, and 
grow in jointed segments, like squashed pop-beads. It spreads outwardly 
and drapes, and can grow to prodigious size. The flowers look like 
elongated roses and form at the ends of the stems. Usually they are 
deep pink, fuchsia, white or red. A Christmas cactus needs long spells 
of darkness to impel flower formation. In northern regions, where 
day length naturally shortens to fewer than 10 or 11 hours in autumn 
and early winter, it will bloom at the right time without any help 
from the gardener. Where days stay long later into the season, the 
cactus should be put into a dark room or closet each evening around 
5 and brought out again at 7 in the morning (or whatever suits your 
schedule; the cactus won't care, as long as it's 14 hours), starting 
in early October. By mid-November, the flower buds should be formed, 
and then the cactus can stay out of the closet all day. There are 
species that don't require quite so much darkness to form flowers, 
and will bloom earlier. These are known, appropriately enough, as 
Thanksgiving cactuses. The most common cause of failure with a Christmas 
cactus is too much faith in its name. It isn't really a cactus but 
a forest plant. It requires moisture, but not too much. It should 
be planted in well-drained potting soil, but not the sandy mix that 
true cactuses appreciate. A Christmas cactus enjoys misting, or having 
its pot set on a tray of wet pebbles. Direct sunlight is a bit much 
for a Christmas cactus, too. Bright indirect light is fine, but a 
Christmas cactus in the south window will likely shrivel and develop 
blemishes on its leaves. That's sunburn. If you summer it outdoors, 
it should be put in a spot protected from direct sun. Properly cared 
for, a Christmas cactus can live for 20 years, and it's easy to start 
new plants from stems broken off and rooted in damp vermiculite or 
sand. That's a great deal more than one can say about a potted azalea. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>