<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981211.0412 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
In a late attempt to salvage what is left of the National Basketball 
Association season, commissioner David Stern and Billy Hunter, the 
executive director of the players union, will meet face to face Saturday. 
It will be the second time in three days that the principal negotiators 
in the league's labor dispute have convened in a private setting. 
Thursday, internal bargaining teams met privately for five hours in 
New York. Friday, neither league official nor union officials were 
commenting on the negotiations. But a person familiar with the talks 
said that although little progress was achieved in the meeting, the 
fact that they were meeting at all represented a positive development. 
``It's premature to say what's going to happen, other than the parties 
are trying to explore some possibilities,'' said the person with knowledge 
of the negotiations, who spoke on condition of anonymity. ``It's overly 
optimistic to say there's momentum, but it is certainly much better 
than the time we weren't meeting.'' Whether progress was made that 
could lead to an end to the 164-day lockout and a belated start to 
the season was unclear, but both parties have apparently agreed to 
stop the public posturing and make their bargaining sessions private. 
NBA deputy commissioner Russ Granik said the two sides had pledged 
secrecy behind closed doors. Several regular participants in the discussions 
on both sides were not informed of Thursday's meeting until after 
the two sides adjourned. The approach represents a definite shift 
away from the public settings in which the two sides have met with 
each other and then met with the news media after each session. Any 
hope emerging from the previous talks disintegrated within days. ``The 
public nature of these discussions has been a detriment to a solution 
so far,'' said Leigh Steinberg, an agent who represents six NBA players 
and several of the National Football League's marquee quarterbacks. 
``Any good negotiator knows that a quiet and relaxed setting, with 
no time restraints and outside pressure, is much more likely to produce 
a positive result. This current climate, where each meeting is followed 
by the press and all the parties comment when they walk out of the 
room, doesn't advance the cause of the settlement. I think what they're 
doing now is more helpful to the process.'' Saturday's meeting between 
Stern and Hunter may also include chief outside counsels from both 
sides; Granik, and the union president, Patrick Ewing _ all of whom 
met privately Thursday afternoon. If detailed discussions over proposals 
strike a chord of optimism, full bargaining teams will most likely 
meet in New York next week. With seven more games wiped out Friday 
night, the league has lost a total of 271 games. With an expected 
three to four weeks needed to sign free agents and draft picks as 
well as a training camp, another 200 games may be scrapped even after 
an agreement is reached. Thursday's meeting was the first contact 
between the league and the union since Dec. 3, when a 10{-hour session 
provided more pessimism than encouragement for the season to be saved. 
That meeting was the first one since Nov. 20, when both sides reported 
progress following a lengthy session. The owners have rejected three 
requests from the union to have the talks sent to mediation. With 
Tuesday's cancellation of the All-Star Game, scheduled for Feb. 14 
in Philadelphia, concern over a lost season continued to grow. Whether 
the sides can reach a resolution in the next few weeks and prevent 
the most devastating labor disaster in American sports history remains 
to be seen. But, as one league official said: ``At least we're trying. 
Maybe this new approach we're taking will make us understand each 
other a little better.'' Steinberg, who said he is behind Hunter and 
the union, said: ``The tendency in large groups is to have the participants 
deliver set speeches, to argue philosophical positions and to speak 
in the abstract. And that form of negotiating, where the participants 
are extremely anxious to impress their peers or not to embarrass themselves, 
is not an ideal negotiating model. ``The key to effective negotiating 
is to get two parties _ who are honestly communicating what their 
goals and priorities are _ to move into a cooperative paradigm.'' 
</TEXT>
</DOC>