<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981211.0340 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
The New York Times said in an editorial for Saturday, Dec. 12: It 
is hard to fathom what gain Bill Clinton thought he could achieve 
Friday in restating his remorse over the Monica Lewinsky case while 
still dodging the core issue of his deceitful testimony under oath. 
The disconnection between Clinton's appearance at the White House 
and the legal and constitutional charges bearing down on him in Congress 
could not have been clearer. Moments after he once again failed to 
acknowledge that he had lied under oath, House Judiciary Committee 
Republicans approved the first of four articles of impeachment on 
the panel agenda. The article revolves around alleged perjury. The 
strictly partisan vote was a disservice to the country and an embarrassment 
to the committee. If the House leaders in turn remain so bent on impeachment 
that they try to block a vote on censure on the floor, the best hope 
of forcing their hand rests with moderate Republicans, the group that 
will determine whether Clinton becomes only the second president to 
be impeached by the House. These lawmakers had been fairly shouting 
across the capital all week that Clinton needed to reconcile himself 
with the law if he hoped to prevent impeachment. Instead the president 
spoke of reconciling himself with the American people, while leaving 
his aides and lawyers, as he said, to deal with the facts, the law 
and the Constitution. Clinton at this point seems trapped in the legal 
and political universe he and his lawyers have created. It allows 
for contrition and apology, but denies the unmistakable offense of 
lying under oath before a federal grand jury and in his testimony 
in the Paula Jones civil suit. Gregory Craig and Charles Ruff poked 
a bit at this obstacle in their appearances before the Judiciary Committee, 
but no one seems willing or able to push it aside. Clinton may be 
betting that the House will blink first, or he may be waiting to make 
one final, more confessional statement closer to the House vote late 
next week. It is even possible that he is prepared to let the case 
go to the Senate with the expectation that he is unlikely to be convicted 
and removed from office. But his primary motivation seems to be protecting 
himself against criminal prosecution when he leaves the White House. 
That is a natural concern, but it ought not to be the decisive consideration 
for a leader who is expected to place the interests of the country 
above all else. If Clinton genuinely wishes to move ahead with the 
nation's business, he must do his part to secure an end to this matter 
short of impeachment and a potentially long and divisive trial in 
the Senate. He declared his readiness to accept congressional censure, 
but could not bring himself to say the words that could produce that 
outcome. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>