<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981211.0291 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
The little girl became Nepal's official living goddess the day before 
she turned 4, a grandly ceremonial event that made her parents enormously 
proud, for a divine spirit was about to enter their daughter and she 
would be worshipped by the nation, carried around on a gilded chariot 
and bowed down to, even by the king. But now, seven years later, her 
parents, Amrit and Namita Shakya, are sorry they allowed their girl 
to be plucked from obscurity and turned into the ornately costumed 
and fussily pampered goddess, the royal kumari. By custom, the child 
has lived away from her family in a famous 18th-century house in central 
Katmandu, leaving this cocoon only 13 times a year, during festivals. 
Approaching puberty, she will soon begin to menstruate, which is believed 
to be a sign that her godly power is departing and her time as the 
kumari is over. Her parents expect that upon returning home she will 
be an unhappy, uneducated and unappreciative adolescent ex-deity. 
``Knowing what we know now, we would never have agreed to give her 
away,'' Shakya, an unemployed driver, said. ``She cannot properly 
read or write. She will have to start school far behind her grade 
level. She is a very distant child now, like a stranger to her own 
family. A child should not be raised away from her parents, even the 
royal kumari.'' Adoration of the kumari is one of the epic traditions 
in this mountainous nation of 21 million. The girl is said to be the 
embodiment of Taleju, a Hindu goddess who befriended an ancient Nepalese 
king. In the most common version of the story, the king once looked 
lustfully at the beautiful goddess. She took great offense and vanished, 
vowing to reappear only in the less seductive body of a virgin child 
from a lower-caste family. By practice the kumari has always been 
chosen from the Shakya caste, whose members customarily labored as 
goldsmiths and often use the caste name as their surname. Families 
eagerly tendered their daughters, and the priests from the royal palace 
and the Taleju temple had their pick of girls aged 3 to 5. The selectors 
want a child in perfect health with unblemished skin, big eyes and 
a full set of teeth. At the same time, the royal astrologer consults 
the stars to see which child's horoscope is in harmony with the king's. 
Then, in one final trial, the chosen girl's composure is tested as 
she is made to walk on bloody ground through recently severed buffalo 
heads, their eye sockets lighted with candles. In recent years, however, 
Shakya families have not been so willing to come forward with their 
daughters. The parents of the past two kumaris say the selection committee 
came to their homes, more to search for volunteers than to sift among 
aspirants. ``They tried very hard to convince me,'' Shakya said. ``They 
said my daughter would be looked after and this was a good thing. 
It was an honor for me. It commands respect. And for my daughter it 
meant she would be a goddess to all.'' But he began doubting his decision 
as soon as he took the child into Kumari Ghar, a three-story red-brick 
house built around a small courtyard near the old palace. Elaborate 
wood carvings _ peacocks, serpents, gods _ adorn the doorways and 
windows. The front entrance is flanked by statues of two white lions 
with bared teeth. ``Obviously, when I left her I could see she was 
unhappy, but she shed no tears until after I was gone,'' said Shakya, 
37, looking as if he had been ambushed by an unwelcome memory. ``They 
told us she wept for hours afterward. I had such mixed feelings. I 
had to keep reminding myself that my daughter was being made a goddess.'' 
A man named Juju Bhai oversees the young goddess' life. For generations, 
members of his wife's family have been the custodians of Kumari Ghar. 
They support themselves and maintain the property with donations left 
in a courtyard collection box or at the kumari's slippered feet. The 
girl's daily routine is quite restricted. She is allowed playmates, 
but no games can take her outside or risk the opening of a wound _ 
a show of blood that would prematurely empty her of divine power. 
Her diet is spared anything that might upset her stomach. For a few 
hours, the kumari's forehead is painted in red and her eyes are surrounded 
by black circles that tail off toward her ears like calligraphy. Supplicants 
are permitted to visit her, beseeching a silent blessing. Tourists 
gather in the courtyard, hoping to glimpse her from a designated window. 
Her custodians see to it that she makes an occasional appearance. 
The Shakyas, who have two other children, are allowed to call on their 
daughter occasionally. While Shakya tries to go once a week, his wife 
finds the meetings too painful. ``We are parents in name only, and 
this will be true until our daughter comes back home,'' she said. 
They have quarreled with Juju Bhai about the girl's education. Nepal 
is a constitutional monarchy, and though King Birendra has limited 
power, the oversight of Kumari Ghar is still a matter handled by the 
palace. At a festival in May, as her daughter sat in a throne on her 
chariot, Mrs. Shakya squeezed through the guards and handed the king 
a petition, asking that the goddess be given more tutoring. A royal 
secretary has pledged to look into the situation. ``There is no arrangement 
for proper schooling,'' said Pragya Devi, the mother of the previous 
kumari. ``My daughter Rashmila was not prepared to have a life after 
her time as a goddess was over. She had to sit by the side of her 
younger brother, enrolled in the second grade at the age of 12. This 
was a very painful thing.'' Until recently education for any girl, 
including a goddess, was not much of an issue here. But Nepal, however 
much it clings to familiar rituals, is modernizing. In an urban capital 
like Katmandu, most parents want their daughters to have careers. 
``As long as Rashmila was a goddess, people respected her, but once 
she retired, it was like being discarded,'' Mrs. Devi said. ``No one 
cared what became of her.'' Rashmila, now 18, is studying for exams 
that might win her a place in college. She is a shy, serious young 
woman who at times has complained of depression. The adjustment to 
post-Kumari life has been demanding, but unlike her mother she has 
few regrets. She recalls how strong she felt with the divine power 
within her. ``I never sneezed,'' she said. ``I never once had a fever. 
I was truly someone special. I met the king, and the king bowed down. 
It was a good time for me. I can remember playing with my dolls and 
toys in a spacious room. The caretakers were like a second set of 
parents. They gave me all I needed and restrained me in only one way. 
``I could never leave.'' 
</TEXT>
</DOC>