<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981211.0300 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Broadway musicals that explore daring subjects always push the envelope 
of acceptability but with varying results: some find their audiences, 
others don't. Of the ones that don't, some just aren't done well and 
would fail no matter what the subject matter. Others electrify their 
audiences, even get good notices, but still fail at the box office 
because of an underlying uneasiness on the part of the public. This 
was my experience with ``Side Show.'' Reflecting on my beginnings 
with ``Side Show,'' I recall being taken aback when Bill Russell (the 
show's book writer and lyricist) and Bobby Longbottom, (the director 
and choreographer) asked me to be the composer of a musical featuring 
the Siamese twins Daisy and Violet Hilton. Siamese twins? It seemed 
a rather bizarre and possibly risky subject, but I had admired Bill 
and Bobby's off-Broadway musical ``Pageant,'' in which beauty contestants 
were imaginatively and entertainingly portrayed by an all-male cast. 
Quite a feat. And after all, hadn't such a show as ``Kiss of the Spider 
Woman'' with its homosexuality in a South American jail cell, found 
its audience? And how about ``Rent'' and its East Village drug addicts, 
transvestites and AIDS victims? A solid hit. The three of us agreed 
that the Hilton sisters' story was well worth telling but would need 
to be handled with great sensitivity; would need to touch on issues 
like duality, compromise, conflict, exploitation, yearning, courage 
and love, and should examine who and what is ``normal.'' Bill and 
I began creating songs and recitative and soon realized we were mining 
a rich vein of possibilities. Far from being a problem for us, our 
offbeat subject propelled us, offering an endless stream of ideas. 
The experiment grew and became our shared culture. Once we had a first 
draft, Bill and Bobby and I arranged a rehearsed reading so that we 
could hear our show interpreted by actors. The veteran producer Emmanuel 
Azenberg attended and expressed interest. Our unconventional musical 
was being taken seriously by a producer. As we moved forward, we took 
pains to make the Hilton twins fully drawn human beings, much ``like 
everyone else'' (as they sing in Act I); to endow them with senses 
of humor like the real Daisy and Violet. We explored what we imagined 
to be the special intimacy between conjoined sisters, both in serious 
scenes and in lighthearted vaudeville numbers. We assiduously avoided 
eliciting pity for them. Azenberg produced a second reading for potential 
investors who laughed and cried in all the right places. In September 
1996, he and his investors produced a series of staged readings at 
the Richard Rogers Theater and the audiences went wild. Hundreds and 
hundreds of people were showing unbridled enthusiasm for our show, 
and naturally the creators and producers alike were greatly encouraged. 
We were pushing the envelope, and the results looked very exciting. 
A year later, we opened on Broadway to many excellent reviews, including 
those of Ben Brantley and Vincent Canby of The New York Times. Audiences 
were giving the show heartfelt standing ovations. Our publicity department 
was getting excellent press coverage on television and in print. How 
could we fail to catch on? We had proceeded carefully, step by step, 
nursing our unusual project over the course of more than five years 
since that first collaborators' meeting. It seemed like a winner . 
. . but then the box office just wouldn't get in step with our expectations. 
After all our work and careful planning, shock was setting in. Hindsight, 
as the saying goes, is 20/20. Now I and others can point to the lack 
of saturation advertising before the show's opening and to the absence 
of a well-financed contingency plan to respond to any unforeseen public-perception 
problems. We had gotten great reviews and excellent word of mouth. 
Going by conventional wisdom, this would have been enough. But too 
many potential theatergoers had the misconceived notion that our show 
was an unpleasant evening about freaks. We had failed to communicate 
that ``Side Show'' was an inspirational love story, a rags-to-riches 
story. Anything but a downer. I am convinced that ``risky'' material 
won't necessarily doom a show, but that not having a powerful advertising 
strategy will. As for the time I spent with Daisy and Violet, no regrets. 
They taught me a lot, and to borrow a phrase from them, they will 
never leave me. I recently attended a production of ``Side Show'' 
presented by TheaterWorks in Palo Alto, Calif, the show's first production 
since Broadway. Again, excellent reviews and enthusiastic audiences, 
and this time a sold-out box office (albeit helped by the theater's 
subscription base). Could it be that our envelope-pushing show still 
has a bright future? Maybe there's life in the old girls yet. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>