<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981211.0328 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
A 19-year-old college student sat alone with a computer as a commanding 
voice echoed through the windowless room. ``Now go to No. 5,'' the 
voice said. ``Find out what the weather is like in San Jose.'' The 
student was taking part in a test of the Go Network, Walt Disney Co.'s 
answer to Yahoo, America Online and all the other ``portals'' to the 
Internet _ entry points to a world of information, entertainment and 
commerce. Go wasn't going so well, however, at this late October test 
in Sunnyvale, Calif. As the student scowled, three young women behind 
a one-way mirror monitored each of her hesitant clicks of the mouse. 
It took her a long time to find the weather section on Go's crowded 
front page; then she was stumped, because she thought she needed to 
know San Jose's ZIP code. She could have determined the weather in 
Silicon Valley a lot more quickly by stepping outside. Disney hopes 
that it has gotten the bugs out of Go by now, especially since it 
is offering a preview of the site (go.com) to the public starting 
Dec. 14. While the company is already a major presence on the Internet 
_ with popular sites for sports fanatics (espn.com), news hounds (abcnews.com) 
and soap opera viewers (abc.com), among hundreds of others _ it is 
now making a bigger bet on cyberspace than any other media concern 
in the world. In a complex deal in June, Disney traded some Internet 
operations plus $90 million in cash for a 43 percent stake in Infoseek 
Corp., an also-ran Internet search engine company, which will run 
Go. Disney will funnel $156 million to Infoseek to promote the new 
Web site on ABC, which Disney owns, and on Disney's cable channels. 
Indeed, Disney will deploy everything from its cruise ships to its 
theme parks to trumpet Go, just as it stretched its every synergistic 
muscle for ``A Bug's Life,'' its current hit movie. Why bother? Disney 
is entering a crowded field in which big media companies have repeatedly 
foundered _ most notably its rival Time Warner, whose pioneering Pathfinder 
portal has struggled as more nimble Internet companies have vaulted 
ahead. At first glance, Disney's offering has little to distinguish 
it from the leading portal, Yahoo, which sets the standard for being 
fast, easy to use and loaded with handy features _ news, financial 
data, electronic mail, chat groups and the like. America Online incorporates 
those same features in the Internet access it provides to half the 
nation's wired homes, and it just agreed to buy Netscape Communications, 
largely for its popular Internet portal. Other rivals abound, including 
Excite, Lycos, Microsoft's MSN and Snap, which is backed by NBC. And 
given that hardly any of these businesses are profitable, Disney _ 
with so many opportunities in movies, television and theme parks _ 
could have found easier ways to get a return on its investment. Still, 
Disney chairman Michael Eisner has personally orchestrated much of 
the Go initiative, down to selecting its traffic-light logo. He concluded 
that Disney had no choice but to enter the fray. ``We want to be a 
relevant company,'' he said in an interview last week. ``I don't want 
to have our company be in the railroad business while people are flying 
overhead in airplanes.'' Contrary to much of the evidence so far, 
Eisner is betting that ``content'' _ the information and entertainment 
created by companies like Disney _ will give Go an edge over Yahoo 
and its kin, which dismiss content as a mere commodity, preferring 
to link users to information rather than originate it themselves. 
Though the user's first encounter with Go is a screen that _ quite 
purposely _ looks like Yahoo's, clicking on a link to ``news'' or 
``sports'' or ``kids'' leads directly to Disney-generated content. 
And every page _ along with every other Disney Web site _ links back 
to Go, in what the company hopes can become a largely self-contained 
cyberuniverse. Microsoft, America Online and others have reduced investments 
in original Web content. ``It's a very big bet to cast your lot with 
one group of content sites and assume what is good today will also 
be good tomorrow,'' said Jerry Yang, a co-founder of Yahoo. ``We have 
felt that it is important to stay independent.'' But Eisner argued 
that as the Internet matured, Disney's strengths would be more important. 
``As technology becomes comfortable, the product takes over,'' he 
said, comparing the Internet now to cable television in its early 
days. ``At first, the point was to improve the picture on your broadcast 
channels. Now it has turned into a product play: How good is the Disney 
Channel or the Discovery Channel?'' So far, however, analysts who 
have seen previews of Go say that despite a few nifty features, it 
does not seem to be anything special. ``I don't see Disney as an also-ran, 
given how much money they will throw at this,'' said Patrick Keane, 
an analyst with Jupiter Communications, a consulting firm in New York. 
``But I'm not sure how many users they can siphon from Yahoo or Excite.'' 
Finding the Pieces As much as Eisner now extols the Go Network, he 
was not always so enthusiastic. In March, he assembled a group of 
key advisers and executives at his home in Aspen, Colo., to make sense 
of what Disney should do on line. Portals were hot, and Disney didn't 
have one. Instead, it had focused its early Internet efforts on developing 
sites related to Disney content. Beginning in 1995, it has been building 
a bevy of family-oriented sites, accessible at Disney.com. In 1997, 
Disney bought part of Starwave, the Seattle company that created its 
ESPN site, from Paul Allen, the billionaire co-founder of Microsoft. 
It then had Starwave start ABCnews.com. Sitting in front of the fireplace 
at Eisner's spacious house, Jake Winebaum, 39, the ambitious head 
of Disney's Internet group, and Michael Slade, 41, Starwave's chairman, 
argued that without a portal, all Disney had built so far was at risk. 
``It became clear that if people's appetite for news and sports was 
satiated at the place their voyage was starting on the Internet, there 
would be fewer people coming to our sites,'' Winebaum said in a recent 
interview. They recommended that Disney buy Infoseek, which was only 
then beginning to recover from internal conflicts that had sapped 
its momentum in a rapidly changing market. Infoseek's new chief executive, 
Harry Motro, who had started CNN's Web site, realized that the company 
needed a big brother and was eager to sell out to Disney. But there 
was a problem. The $1 billion price tag _ inflated by the surging 
stock prices of Internet companies _ blew the lid off all the rigorous 
financial models that Disney uses to judge acquisitions. So at the 
Aspen meeting, Eisner rejected the deal. ``We have a problem overpaying 
for things,'' he explained later. ``Our company is selling at a real 
multiple of real earnings, so I've got to be careful.'' Instead, Starwave 
was assigned to build a portal from scratch. Through the spring, as 
other portal companies grew rapidly, Infoseek flirted with other possible 
partners, including Netscape. Winebaum kept pushing to find a way 
for Disney to buy a portal. Then Disney chief financial officer Thomas 
Staggs hit upon a way to gain control of Infoseek for less than $1 
billion. Disney had paid $82 million for 42 percent of Starwave, with 
the option to buy the rest of Allen's stake for about $162 million. 
But with the market for Internet companies so hot, Starwave was worth 
far, far more than $244 million. Why not come up with a trade? Ultimately, 
Disney gave Starwave _ and $90 million cash _ to Infoseek in return 
for 43 percent of Infoseek, a stake valued at about $900 million when 
the deal was announced in mid-June; Disney has the option to raise 
its stake to 50 percent. Infoseek promised to buy $165 million of 
advertising from Disney, with money Disney would lend to it. Most 
important, Disney and Infoseek agreed to build a new portal before 
the end of the year. Under Construction When Barak Berkowitz walked 
into a conference room at Infoseek's headquarters in Sunnyvale in 
late October, his jaw dropped at the sight of a 30-foot-long wall 
covered floor to ceiling with a grid of text, lines and little dots. 
The grid mapped out exactly what had been done and was yet to be done 
to complete the 30 separate features in the first version of the Go 
portal. ``This is awesome,'' said Berkowitz, general manager of the 
portal. He was impressed, not because of anything on the vast chart, 
but because for the first time someone had assembled all the information 
in one place. ``We're making 30 things for dinner, and we want to 
make sure everything is done and hot when the bell rings,'' said Sue 
LaChance, a former librarian, who is the project manager. ``And it's 
not like we have 30 ovens either.'' Much of the work was simply an 
attempt to match the features offered by other portals. For example, 
Go will have a personal-finance section, with financial analysis software 
developed by Starwave. Yet each new feature puts more strain on designers 
trying to keep the service accessible to novices, still the fastest-growing 
portion of the market. An Internet portal, after all, is a control 
panel to the online universe, with buttons, links and boxes that promise 
to deliver the canon of human knowledge, a personal relationship with 
every like-minded user and a catalog of all goods for sale anywhere. 
All this has to be designed for small computer monitors, without complex 
graphics that bog down slow modems, and with the 219 colors that Web 
browsers can reliably reproduce. And, oh yes, most users won't read 
any of the instructions printed on the screen. Commerce and Content 
Disney and Infoseek are proud of an innovation _ an organizational 
structure called ``follow me tabs'' _ that lets people switch among 
the main subdivisions of Go _ topics, shopping sites, local information, 
chat rooms, Internet searching _ and still see information related 
to the topic they are researching. At the top of the screen, looking 
like file-folder tabs, are buttons for each of these sections. Someone 
looking for sites about fishing, for example, could click the Community 
tab to find message boards with fishing discussions, the Shop tab 
to find fishing equipment stores and the Local tab to find fishing 
holes near them. Ultimately, it's the shopping section that will be 
crucial, because Go's biggest revenue stream is likely to be from 
commissions paid by online merchants. As they can with other portals, 
users will be able to customize the site, specifying the news topics, 
stock quotes and sports scores they want to see when they type in 
go.com. An emerging truism about portals _ where most of the online 
ad dollars are spent _ is that not only are users who program these 
features more likely to return, but the information they provide while 
programming makes them more valuable to advertisers. If, say, a California 
teen-ager types in his birth date to look up his horoscope, advertisers 
can make sure they don't show him ads for Florida retirement homes. 
Of course, there are Orwellian overtones to marketing based on personal 
information, and Disney, ever image-conscious, has been dampening 
some of the more aggressive ideas of Infoseek and Starwave. ``Disney 
has geometrically expanded the complexity of what we do,'' said Ned 
Desmond, Infoseek's vice president for content. ``If you bring up 
the idea, say, of an e-mail service for kids, suddenly you're on a 
conference call with 15 lawyers who are dedicated to nothing but children's 
privacy.'' Disney has also forced Infoseek to swear off the lucrative 
practice of selling advertisements to pornography sites. But Infoseek 
_ which, like Yahoo, has been accustomed to seeing content as just 
a commodity _ is winning the battle to keep Go fast and simple, prevailing 
over an ethos at both Disney and Starwave that favors heavy production 
values. After a long fight, for example, Infoseek decided that the 
news channel on Go would not offer the elaborate graphics and video 
clips used by ABCnews.com. Rather, Go News will have stripped-down, 
but faster, news pages from both ABC and other, non-Disney sources. 
Even so, Infoseek executives argue that the news Go News will distill 
from ABC and the sports it will draw from ESPN will provide users 
a richer experience than they can get from Yahoo and its ilk. For 
example, the news page on many portals simply displays the most recent 
headlines. Go News will rank stories in order of importance, as determined 
by editors at ABC. What's more, every Go page will have a link to 
the ABCnews.com site for those who want to delve deeper. In the weeks 
since the schedule chart was posted _ during which America Online 
spiced up the contest by agreeing to buy Netscape _ Disney has tinkered 
with the timing of Go's debut. With some areas, like the shopping 
tab, not yet completed, the service is being introduced Dec. 14 as 
a preview version, with a formal introduction in January. Cross-Marketing 
Galore When Disney starts to widely promote Go next month, ABC and 
ESPN viewers will see television commercials that use the slogan ``Are 
you ready to go?'' But what may make the promotion stand out is the 
sort of synergy marketing at which Disney is the undisputed master 
_ the peddling that puts ESPN sports bars on Disney's cruise ships 
and stuffs subscription cards for its Family Fun magazine into envelopes 
containing dividend checks. ``I don't know how many impressions we 
make on a customer every day,'' Eisner said. ``But in most of them, 
we'll remind people that if they go to the Internet, they can use 
the Go Network to find the things they love.'' Disney has done it 
before. For example, at a colorful new Internet exhibit in the Epcot 
Center in Florida, visitors browse the Web and even have their pictures 
taken to be placed on personal family Web sites. The display will 
soon be expanded and take the Go name. The Disney Channel features 
a series of programs about Zoogs, little animated robots that live 
in the ``zether'' _ the space between the television and the computer. 
Young viewers can play Zoog games on Disney's main site and send e-mail 
that can be read by the Zoogs on the next show. The show quadrupled 
the Disney Channel's Web site traffic, Winebaum said. ``No one else 
can do this,'' he said. ``Not Yahoo. Not AOL.'' Yet for all the synergies, 
can Disney learn to survive in the zether, where profits are scarce 
and size means less than agility? Eisner says the formula for Go _ 
mixing Disney's media skill with the innovative agility of small technology 
firms _ can work. ``One reason we are in business with Infoseek and 
Starwave is to have people who will turn to us and say, `You guys 
are so old and so stupid,''' Eisner said. ``I don't want the company 
to be that way.'' THE ONE WHO WAVED THE INTERNET WAND c.1998 N.Y. 
Times News Service NORTH HOLLYWOOD, Calif. _ As a junior executive 
in the circulation department of Time Inc. in the early 1980s, Jake 
Winebaum peppered his bosses with ideas for new magazines. One idea 
was aimed at ambitious yuppies: Advance, ``the magazine for moving 
ahead.'' Though Time rejected the magazine, Winebaum himself certainly 
moved ahead. Now, as head of the Buena Vista Internet Group, he has 
a spot on Walt Disney Co.'s organizational chart that is parallel 
to those of the heads of the company's movie studio and ABC television 
network. Throughout his career, Winebaum has been filled with entrepreneurial 
ideas, but has mainly stayed at established companies. He moved from 
Time to U.S. News &AMP; World Report and finally struck out on his 
own to start Family Fun magazine in 1991. After two issues, Winebaum 
sold the magazine to Disney, a move that started him on a rapid ascent 
through its management ranks _ first in publishing, later in its dalliance 
with starting an all-news cable channel (it decided to pass), and 
by 1995 in its nascent Internet efforts. He started the family-oriented 
Web site, Disney.com, and a profitable online store that sells Disney-brand 
merchandise. And he has become an Internet evangelist in the corporation. 
``I spent a lot of my time all over Disney helping them understand 
what the Internet is and why it's important to their business,'' Winebaum 
said recently, slouched in an easy chair in his office. With his corduroy 
shirt untucked over a white T-shirt, and with his brown suede shoes 
plopped on the coffee table, he looked more like a wayward teen-ager 
than a 39-year-old new-media mogul. But Winebaum works hard to make 
the right impression. One former colleague recalls how, in preparation 
for a visit by Disney chairman Michael Eisner, Winebaum held two separate 
rehearsals of his staff, blocking out where Eisner would walk and 
what people would say to him. A current colleague, Michael Slade, 
the chairman of Starwave, the Internet production company recently 
bought by Disney, said, ``The best way to understand Jake is that 
he's a great athlete.'' Winebaum was a ski racer at Dartmouth and 
now wind-surfs and runs marathons. ``He is very competitive and wants 
to win,'' Slade said. ``Two years ago, he worked for someone who worked 
for someone who worked for Eisner. Now he works for Eisner.'' _ SAUL 
HANSELL 
</TEXT>
</DOC>