<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981211.0297 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Yes Virginia, there is a Santa Claus. But be wary, little girl, because 
not all Santas are real, or even very nice. Some young children became 
aware of that sad possibility on Thursday night when New York City 
police officers at Rockefeller Center carted off two handcuffed men, 
each dressed as the famous Claus. It was bad enough that the accused, 
Alzumar Jenkins, 24, and Louis Nicklas, 45, had the temerity to impersonate 
the purveyor of Christmas cheer and expensive gifts, police officials 
said. Even worse, investigators said, the plump men in red were fraudulently 
soliciting donations in the name of charity. And perhaps taking a 
page out of the Grinch's playbook, one fake Santa working Rockefeller 
Center had earlier assaulted a properly trademarked Santa doing good 
works for the Volunteers of America Greater New York, pushing him 
off his corner and stealing his bell in an apparent attempt to muscle 
in on his business. ``It may or may not have been one of the Santas 
we arrested because all Santas kind of look alike,'' said Deputy Inspector 
Robert Martin, commanding officer of the department's special investigations 
division. ``But we are trying to get the word out to people who think 
this is an easy scam, that it's not, particularly if you are going 
to bully a legitimate Santa off his corner. ``We will look at that 
very severely,'' the inspector added, saying that he was particularly 
unnerved by reports that children had witnessed ``two Santas rolling 
around'' in the assault on Wednesday afternoon. Though the police 
were called to the scene, ``the bad Santa'' had already escaped, he 
said. Volunteers of America Greater New York first alerted the police 
to the illegal Santa problems a few days ago, after their volunteers 
noticed several strangers impersonating them to collect money around 
Rockefeller Center. The charitable organization, whose distinctive 
Santa look is trademarked, has eight Santas collecting donations at 
busy shopping and tourist sites in midtown Manhattan. The money is 
used to provide services to the homeless. Linda McNeil, a spokeswoman 
for the organization, said that her volunteers had seen other suspicious 
Santas in years past but that the impostors had been too fleet-footed 
for capture. This year, however, the fraudulent Santas have become 
more bold, not only professing to work for Volunteers of America, 
but also intent on stealing the territory of real volunteers in the 
Rockefeller Center area. The police stationed undercover officers 
there on Thursday. The officers were astonished by what they saw shortly 
before arresting the men around 8 p.m. The police said one illegal 
Santa peacefully worked around the edges of the center, walking about 
and asking passers-by for charitable donations. But another Santa 
stationed near the Christmas tree had a more elaborate scheme to defraud 
his customers, who also lined up to take photographs with him at $5 
a shot, the police said. ``He was working with a group of elves who 
were steering people to him,'' said Inspector Martin, adding that 
``the elves had little Santa hats on.'' ``The money was being passed 
between the elves and the Santa, who kept some of the money in his 
Christmas sack,'' he said. No elf impersonators were arrested. Several 
things gave the fake Santas away, the inspector said. Each of the 
trademarked Santas used by the Volunteers of America has a red suit 
with a distinctive white belt, a green button with the charity's name 
on it, a bell and a 3{-foot-high black chimney for donations. The 
fraudulent Santas wore red suits with black belts and moved about 
without the chimney or green button. The Santas also continued to 
solicit donations well beyond the 11 a.m.-to-7 p.m. schedule adhered 
to by the volunteer Santas, who are picked up by a car service at 
the end of their shifts. While the volunteers do work with elves, 
the elves merely guard the donations while Santa stretches his legs 
or goes for his morning constitutional. Jenkins, 24, and Nicklas, 
48, have both been charged with scheming to defraud, criminal impersonation 
and petty larceny, the police said. If convicted of the most serious 
charge, scheming to defraud, the men face up to four years in prison. 
Inspector Martin said that both Jenkins, of Passaic, N.J., and Nicklas, 
of Queens, N.Y., have minor criminal records, though neither has a 
history of Santa impersonation. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>