<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981211.0231 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Faced with a daylong debate on a proposed article of impeachment against 
the president of the United States, only the third such debate in 
the nation's history, the three big broadcast networks responded Friday 
with a collective shrug, and the message: Wake us when they're voting. 
While three all-news cable networks _ CNN, MSNBC and Fox News _ along 
with C-Span and some PBS stations, carried comprehensive coverage 
of the full debate over the articles of impeachment proposed by the 
House Judiciary Committee, ABC, NBC and CBS limited their coverage 
to the actual votes on the articles. But because the president made 
a statement at 4 p.m., the networks' timing was thrown off and the 
full committee vote on Article 1 was seen only on CBS, with the other 
two networks joining it in progress. Network news executives offered 
several explanations for their decision to limit the coverage on Friday, 
beginning with the fact that the public interest was being served 
by the extensive coverage available on the cable news channels. But 
several executives said candidly that they felt no real pressure for 
widespread coverage, both because the outcome was completely predictable 
and because, as Lane Venardos, the executive producer of special events 
for CBS, put it, ``people are totally tired of it and would just as 
soon hear no more about it.'' Another network executive noted that 
ratings for the cable news networks carrying extensive coverage do 
not indicate a ground swell of public interest in the debate. Indeed, 
a CNN spokesman reported that while ratings for coverage of the committee's 
deliberations on Tuesday and Wednesday far surpassed the typical ratings 
for the channel, the figures did not approach the audience levels 
reached by numerous previous news events. On Tuesday, for example, 
CNN's coverage was seen by about 1.5 million people, up from an average 
day's audience of about 415,000 people. MSNBC had an audience of about 
260,000 and Fox News an audience of about 118,000, both higher than 
their usual figures. By contrast, during a typical week of the O.J. 
Simpson trial, almost 5 million people were watching CNN's coverage. 
And more than 5 million were watching CNN during the contentions Senate 
confirmation hearings for Supreme Court Justice Clarence Thomas, even 
though all the broadcast networks were also covering that event. Venardos 
said, ``What we have has here is mostly the same people saying the 
same things.'' He added, ``People are saying they're fed up with it.'' 
At ABC, Eileen Murphy, the spokeswoman for ABC News, said the network 
had deemed the outcome in the committee so predictable that only the 
official votes on the articles of impeachment had news value, and 
then purely for their place in the country's history. History suggests 
that public interest was considerably higher 24 years ago, during 
the House Judiciary Committee's vote on articles of impeachment against 
President Richard Nixon. There was considerably more network coverage 
at the time, but several network executives pointed out that this 
was an era before an all-news cable channel existed. Even then, the 
networks did not devote themselves to gavel-to-gavel coverage of the 
House proceedings. Under what was then an unusual agreement among 
the networks, ABC, CBS and NBC agreed to rotate coverage of the Watergate 
proceedings, first in the Senate and then during the pursuit of articles 
of impeachment in the House. Each network took a day and blocked out 
its regular program schedule for the Watergate coverage. That way 
no network suffered any ratings falloff for its regular daytime programs. 
But networks did add unilateral coverage when they believed the events 
were of sufficient importance. On July 30, 1974, for example, when 
the committee passed three articles of impeachment, CBS broke into 
its coverage three separate times _ at 3:24, 6:21 and 10:59 p.m. _ 
for just a few minutes each time to cover the votes. Friday's network 
coverage was of similar duration. But executives from all three networks 
said coverage might be more extensive when the full House meets to 
debate the articles of impeachment. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>