<DOC>
<DOCNO> PRI19981211.2000.2010 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
According to a U.S.-based human rights organization, a prominent dissident 
Iranian writer, who was found dead this week, appears to have been 
murdered. Just hours after his body was discovered, another Iranian 
writer disappeared, the third writer this month. All three had been 
involved in attempts to revive Iran's banned Association of Writers. 
On the line from Tehran is Shirzad Bozoldmair, deputy editor of the 
"Iran News" in Tehran. Mr. Bozoldmair, assuming that the fate of these 
three men is somehow tied to their work, what was it they were saying 
and trying to do? Well, I don't know if I can go along with the assumption 
that their deaths were directly related to their work. There is no 
evidence of that so far, although there are accusations made by the 
opponents of the Iranian government. Nevertheless, when two, three, 
or four writers lose their life in violent circumstances, it does 
bring up the question whether or not their profession had anything 
to do with it. Were they in any way definable as dissident voices 
in Iranian society, these writers? Yes, they could have been called 
that, if someone chooses to do that, because their opinions and their 
writings and their thoughts were not quite in line with what is called 
here the hard line tradition of right, which basically means the hard 
line clerics who believed that there should be no dissent, no variety 
of thought regarding certain specific tenets of Islam, as well as 
certain specific principles of the government in Iran. Give us an 
example, if you can, of some of the things they might have said. Were 
they - Were these fiction, nonfiction writers? There might have been 
one or two of them that delve in fictional writing as well, writing 
fiction as well, but they were mostly, as far as I could tell, serious 
writers. There was a poet among them, also. But in Iran, it is - you 
don't have be a serious writer or a political writer to be a dissident. 
You can be a poet or children's writer and at the same time be a dissident. 
What would constitute a dissident remark? What would you be in trouble 
for having said or having had published under your name? If anything 
has been written by them that contradicts the basic tenets of Islam, 
or the revered figures and personality within Islam living or dead. 
Is the story of the disappearance and the possible murder of these 
three writers being looked at in Tehran as a significant story and 
a possible indication of the change in the climate of whatever kinds 
of disagreement might be going on? It depends who you talk to. If 
you talk to people who are on the extreme side of the Reform movement, 
some of them might say, yes, this could be a form of intimidation 
of the Reformists. If you talk to the opposite camp, they're saying 
- you know, they might say that, you know, these things happen, it 
has nothing to do with the conflict between the Hatami administration 
and its opponents. So it, you know, it's not something that you can 
say yes or no. It depends who you talk to and what their points of 
view are and their political affiliations are. Shirzad Bozoldmair 
is the deputy editor of "Iran News" in Tehran. Thank you very much 
for speaking with us. Thank you. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>