<DOC>
<DOCNO> PRI19981211.2000.0377 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
This is THE WORLD. I'm Tony Kahn. Tomorrow morning, President Clinton 
will leave behind the rancorous impeachment debate in Washington and 
land in the midst of even more ill will in the Middle East. Mr. Clinton 
will try to smooth out differences Israel and the Palestinians have 
on implementing the Wye peace accords he helped work out in October. 
But as THE WORLD's Richard Myron reports from Jerusalem, the signs 
are not promising for a successful presidential mission. On the eve 
of President Clinton's arrival in Jerusalem, Israeli soldiers' M-16 
rifles slung over their shoulders stand guard on a street corner in 
the east of the city. With tension high in the region, the president's 
security is being taken seriously. Fifteen thousand security men are 
being deployed during his three-day visit to Israel, Gaza, and Bethlehem. 
The idea for Mr. Clinton's trip came up through negotiations at the 
Wye Plantation two months ago. Then the atmosphere between Israel 
and Palestinians was cordial; today, it's acrimonious, and the Wye 
memorandums become bogged down amid disagreements and delays. David 
McCofsky, diplomatic correspondent for the Israeli "Ha'ares" newspaper 
says that this visit is a mark of Mr. Clinton's dedication to the 
peace process. It's extraordinary the president has visited this country 
four times in four years. He's been here at the greatest highs and 
the greatest lowest. This is somewhere in the middle, which is that 
you're celebrating achievement, but frankly the achievement is not 
all achieved. And by coming, he's also trying to nudge Israel forward. 
But some Israelis are angry about the president's visit. The speaker 
of the Knesset, Banti Hahn, announced earlier this week that he'd 
boycott the visit to protest that Mr. Clinton isn't visiting the Knesset 
but will attend a session of the Palestinian National Council in Gaza. 
In Jewish West Jerusalem, posters have appeared telling President 
Clinton to go home and picture him in an Arab head dress. Most Israelis, 
though, consider Mr. Clinton one of the best allies Israel has ever 
had. Gabriel Ozery, who owns a restaurant opposite the hotel where 
the president's staying in Jerusalem, is pleased Mr. Clinton is coming. 
Very excited actually, extremely excited. And I'm hoping that I'll 
have the honor having him as a guest. Just a small chance. I think 
it's going to have a positive effect. I know a lot of the people that 
I know and most of the people that come to my restaurant are all very 
excited that he takes the time out and shows that he cares about Israel 
and takes the time out to come - to come here. Benjamin Netanyahu 
says the president is a welcome to guest in Israel, but the prime 
minister has doubts about certain aspects of the trip. I think we 
are concerned with some efforts that the Palestinians are making to 
use the trip to try to shore up their plans for Palestinian statehood. 
Everybody thinks Palestinian statehood is such a great thing, but 
such a state, not shorn of certain powers that could threaten Israel, 
could be a base for terrorism, they'll launch terrorism against us. 
We'll have to respond to this terrorism. The Arab states will have 
to respond to our response, and soon, you'll have a vortex. Many are 
also concerned about the violence that's broken out across the West 
Bank in the past week. Just today, two Palestinians were killed and 
about 50 wounded when Israeli soldiers fired at demonstrators near 
the West Bank town of Calkilia. The Palestinians are protesting Israel's 
refusal to release political prisoners from Israeli jails. As part 
of the Wye memorandum, Israel pledged to free 750 Palestinians, but 
it's so far released mostly common criminals. On the streets, Palestinians 
like Mahwan, a student at Bethlehem University, say such Israeli actions 
bode ill for President Clinton's trip. The situation here is not so 
good, especially for the prisoners. And, uh, if you do something that 
release our prisoners, then it will lead to some ideas about him. 
But we hope that he will help us to release our prisoners here in 
Palestine. But many Palestinians are pleased about the presidential 
visit to Gaza, which they see as recognition of their aspirations 
for statehood. Maviyato Havia, commentator on Palestinian affairs, 
says it marks the beginning of a new era and relations between Gaza 
and Washington. Symbolic historic visit is a direct message to the 
Palestinians to build their home; you have the support of Washington, 
as well as Europe. And it's an indirect message to the Israelis we 
are going to support these guys whether you like it or not. We are 
not prisoners to you and. President Clinton may have originally anticipated 
this visit as a way of crowning the diplomatic achievement at Wye 
Plantation. He may also have seen it as an escape from his impeachment 
troubles at home. But with violence on the West Bank and the politically 
besieged governments in Israel awaiting him, Mr. Clinton may well 
find himself longing for the comfort of scandal-crazed Washington. 
For THE WORLD, this is Richard Myron in Jerusalem. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>