<DOC>
<DOCNO> PRI19981211.2000.1190 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
This is THE WORLD. I'm Tony Kahn. U.S. Deputy Treasury Secretary Lauren 
Somers, and Deputy Secretary of State Strobe Talbott are in Moscow 
meeting with Russian officials about a variety of issues. At the top 
of the agenda is Russia's economic crisis, which seems to get worse 
by the day. But as we hear in this report from THE WORLD's David McGuffen 
in Moscow, the best hope for improvement may just lie in the fact 
that things can't get much worse. Vitali Uzbekhov is one Russian businessman 
hoping that Strobe Talbott and Lauren Somers succeed in selling their 
message of economic reform to the Primakov government. The 30-year-old 
entrepreneur owns a company that installs windows in homes in the 
Moscow region. Since the crisis, he's been doing his best to stay 
in business. He doesn't give the present government any credit for 
his survival so far. I would like it if the government at the very 
least didn't disturb us. To make businesses prosperous, they need 
to calm down the political situation. The problem is instability. 
Many businessmen are sitting on suitcases full of money because they 
don't know what will happen tomorrow or what they will need to do. 
The main complaint against the government of Prime Minister Yevgeny 
Primakov is that it has done almost nothing to solve the effects of 
last summer's economic crash despite having being in office since 
September. Which is where the visit of Deputy Secretary of State Talbott 
and Deputy Treasury Secretary Somers comes in. Washington has been 
increasingly critical of the Russian government since its decision 
to default on its debt in August, and has backed off its once blanket 
support of Boris Yeltsin's regime. The discussions involving the team 
of Clinton officials in Moscow has been officially described as routine 
by American officials, but it's been quietly acknowledged that they 
are here to push Primakov on the economy. Following his meetings at 
the Russian Foreign Ministry today, Talbott insisted the Clinton administration 
has not given up on Russia. What the United States needs is to work 
closely with Russia, because U.S.-Russia cooperation is important 
in many areas, including in the economic field. We've had very good 
talks here in Moscow about ways in which the United States and Russia 
can work together with the international community so that the international 
community can do everything possible to help Russia address its economic 
problems. It may have been just coincidence, but the Russian government 
did finally release its 1999 budget the day before the American delegation 
arrived, and many analysts say it's the most realistic budget presented 
in Russia in years. It has received favorable reviews from economists 
in its pledges to minimize spending and the deficit. Both are conditions 
the International Monetary Fund has set before it agrees to release 
billions of dollars worth of loans to Russia. Moscow-based political 
economist, Sergei Markov, says the budget should help improve the 
current strained relations between the two countries if the Russians 
actually carry it out. This budget, budget by selective government 
is mostly strong budget compared with previous selective government. 
So I'm sure that American politician will choose this, but the question 
for them will be: Is Russian government able to follow this strong 
budget? That's what many reformers are openly questioning. Boris Nemsov, 
a deputy prime minister in the previous government, says that the 
wide ideological spread in the Primakov government will prevent it 
from achieving much. Primakov government consists of a lot of very 
old Communists and some liberals. This is, from my point of view, 
very and I don't think that they can do something completely and something 
efficient. But as Vitali Uzbekhov ponders the future of his window 
business, he admits that at least the budget is a start amidst the 
economic ruins here, and marks a small glimmer of hope after months 
of despair. For THE WORLD, I'm David McGuffen in Moscow. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>