<DOC>
<DOCNO> PRI19981211.2000.0708 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
It was only a step in a legal process that could take years, but it 
was a dramatic step. Today, at a courtroom near London, former Chilean 
dictator, Augusto Pinochet, made his first public appearance since 
October. That's when Pinochet was arrested at the behest of a Spanish 
judge who was seeking the general's extradition so that he can face 
charges stemming from his brutal rule of Chile in the 1970s and '80s. 
THE WORLD'S Mary Louise Kelly reports from the British capital. It 
was the moment many people have been waiting for: the first public 
glimpse of General Augusto Pinochet since his arrest here in London 
two months ago. But the general did not oblige. His mini-van sneaked 
in a side entrance of the Balmarsh prison complex in South London. 
He left an hour later in the same way, this time with a white blanket 
over his head to shield him from prying news cameras. But the general's 
non-appearance didn't dampen the enthusiasm of hundreds of demonstrators 
who lined the street leading to the court: Pinochet supporters on 
one side, opponents on the other. Inside the courtroom, the general 
did appear in a wheelchair wearing a brown business suit and a lime 
green tie. Speaking in Spanish, he told the British courts he doesn't 
recognize the authority of any country but his native Chile for trying 
him against what he called "all the lies of Spain." Juadrico Alvarez, 
one of Pinochet's lawyers, spoke outside shortly afterwards. We don't 
recognize the British jurisdiction. We don't recognize the Spanish 
jurisdiction. This is a Chilean matter, it's a Chilean internal affair, 
and the only people that we have to deal with this situation is the 
Chilean people. So he - the general, he doesn't recognize the British 
jurisdiction. He has to be - honor that jurisdiction because he's 
in United Kingdom, but he doesn't recognize that. Still, for many 
of the anti-Pinochet demonstrators gathered outside, it was enough 
to see the general finally face a day in court. Exiled Chilean playwright, 
Ariel Dorfman, says many of Pinochet's victims were there in spirit. 
I think that in that court, invisible, intangible, but real, are many 
of the victims. Many of my friends are there, the people who died 
in my stead, the people who - who were killed, they're there in that 
courtroom. They're escorting him in. He's going to have a chance, 
of course, to prove his innocence, which none of my friends ever had. 
It's still by no means certain that General Pinochet will ever face 
a trial. He must now wait five weeks until the next court hearing 
in London, at which he doesn't have to appear. The entire legal process 
of appeals and counter appeals could take up to two years. And even 
if General Pinochet does one day face trial in Spain, he may never 
go to prison. Spanish law forbids jail terms for anyone over the age 
of '75. The general is 83. For THE WORLD, I'm Mary Louise Kelly in 
London. In Santiago, Chile today, a former minister in Pinochet's 
government read a letter to the followers of the former dictator. 
In it, Pinochet wrote, "I feel a sincere pain for all Chileans who 
lost their lives during those years." The Pinochet case is triggering 
debates in other South American nations where the memory of military 
rule remains fresh. In Argentina, for example, former Junta chief, 
Jorge Ebella, is being sought by a Swiss judge who wants to try him 
for the kidnapping and murder of a student in 1977. Anna Barone, the 
Washington correspondent for the Buenos Aires newspaper, "Cladin", 
says there are similarities and differences between Argentina and 
Chile. The similarity, uh, that both countries would have this very 
repressive dictatorships, many people died, others disappeared. In 
Argentina, the number is bigger; in Chile; apparently, there are 3000, 
but in Argentina, they talk about 10,000, 15,000. So that is the similarity. 
What is different is that when the democracy came to power, Argentina 
had trials, and all the generals, the responsible of this horrible 
acts, were judged, condemned, and went to prison. Then later there 
was an amnesty. But in principle, there was this painful process of 
the population that being informed through these trials a lot horrible 
things had happened. Do Argentineans in general feel that the process 
that they went through is a necessary process that the Chileans themselves 
must also undergo in order to put the past behind them? Yes, because 
the idea is that if you do our reconciliation without going through 
that process, the reconciliation is a little bit fake, or it's not 
true, because it's not based on the reality. And that's why now you 
are seeing that, in fact, there has not been a reconciliation in Chile 
because there is this enormous division about what has to be done 
with Pinochet. In Argentina, us, I think, the reality is known by 
everybody. Even if it is still painful, even if it is, you know, people 
are still asking for more justice, at least the basic facts are very 
well-known, and the militaries were condemned and went to prison. 
Give me an example of some of the things that you still feel you haven't 
completely overcome. There is always the fear that the civilians cannot 
control the militaries, for example. There is always the fear that 
something like what happened could happen again, even if the possibilities 
are very remote. There is this incredible discussions still going 
of, uh - between people that were in favor of the dictators and people 
that were against it, people that didn't suffer the repression, people 
that were victims of the repression, so we are still learning. But 
sometimes you are, for example, you're having a dinner in Buenos Aires, 
and passion comes back very quickly because supposing you are invited 
to a family that members of it were members of the military, and others 
are, you know, victims of the militaries. It's still very painful 
to talk about what happened. Do Argentineans feel that the story of 
Pinochet in terms of its consequences and its unfinished business 
is perhaps more compelling than, say, what's happening with our own 
president here in the United States? Oh, without doubt. I mean, the 
Pinochet story in the papers are all over the country is much more 
important today in Argentina than there is of Clinton in Congress. 
That's definitely, because, you know, many things happen because - 
happening in Argentina because of the Pinochet arrest. There are many 
cases that are being reopened. Everybody's waiting for the famous 
documents that the State Department, you know, has said that they 
are examine in order to declassify; if there, we can have new information... 
And possible CIA involvement in the overthrow of President Allende. 
There are some documents that already prove that. The problem is that 
we don't know the dimension of the involvement, what information CIA 
had about these. A lot of information is not known yet, so it's - 
it's -it's very interesting to see if the State Department is going 
to release this documents or not. Anna Barone is the Washington correspondent 
for the Argentine newspaper, "Cladin." Gracias. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>