<DOC>
<DOCNO> PRI19981211.2000.2555 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Are you still puzzling over the answer to today's GeoQuiz? We were 
looking for the name of Europe's longest river, which passes through 
eight countries on its way to the Black Sea. A famous waltz is named 
after it. Got it yet? Well, that waltz is "The Blue Danube." And one 
of the city's the Danube passes through is the city synonymous waltzes: 
Vienna. The Austrian capital is also famous for its old coffee houses 
where no one minds if you hang around all day and buy just one coffee. 
Must be decaf. At the turn of the century, there were around 500 of 
these laid back establishments, but now there's fewer than 200, and 
as Imogene Fulks reports, fans of the traditional coffee house fear 
for its future. The Viennese make preparations for Christmas into 
a really grand affair. There are Christmas markets everywhere. The 
trees in the parks are hung with colored lanterns. Mulled wine stands 
offer comfort to the cold and foot sore. And naturally enough, in 
the home of Strauss, there is music everywhere. But when Viennese 
want some peace from all the hustle and bustle at this or indeed any 
other time of year, they know they've got somewhere they can go. It's 
the place to be - You don't go to a cafe to drink only coffee or to 
eat. You go to spend time there. You won't find any gastronomic institution 
in the Western world where you can stay for hours and hours and nobody 
will bother you. You can read newspapers for half a day. And that's 
something special in Vienna. Hanz Deglas is chairman of the Vienna 
Coffee House Union and proprietor of the Cafe Deglas, one of Vienna's 
most popular coffee houses. He naturally wants to praise the virtues 
of the coffee house way of life, but at the end of the 20th century, 
things are changing. We are now at McDonald's, at McCafe in Vienna. 
People can order regular Big Macs, hamburgers, fries, but they also 
can order cakes and different types of coffee. It's Milange, cappuccino, 
hosa brauna, cana brauna. People can sit here all day or however they 
want. Harold Fasching is manager of the McCafe, McDonald's answer 
to the Viennese need for a coffee and a cake every afternoon. Although 
it has some of the trappings of a traditional coffee house, marble 
tables, comfortable chairs, the McCafe is only an annex of McDonald's 
itself. While sipping your coffee, you can stare straight out to the 
fast food counter, and that globally familiar smell of the Big Mac 
is everywhere. It's a long way from the Vienna of Strauss or Mozart, 
and a long way from the elegant atmosphere of the famous Cafe Lantmon, 
with its tall, arched mirrors, inlaid wooden paneling, and mouth watering 
pastries. A coffee here cost about twice what it does at the McCafe, 
but Anita Clearfelt, the formidable proprietress of the Lantmon, has 
little time for the up start. It's terrible. The young people and 
the people who are busy and have no time, they go quickly, quickly 
to McDonald's, and in the afternoon, you can drink also coffee and 
take one of the sweetest from there, but this is not the Vienna coffee 
house. It will never be in this atmosphere. The Cafe Lantmon was Sigmund 
Freud's favorite. There's a saying that if some of his patients had 
spent more time in its relaxing atmosphere, they might not have needed 
Freud's services quite so much. But some coffee houses are closing. 
Many proprietors are getting older and have no one to take over from 
them. So the prime corner sites are targets for other businesses with 
plenty of ready cash, such as fast food outlets. On Vienna's famous 
Ringstrasa alone, there were once 38 coffee houses. Now there are 
only four. Hans Deglas regrets the loss. If a cafe is taken over by 
any other business, you never can restore it, you never can bring 
it back. So we have to look careful after our cafes in Vienna because 
they are part of our city, part of our culture, the soul of Vienna, 
so to say. Luckily, for the soul of Vienna, the Austrian government 
has placed some coffee houses under preservation orders, and there 
is money for restoration. So it's unlikely the Cafe Lantmon will ever 
sell Big Macs. But for the less famous and less sensual Viennese coffee 
houses, the future may not be quite so rosy. That's Imogene Fulks 
reporting on the tenuous, if not nerve-jangling fate of Vienna's coffee 
houses. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>