<DOC>
<DOCNO> PRI19981211.2000.2904 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
This is THE WORLD, I'm Tony Kahn. This Sunday, Puerto Ricans go to 
the polls to let us mainlanders know whether they want to remain a 
commonwealth or become the 51st state, or some other status. The referendum 
is nonbinding, but President Clinton has said he hopes Congress will 
abide by the result. When THE WORLD's Boris Maksimov visited San Juan, 
he met some Puerto Ricans who are still sorting out the relationship 
between the island and the mainland, and their relationship with both. 
Maria Langston lives in the heart of old San Juan above the park where 
frogs sing in the above the narrow streets where cars wind their way 
pass Spanish colonial buildings around the corner from the governor's 
residence. Born in Puerto Rico, she was taken to the Bronx at the 
tender age of 12. She learned English, survived the tough neighborhood, 
the gangs and all that, had a successful career with an airline, lived 
in the states for 40 years, and then suddenly four years ago, she 
left that life behind and move to Puerto Rico. Why? I've always said 
I was born here, I want to be buried here, although since I've been 
back this four years, I don't want to be bury anymore. Now I want 
to be cremated. But I - I - So I want to end up here. I started here, 
I want to finish here. But Maria Langston's homecoming was not without 
its tensions. I got here at, you know, retirement age. I'm so happy 
to be here, and I'm facing all these cold shoulders from the home 
boys, sort of - the people who live here who think that I'm not Puerto 
Rican enough 'cause I don't speak Spanish very well. What I was wondering 
was how does it feel for returnees to find out that what they always 
considered home where they belong is actually a somewhat foreign land. 
Disappointing. You feel hurt. But I'm not giving up. This is my island 
as much as anybody else's. And mostly the local people who think that 
I'm not Puerto Rican enough that say, "You're a New Yorican and always 
will be. You're not Puerto Rican enough." Well, you know, I was born 
right there across the bay. You know, I was just gone for a long time 
and I'm back. Most Puerto Ricans who return to the island from the 
states for good do so after retirement, most but not all. Across the 
bay from San Juan in Bayamon, Eva Contilario runs a Montessori pre-school 
center. My mother and my father lived in the states. I was born here. 
My mother decided she wanted to come and have the baby here in Puerto 
Rico so it would be a Puerto Rican baby. Eva grew up in the states, 
had her life there, but always feeling Puerto Rican, different, special, 
spending every vacation on the island. So 22 years ago, she and her 
husband packed their bags and moved here. But now... I still have 
so much of New York in me, you know, just that American culture, also, 
that I sometimes go on vacation to the states just to eat hot dogs. 
Yes, yes, yes, yes, yes. Just to go back and just eat hot dogs and 
eat knishes, and see the museums, and see the plays. Eva came to Puerto 
Rico young, full of ideas, full of desire to be finally home, but 
she, too, wasn't readily accepted by the locals. Somehow they - they 
- I acquired this nickname of being a New Yorican. First it bothered 
me 'cause I used to say I'm as Puerto Rican as anybody else. And after 
a while, I just didn't pay them any mind. But they still would always 
be very objective about my language and how I spoke Spanish, you know, 
and correcting me, always correcting me. Until today? Until today, 
yes. The children correct me. I work with children, yeah. It took 
more than ten years for Eva to feel relaxed at home as if she finally 
arrived to be confident. And yet both Marie Langston and Eva Contilario 
refer to locals, to Puerto Rican Puerto Ricans as them. They returnees 
discover that they themselves have changed, that something happened 
because of the crossing of the water separating the island from the 
mainland. On one hand, they find themselves in the position of immigrants 
- they have to relearn or learn the language, learn the courtesies 
of the local culture, the local ways of doing things. On the other 
hand... I'm Puerto Rican. I am Puerto Rican, knowing two languages, 
because one is I was - I was born here, see. I was born here. I was 
born here. I'm just fortunate enough to have two worlds. And I'm fortunate 
enough to have learned the language well, to have studied in the states, 
and I feel like I have both worlds, and I feel really lucky, I feel 
really lucky. It is hard to be of two places at one time, to belong 
here there, to be dual. The locals do get confused about you, and 
call you names, and make your life harder. But then, as Eva Contilario 
says, it is a fortunate thing to feel at home in two worlds. After 
all, who is to say where is home, except perhaps in your own heart? 
For THE WORLD, this is Boris Maksimov. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>