<DOC>
<DOCNO> PRI19981211.2000.2286 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Well, for a respite from the world's problems, you can always turn 
to the world of sports, right? "Not," as my son would say. In Lausanne, 
Switzerland today, International Olympic Committee officials are meeting 
in a variety of issues, some of them very contentious. One is the 
charge that organizers of the 2000 Winter Olympic Games in Salt Lake 
City bribed IOC officials to help secure the games' the other, two 
petitions seeking recognition for Olympians who lost to steroid-pumped 
East Germans during the 1970s and '80s. THE WORLD's Clark Boyd has 
the story. It was a familiar and disappointing sound to the U.S. Women's 
Olympic Swimming Team during the 1976 games in Montreal. Going away 
to a fourth gold medal, she looks as if she's in a practice swim, 
Cornelia Ender, 17, the world record holder. This is going to be her 
fourth gold medal. She... Cornelia Ender of the East German Women's 
Team taking yet another gold medal. But recent court cases in Germany 
have tarnished that gold. Police files from the former East Germany 
have shown that the East German Women's Swim Team, which won 11 of 
13 gold medals, at the 1976 Olympics, and then duplicated that feat 
four years later, was part of a state-sponsored, systematic doping 
program. And now, athletes who finish second to the East Germans want 
recognition from the International Olympic Committee. International 
Olympic Committee is really in a bind. Charles Yusales is the author 
of "The Steroid Game." People are lining up asking for a higher level 
of medal than they received in past Olympics because of the now-documented 
widespread drug use among East German athletes. Those lining up include 
the four members of the 1976 U.S. Women's Relay Team, who finished 
second in Montreal, and the United States isn't the only one petitioning 
the International Olympic Committee. The British Olympic Association 
is also seeking redress for Sharon Davis. She won silver in 1980 behind 
East German, Petra Schneider, who has admitted to steroid use at the 
time. I think the United States should decide to put record books 
correct. I really don't think they should stop start taking medals 
away or reissuing medals, but I think what they need to do is make 
a positive step on what they now have proof of from the past, and 
try to use, as an example for the future, because drugs in sport is 
a problem that keeps getting worse, not better. Author, Charles Yusales, 
agrees but is concerned that any decision by the IOC would turn the 
East German athletes into scapegoats. I'm very uncomfortable with 
this whole notion because that is based on the very tenuous assumption 
that athletes other than the East Germans are all clean should come 
to the judgment that only the East Germans used drugs back then is 
- I think is grossly incorrect. And I think we should just leave things 
as it is and focus our attention on the current epidemic of drug use 
that exists in the league sport today. Craig Reedy, president of the 
British Olympic Association, also urges the International Olympic 
Committee to tread carefully as it considers rescinding past gold 
medals. I think you have to do it on a case-by-case basis. I would 
hope that the IOC would look at it. I would hope that they might say, 
well, there is clear evidence here, and there has to be very clear 
evidence the particular athlete had transgressed, at which case if 
you mark the record so that everybody who knows what's going on says, 
"Well, all right, that record has been marked." I think that's fine. 
I don't think you can take a blanket decision which says everybody 
from any particular country was transgressing. And, says British silver 
medallist Sharon Davis, any decision by the IOC should take the East 
German athletes into account as well. I mean, ultimately, there's 
two victims. There's the people like myself who, you know, didn't 
get the medals that maybe they should have done on the day, and also 
the East German athletes who were very and getting very little support. 
So they should do something for both parties, really. But doing something 
that pleases all parties involved might prove difficult, if not impossible, 
for the International Olympic Committee. Executive board members have 
already expressed the feeling that any decision they make on the petitions 
will be opening a Pandora's box. The IOC executive committee is addressing 
the U.S. and British petitions at a meeting this weekend in Switzerland. 
No final decisions are expected for months. For THE WORLD, this is 
Clark Boyd. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>