<DOC>
<DOCNO> VOA19981211.1600.2483 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Well, Jim, David Swan is up on the Senate side on Capitol Hill. Let's 
go to David. David, what's the mood up there right now? Well, the 
mood up here isn't quite as frenetic as it is on the House, but this 
matter is very much on the people's minds, even though it has not 
reached the Senate yet and it may not at all. We just had earlier 
today a press release of a kind I have never seen before, a joint 
statement by the Republican and Democratic leaders. And what they're 
saying in effect is that they will not pre-judge this case. These 
two leaders will not make any official statements on this until and 
unless the House does follow through and impeach the president. However, 
we've also been told that there have been discussions, memorandums 
floating around. People are trying to figure out how to prepare for 
this because to say that we'd be getting into unchartered territory 
in a trial would be a huge understatement. Jim, I'd like to take a 
look if we can at the basic arguments that have occurred in this Judiciary 
Committee for and against the various articles here. Can you tell 
us... Well, I'll tell you what. Let's just pop in for a minute on 
the hearings because they're debating the second article, which also 
deals with perjury. And right now, we're hearing from the top Democrat 
on the committee, Representative John Conyers of Michigan talking 
about the charge of perjury in the second article. Republicans would 
impeach the president of the United States for his testimony on subjects 
as whether he was ever alone with Ms. Lewinsky. While we're troubled 
by the president's testimony, we believe it is insufficient, too insufficient 
to warrant an impeachment of the president. The president's reactions 
to the set up in the Jones deposition were not impeachable reactions, 
but the reactions of a husband and a father who... Again, we've been 
hearing from John Conyers, the ranking Democrat. The argument Democrats 
are making is: Look, even if you do consider this perjury - and a 
lot of them would argue that technically, legally, it's not perjury, 
even if you're going to say that, is it really worth removing the 
president of the United States? That's the Democratic argument; that's 
obviously the White House argument. The Republican argument again 
summing up is: Perjury, basically defying an oath, is a very serious 
offense. The president has an obligation as the chief law enforcement 
officer in the land to abide by oaths and to abide by the rule of 
law. And if he is deceitful in that area, that is grounds for his 
removal from office. That's the nub of what we're getting at right 
now. And yet though, there may be a legal argument here. There's also 
public opinion that it's lying about sex, and it's a private matter. 
That's right. The Democratic argument all along has been this is really 
lies about sex. The Republican argument is this is lies that subvert 
the justice system. So it's up to you to depend on what you think 
is more important, which goes to the heart of the case. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>