<DOC>
<DOCNO> VOA19981211.1600.1017 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Well, let's talk about the vote about to take place in the committee 
and the timing of this announcement that he has prepared to accept 
censure. Well, I think he's now -- What obviously the White House 
is doing is looking beyond this vote in the committee, which has not 
happened yet; we're waiting for it to happen. They're still debating 
the various fine points of the first article. But I think they're 
looking ahead to a full House debate next week on impeachment. The 
Democrats would like to be able to offer an alternative to censure 
the president, a milder form of punishment. They think that would 
give political cover to some moderate Republicans and conservative 
Democrats who want to punish the president but may not be necessarily 
committed to impeachment and seeing him removed from office. So I 
think now the White House has begun the lobbying to sort of get censure 
as an alternative on the House floor. That was going to be my next 
question. Beyond this statement today, what types of actions, what 
is the Clinton team doing right now to gather the support? Well, we've 
heard the most public presentation they're going to make. Now everything 
else is going to be behind the scenes, pressuring or really appealing 
to lawmakers not to vote for impeachment any way they can. Well, Jim, 
we heard certainly a reaching out to not only the Congress, Bill Clinton 
saying that his critics are his friends, quoting a line from Ben Franklin, 
but it seems as though he was trying to reach out to the American 
people directly. How important is that in this process at this point? 
That's a good question, Victor, because although the polls have continually 
shown the public does not want impeachment, finds the president with 
high popularity ratings, they are not happy with what he did, they 
do feel some sort of punishment is warranted. They prefer censure, 
the censure option. But the public has notoriously been sitting back 
here. They've been holding back. And although there's not great will 
it seems among the public for impeachment, you wonder how much the 
public's going to come out and oppose impeachment if it gets that 
far. And that has in part allowed the Republicans to push this far, 
I think, with their impeachment campaign in the House. Jim, the committee 
is also considering other articles beyond this, although the big developments 
of this day hinge on this first article of impeachment. There is another 
article of perjury in addition to this. That's right. In fact, before 
I get to that, I was just about to go to the committee because they 
were getting ready to vote, but it looks like we're going to have 
yet another short speech, which should be no surprise to anyone and 
it looks like perhaps an amendment. In any event, this second article 
that they would deal with also has to do with perjury, alleging the 
president lied under oath in the Paula Jones case. You remember back 
in December, January where he was denying a sexual relationship with 
Monica Lewinsky. That would be the second article. Third article deals 
with obstruction of justice, the efforts he took to cover up the affair; 
fourth article, abuse of power, particularly the use of executive 
privilege trying to shield his aides from having to testify in connection 
with the Monica Lewinsky affair. It's not clear all of these articles 
will pass, by the way. The perjury articles seem to have the best 
chance. And again, we don't expect any Democrats to support any of 
the articles of impeachment. Now, Jim, the president more or less 
ended his speech by calling for the nation to return to its work and 
letting the president get back on with his duties. Can we expect perhaps 
another speech down the road or are we looking at more or less the 
end of the process? I think at this point, Victor - By the way, in 
the background, I can hear some voting going on. That's not on the 
article. It's on the previous question. We're into procedural events 
here but we're getting very close to a vote, so we ought to hang on 
for that. But regarding the strategy at the White House, I would guess 
it's going hour to hour now, not even day to day. They've done the 
statement now; they want to see how that plays. The president's heading 
overseas now to the Middle East. That could be a disadvantage for 
him over the next few days. He's going to be out of the country. This 
is expected to follow him, no doubt, on his trip. Right. But he'll 
be back before the vote next week, which we expect on Thursday or 
Friday of next week, so there will be additional time there for the 
White House, for the president to come forward again. But certainly, 
we all listened to what he had to say. It seemed to me we might conclude 
that might be his final public word on the matter. I would never say 
that for sure, but he seemed to be saying there's nothing more he 
can say to change anybody's minds. Well, as you say, Jim, we are now 
watching and you can hear in the background a procedural vote. What 
is the procedure that's being voted on? What they do is they say, 
"We want to move the previous question." It's a parliamentary procedure 
where they get to the amendment they want to vote on; once they deal 
with the amendment, they will then vote on the first article of impeachment. 
At that point, we truly will have some breaking news because for the 
first time since 1974, we'll be having a president facing an impeachment 
charge in the House of Representatives, something that's only happened 
twice before. And it seems even this procedural vote is coming down 
heavily along party lines. That's right, as expected. And we'll just 
have to watch each article as they come up. Some of the Republicans 
are less supportive of some of the other articles than they are of 
perjury. Certainly perjury though seems to be the strongest case against 
the president. Difficult to prove? Difficult to prove in a legal sense, 
absolutely. That was part of the arguments that the Democrats have 
been making for days, that to prove perjury, you have to show that 
someone knowingly and intentionally lied. However, even a lot of the 
Democrats are saying, "Look, even if you concede, and some of them 
are willing to concede the president did commit perjury, the question 
is: Does it rise to a level of impeachable offense? And that will 
be the nub of the debate not only in the committee but in the House 
next week: What exactly constitutes an impeachable offense? Jim, do 
we get any sense from public opinion polls that although many Americans 
if not most are more or less against impeachment that this could swing 
dramatically, given what this committee votes on today? The polls 
have held fairly consistent that the president did wrong, but that 
he remains popular. The approval ratings in the 60 percent range the 
last few days. Some of the opinion polls have seemed to indicated 
a growing number of Americans oppose impeachment. It's actually reaching 
up to two-thirds. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>