<DOC>
<DOCNO> VOA19981211.1600.2309 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Let's talk about what the president, this acting president did today. 
Well, the president - I'm listening in my earphones, by the way, to 
the committee debate, which continues. They're now into the second 
article which involves perjury. The president came out, and obviously 
the White House knows they were in a very desperate fight for votes 
here. Next week is going to be the crucial vote of Bill Clinton's 
presidency, and they're pulling out all the stops to win over that 
handful of moderate Republicans, conservative Democrats who are hanging 
in the balance. They perhaps hold Bill Clinton's fate and history 
in their hands, and it's up to them to decide whether or not this 
is an impeachable offense. The president going to the Middle East 
having made his statement, his apology saying he's ready to accept 
milder punishment, he'll be leaving the lobbying campaign in the hands 
of his senior advisers at the White House for the next few days. Yeah, 
perhaps not the best time for him to be out of the country; no question 
about it. The president in his little statement a little while ago 
said he was very sorry to have misled the country for so long. He 
said words and deeds cannot - He can't undo the words and deed that 
have already come. But it's interesting that he would not go so far 
as to admit that he lied, which is the one thing that a number of 
moderate Republicans and some conservative Democrats have indicated 
they'd like to see him do in order for them not to vote for impeachment. 
So the president perhaps did not go as far as a lot of people would 
have liked. You know, whether he went far enough to save his presidency 
from impeachment, we'll have to see next week. It's a ways to go yet. 
Now, Jim, it seems as though he was reaching not only out to his critics, 
he mentioned a line from Benjamin Franklin, you know, "Our critics 
are our friends," he was also reaching to the American people, it 
seemed to me. And at this point, is it going to make a difference? 
I think obviously the White House thinks it can. The White House has 
continually relied on the fact that Mr. Clinton's approval ratings 
have been running high in the 60 percentiles even with the Monica 
Lewinsky scandal; that up to two-thirds of the country, according 
to most opinion polls do not want him impeached or removed from office. 
The public seems to prefer the option of censure, a public scolding 
by the Congress, which is a milder form of punishment which would 
not lead to impeachment or removal from office. The Democrats, of 
course, will offer in this committee a censure resolution, and they'll 
try to get an offer on the House floor next week. But is there the 
possibility the longer this drags out, the more air play, more media 
attention this receives that public opinion could sway the other way? 
I think it's possible. Actually, I think it's possible the Republicans 
could find themselves in hot water, Victor, because every time one 
side or the other in the story has tried to gain an upper hand politically, 
the other side's been able to take advantage. The Republicans have 
had the high ground lately. They say the president wasn't responsive 
to those 81 questions they asked from the House Judiciary Committee, 
but the public may be about to believe that the Republicans are over 
reaching by actually impeaching the president. But the public's remained 
somewhat ambivalent about that, and that's part of the problem for 
the White House. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>