<DOC>
<DOCNO> VOA19981211.1600.0359 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
At this hour, Republicans in the House Judiciary Committee are expected 
to vote on an article of impeachment against President Clinton. The 
article is lying before the grand jury in August. And joining us now 
in the studio to discuss developments which are picking up pace right 
now is national correspondent Jim Malone. Jim, where are we right 
now? Well, Erin and Victor, it may be somewhat ironic to say this 
in a case involving President Clinton, but we may be approaching the 
moment of truth. What's happening right now is the House Judiciary 
Committee is getting very close to voting on the first article of 
impeachment against President Clinton. That article specifically alleges 
him committing perjury, that is lying under oath before a federal 
grand jury in August when he went before the Starr grand jury and 
again repeated denials of a sexual relationship with Monica Lewinsky. 
The committee is hearing now, and perhaps we can hear a little bit 
of this from California Democrat Maxine Waters. She is supposed to 
be the final speaker before they get to a vote. Let's just listen 
for a few seconds. I'm sure you don't want to list that in articles 
of impeachment about the president of the United States. What they've 
been talking about, just to fill you in, is they've been debating 
the specific article. The Democrats say it doesn't include enough 
specific references regarding the perjury. Republicans say they don't 
need to put that in there. So it's a very procedural debate. It's 
been going on for hours now. But the fact is that once we get a vote 
here shortly, we do expect to hear from the president at the White 
House, and he's expected to make a last ditch appeal to the full House 
to not vote for impeachment next week. We expect the committee to 
approve at least one article of impeachment, and at that point, we 
are headed for a House vote next week. Now with one article down, 
does that mean other articles are to follow? How does it work? Right. 
Well, we're still, as I say, waiting for the first article to be voted 
on. After that, the committee will continue to debate the other three 
articles. There's one more article on perjury relating to his deposition 
in the Paula Jones sexual harassment lawsuit. There's an article on 
obstruction of justice, and a final article on abuse of power. In 
addition to that, Democrats in the Judiciary Committee have put forward 
a proposal for censuring the president. That's a much milder form 
of punishment, could involve a fine, basically a public rebuke by 
the Congress, but he would not be removed from office. If there's 
impeachment in the House, we should remind everybody, that's the first 
step in a two-step process. It would then go to the Senate for a trial 
where the president could be removed but only if two-thirds of the 
Senate agrees. Jim, Democratic lawmakers are anxious. They want very 
much to have censure debate on the House floor when they move to that 
stage. How likely is that to happen? Right. And again, we're getting 
a little bit ahead of ourselves. The committee is expected to approve, 
as I say, at least one article of impeachment. It looks like they've 
just recognized one more speaker. This is Congressman Gekas from Pennsylvania. 
Now he's yielding to Jim Rogan of California, another Republican. 
And again, we're waiting at the White House. But you're right. If 
we get through this initial committee action, it will go to the House 
floor, and at that point, the real arm twisting begins behind the 
scenes. It's already going on, and this presidential statement we 
expect momentarily will be an effort by the White House to twist as 
many arms as possible and probably to boost public support. Presidents 
always relied on public opinion polls, but they may not be enough 
to save him from the scourge of impeachment. So right now, he's I'd 
say in a very desperate situation trying to find the votes to avoid 
that. We're looking at where we are, where we're about to go. Jim, 
can you briefly take us back a bit, the road map to how we got to 
this point? Right. Essentially, we go back to January, the allegations 
the president was involved with White House intern, Monica Lewinsky, 
and then the fact of an investigation led by the independent counsel 
Kenneth Starr. The evidence he produced forming the basis for an impeachment 
inquiry approved in the House of Representatives largely along party 
lines. We expect the vote on articles of impeachment to be very much 
along party lines. That's a big difference between this impeachment 
process, we expect, and the one in 1974 involving Richard Nixon in 
which seven Republicans crossed party lines in the committee and supported 
articles of impeachment. That was seen as a much more bipartisan effort. 
This is still seen by many people as partisan driven. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>