<DOC>
<DOCNO> VOA19981211.1600.2661 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Dave Swan, you're still up on Capitol Hill, correct? i am. Give us 
a little more react up there. What can we expect in the days ahead? 
Some public pronouncements. Is the Senate going to sort of lay low 
and be quiet and wait until things come to it? What can we expect. 
Well, I think that's exactly it. People have decided they will not 
make any statements in advance, but if the case gets to the Senate, 
then they'll have to decide exactly how to handle it. There's some 
pretty strict procedures laid out by the Senate rule. The chief justice 
of the United States would preside, some of the Republicans from the 
House would act as prosecutors, Mr. Clinton's lawyers would defend 
him, and the senators would do something that they're not used to 
doing, which is just sitting silently and listening, not expressing 
themselves. The question is how long this might drag on, how long 
it would occupy the country, maybe even paralyze the country, as some 
critics have suggested. Senate Majority Leader Trent Lott said a few 
days ago that it might be resolved in as little as a few weeks. Others 
are saying months. And this is one of the arguments that the president's 
supporters are raising, the prospect of a government in paralysis 
in their efforts to head off impeachment by the House. So essentially, 
the mood in the Senate is: Let's wait and see, but let's be ready. 
And there's a very strong sense of tradition and duty over here. I 
think if the House impeaches, the Senate would have a hard time trying 
to avoid putting on a trial. Dave, I think we're going to take it 
back to the committee where Representative Charles Canady, a Republican 
of Florida - We've heard from the Democrats just recently; let's hear 
what the Republicans are saying right now. ... clear knowledge that 
he might be asked questions about Ms. Lewinsky and with a plan to 
lie if he was asked questions. He thought he could get away with telling 
lies because of the affidavit that she had given. Now I would feel 
differently about this if the president had truly been blindsided, 
if he had not known that the subject of Ms. Lewinsky was likely to 
come up. He thought that was a closed chapter, nobody knew about it, 
and a question comes at him like a bolt out of the blue. I think some 
people believe that's what happened in this deposition, but the record 
absolutely shows that wasn't the case. He knew she was on the witness 
list. He knew all the circumstances, and he knew that he was likely 
to be asked about her. He was asked about her, and he sat there and 
we watched him, and he coolly, in a calculated manner lied. That's 
what took place there. Now that is a serious... Again, we've been 
hearing from Representative Charles Canady of Florida, a Republican 
on the committee. We earlier heard from Democrat John Conyers. The 
arguments continue in the House Judiciary Committee over what is perjury, 
did the president commit perjury, and perhaps most importantly of 
all: Is perjury in this case an impeachable offense, an offense worthy 
of removing the president of the United States from office? The debate 
will go on, Erin and Victor, probably well into the night here in 
Washington, but the facts are clear now. We do have one article of 
impeachment approved by the House Judiciary Committee. For the first 
time in 24 years, a president now faces an impeachment charge in the 
House. There will be a vote in the full House of Representatives next 
Thursday or Friday, clearly the most important vote of Bill Clinton's 
presidency. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>