<DOC>
<DOCNO> VOA19981211.0500.1829 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
The U.S. House of Representatives Judiciary Committee resumes debate 
today ahead of an expected vote on proposed articles of impeachment 
against President Clinton. The Republican majority which drafted the 
charges says Mr. Clinton committed perjury, obstructed justice and 
abused his powers as he tried to conceal an affair with a former White 
House intern. Democrats deny the charges. They say the president's 
conduct was reprehensible but not impeachable. So two of these articles 
of impeachment involve allegations of perjury or lying under oath. 
But legally, perjury can be difficult to prove, and constitutional 
scholars are divided over whether perjury alone rises to the level 
of an impeachable offense. Our national correspondent Jim Malone has 
more. Perjury is at the heart of the impeachment case against President 
Clinton. House Republicans, following the lead of independent counsel 
Kenneth Starr, accuse the president of lying under oath when he denied 
a sexual relationship with Monica Lewinsky before the Starr grand 
jury in August and in a sworn statement in January for the Paula Jones 
sexual harassment lawsuit. Time and again, Republicans on the House 
Judiciary Committee have pushed the president's defenders to explain 
Mr. Clinton's denials of sexual involvement with Ms. Lewinsky. This 
is an exchange between Republican congressman James Sensenbrenner 
and White House chief counsel Charles Roth. But did he lie? I'm -- 
I'm -- and I'm going to respond to your question. I have no doubt 
that he walked up to a line that he thought he understood. Reasonable 
people -- and you maybe have reached this conclusion -- could determine 
that he crossed over that line and then what for him was truthful 
but misleading, or non-responsive and misleading, or evasive was in 
fact false. But in his mind -- that's the heart and soul of perjury 
-- he thought, he believed what he was doing was being evasive, but 
truthful. That reasoning by Mr. Roth is at the heart and soul of the 
president's defense against perjury, that someone can't have committed 
perjury if they believe what they're saying to be true. Perjury convictions 
can be difficult because they require proof that a person knowingly 
and intentionally gave false statements under oath. Beyond the debate 
over whether the president technically committed perjury is a second, 
perhaps more important, question with which members of the House are 
now wrestling. Even if the president did commit perjury in lying about 
his relationship with Monica Lewinsky, does it rise to the level of 
high crimes and misdemeanors set forth by the U.S. Constitution as 
grounds for impeachment? Most Republicans on the House Judiciary Committee 
already believe that it does, including Congressman Bill McCollum 
of Florida. The president of the United States committing perjury, 
if we believe he did, obstructing justice in the court system, and 
lying in the grand jury are things which subvert the justice system 
of this nation. But there's a contrary view advanced by the president's 
Democratic defenders, and even a few Republicans. William Weld is 
the former Republican governor of Massachusetts and a former federal 
prosecutor during the Reagan administration. I am pretty well convinced 
that adultery, fornication or even a false denial -- false; I'm assuming 
perjury here -- false denial of adultery or fornication, they do not 
constitute high crimes and misdemeanors within the meaning of the 
impeachment clause of the U.S. Constitution. They're not offenses 
against a system of government. They don't imperil the structure of 
our government. As the impeachment debate in the House moves ahead, 
public opinion will continue to play a critical role in the process. 
Opinion polls continue to show most Americans believe the president 
did lie under oath. But they also indicate that up to 2/3 of the public 
does not believe that that constitutes an impeachable offense. The 
White House is relying on this bedrock of support in the polls to 
ensure the president's survival. They argue that even if Mr. Clinton 
is impeached by the House, he'd survive an impeachment trial in the 
Senate because his opponents have little chance of mustering the 67 
out of 100 votes required to convict the president and remove him 
from office. Jim Malone, VOA News, Washington. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>