<DOC>
<DOCNO> VOA19981211.0500.1336 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
There was a time in the early 19th century when it was thought that 
great canals would revolutionize commerce and travel. VOA's travel 
reporter Ted Lanfair tells us about one of those canals designed to 
connect Washington, the nation's capital, with America's western heartland. 
The Chesapeake and Ohio, or C&O Canal, was inspired by the wildly 
successful Erie Canal that had been built across New York state. That 
canal made its supporters rich. The Erie Canal also inspired stories 
and songs about the romance of canals, canal men and even the mules 
that pulled the boats and barges from a towpath next to the canal. 
Financiers in the Washington, D.C., area also knew what canals meant 
to cities like Venice in Italy and Volgograd in Russia. Remember the 
song Volga Boatman? So the canal backers hurried to build the C&O 
Canal from the old Port of Georgetown in Washington, D.C., to Pittsburgh. 
The Potomac River flows from Georgetown into the Chesapeake Bay, and 
Pittsburgh is on the Ohio River; hence, the name Chesapeake and Ohio. 
The portion along the Potomac River, 296 kilometers long, was completed 
to Cumberland in western Maryland. Then the company ran out of money, 
so the C&O Canal never reached the Ohio River in Pittsburgh. The C&O 
Canal includes 74 stone locks as well as brick aqueducts to bring 
in water from the river. Rita Knox, a National Park Service ranger 
at the C&O Canal Exhibition Center in Cumberland, says at the canal's 
peak in the 1870s, more than 500 long, narrow boats carried cargo 
on the canal. The boat was divided up into a mule stable, the captain's 
cabin, the hay house where they kept grain and feed for the animals, 
and then the cargo holds. And even a cook's quarters. Although boats 
passed each other on this narrow canal, there were few serious accidents. 
The boats were moving at only about 5 kilometers an hour. Old photographs 
show children on deck strapped in harnesses to keep them from falling 
overboard. Rita Knox tells of one sad incident. A boat was passing 
by a factory in the Georgetown area which had a steam exhaust pipe 
coming out of the side of the building. Just as the boat went past 
that, the hot, boiling steam blew into the cabin of this boat. The 
children were scalded to death. There's one long tunnel on the Chesapeake 
and Ohio Canal just wide enough for one boat to get through. Once 
through is a famous standoff when a boat arrived from each direction 
and neither captain would back off. Finally, the -- one of the canal 
company superintendents came and lit a bunch of green corn to literally 
smoke the people out of the tunnel. What killed the C&O Canal and 
other U.S. canals? This! On the very day that ground was broken on 
the C&O Canal in 1828, the nation's first railroad, the Baltimore 
and Ohio, got started along pretty much the same route heading for 
Pittsburgh. Soon, faster railroads that ran in all seasons stole business 
from the canals. Even so, the C&O stayed in business for 74 years, 
mainly carrying coal from western Maryland. Today, it's mostly a recreation 
site. In the Washington area, the C&O Canal still has water. The Park 
Service runs replica boats out of Georgetown. They're a big tourist 
attraction. Beyond Great Falls are old abandoned sections. The stones 
of the locks and a little iron work are all that survive. Around them 
are grass and trees with the Potomac River just over the hill. But 
if the canal itself is almost gone, most of the towpath still exists 
all the way to Cumberland. It's a beautiful, wild trail for hikers, 
bikers and horseback riders. We found one song about the C&O Canal. 
It's a jazz piece called Skating on the C&O Canal. We'll close with 
it. I'm Ted Lanfair. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>