<DOC>
<DOCNO> VOA19981211.0500.2471 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Tuesday, President Clinton is set to visit Bethlehem, the West Bank 
town that is the historic birthplace of Jesus. He will be the first 
U.S. president to visit Palestinian- controlled areas. He does so 
at the same time the town is preparing for its annual Christmas celebrations. 
VOAs David Gollust reports. Construction work is going on here at 
a frantic pace as Palestinian authorities race against time to get 
central Bethlehem and Manger Square, site of the Church of the Nativity, 
into shape for the Clinton visit. Bethlehem is in the midst of a multi-million 
dollar building program. It is preparing for an expected surge of 
tourists a year from now celebrating the new millennium, in effect 
the 2,000th anniversary of the birth of Christ. The central part of 
this hilltop city, 10 kilometers south of Jerusalem, has been torn 
up for months as workmen widen roads and build a tourist reception 
and nativity museum. With only 2 weeks advance notice of the Clinton 
visit, city officials are trying to repave Manger Square and the main 
access road to be able to greet the president and his family. Mr. 
Clinton is visiting Palestinian-run Gaza and Bethlehem along with 
Israel to spur implementation of the U.S.-brokered Wye River Agreement. 
Bethlehem mayor Panna Nazir says the unprecedented gesture has wide 
political significance. This has a very big indication. This, it has 
one meaning, that the United States administration is interested in 
having peace, confidence and peace between the state of Israel and 
the neighboring countries. Plans call for President Clinton to light 
the Christmas tree officially starting Bethlehem's 1998 holiday celebration 
and to visit the Church of the Nativity which stands on the presumed 
site of Christ's birth, and parts of which date back to the fourth 
century. The Clintons stand to be among only a few thousand foreigners 
to visit Bethlehem this Christmas season. In addition to the construction 
mess, there have been serious clashes over the past week between Palestinian 
youths and Israeli security forces at the tomb of Rachel, an Israeli-controlled 
Jewish shrine, less than a kilometer from Manger Square. Mayor Nazir 
concedes the spectacle on TV newscasts of stone-throwing youths and 
soldiers firing tear gas and rubber-coated bullets will scare away 
tourists. But he says he understands the passion of the demonstrators 
who want Israel to release Palestinian political and security prisoners 
as its part of the Wye Agreement. We are working for peace, and we 
are dedicated to peace, but we cannot afford to keep our children, 
our people inside Israeli because I don't see any common sense in 
that. Mayor Nazir and Palestinian tourism officials think the political 
and construction turmoil will end in time. They say as many as 3 million 
tourists could come here for the 15- month millennial celebrations 
which begin at Christmas next year and continue until Easter in 2001. 
David Gollust, VOA News, Bethlehem. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>