<DOC>
<DOCNO> VOA19981211.1600.3158 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Well, now a British fantasy tale becomes an international bestseller, 
and an American detective novelist writes that medieval English mysteries, 
and a mathematician reveals that the links between story telling and 
statistics really is pretty close. VOA's Nancy Beardsley has the book 
briefs for this week. A book about a boy wizard who doesn't know his 
own powers is charming readers on both sides of the Atlantic. "Harry 
Potter and The Sorcerer's Stone" by British writer J.K. Rowling became 
a huge hit in England after it appeared last year, and a new American 
edition is soaring to the top of children's bestseller lists in the 
U.S. Film rights have been bought by Warner Bros. The story describes 
how wizards snatch an orphan named Harry away from his unloving aunt 
and uncle to attend a school for magicians. While Harry is born with 
the gift for the supernatural, J.K. Rowling says it's important to 
her story that he has to undergo training as well. People tend to 
buy me a lot of fantasies now, and in fact it's not my very favorite 
genre. And the reason it's not my favorite genre with a few masterful 
exceptions, life is a bit too easy for these gifted super heroes in 
these books. I mean, in my books, a lot of the humor and a lot of 
the drama comes from the fact that magic is like everything else, 
something you have to practice or something you have to perfect before 
you can really use it. Success hasn't come easily to J.K. Rowling 
herself. She wrote "Harry Potter" largely in cafes in Edinburgh, Scotland 
where she was a young single mother living on welfare. My daughter 
wouldn't take her nap unless she was kept moving, so I used to have 
to push her around town. And then when she fell asleep, I would slip 
into a cafe and I would write like fury. At that time, I was living 
in a very horrible flat, and it was nice to get out, and it was nice 
to be in the warm. And I've tried to pay them back by being interviewed 
in their cafes since everything's happened so they'll get free publicity 
out of it. J.K. Rowling has already published a second "Harry Potter" 
bestseller in Britain and plans a total of seven books in all. The 
series will end with Harry's graduation from magic school. While J.K. 
Rowling takes readers to a world of British make believe, American 
mystery writer Sharon Kaye Penman transports them to Britain's distant 
past. She's just published a second detective story set in 12 century 
London called "Cool as the Grave." The story mixes fictional events 
with real-life intrigue involving Eleanor of Aquitane and her sons, 
Richard Lionhearted and Prince John. Sharon Penman says she's been 
fascinated by medieval England for the past 20 years. The Middle Ages 
was wide open, emotions were closer to the surface, and the contrast 
were violent and very dramatic. It was a time of incredible savagery 
and yet you would also find healing grace. Since 12th century sleuths 
lacked modern day detection aids like blood samples and fingerprints, 
Sharon Penman's heroes have to rely mainly on their wits to solve 
crimes. But they don't have to worry about modern-day legalities like 
search warrants, which gives them a lot more freedom to pursue their 
suspects. Sharon Kaye Penman is an attorney by training and draws 
on her own legal background to understand the intricacies of medieval 
law. And finally, stories and statistics are usually seen as two entirely 
different realms, one full of creative possibilities, the other, limited 
by scientific precision. But mathematician John Allen Paulos believes 
they have more in common than many people understand. In a new book 
called "Once Upon a Number," the Temple University professor says 
statistical terms like standard variation and variance have their 
literary counterparts in words like unusual, peculiar, original, or 
extreme. And the two disciplines share similar goals. Stories in general 
focus on a few people and tell us a lot about those few people. Statistics, 
demographic, and other focus on a lot of people and tell us just a 
few things about them. But both attempt to get at an understanding 
of the world. They complement each other. Take a tale about the horrors 
of racism. If we assume that an equal percentage of blacks and whites 
are racists, blacks are still many times more likely to encounter 
racism in the United States simply because their numbers are so much 
smaller. John Paulos says statistics can make a story more dramatic 
while the human details behind a set of statistics can bring bloodless 
figures to life. That's all from book briefs. I'm Nancy Beardsley. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>