<DOC>
<DOCNO> VOA19981211.1600.0616 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Now, Jim, we're told that within about a minute or so, the president 
of the United States will, in fact, talk to the nation from the White 
House. How effective can hi talk be at this point? It's a little late 
in the game according to some estimates. Certainly late for the committee, 
Victor, you're right. But, obviously, he's looking at the full House 
vote expected next week. There's a group of moderate Republicans and 
conservative Democrats, I would point out, perhaps a total of 20 to 
30 people, as we look at the White House and wait for the president 
to come out to speak. This could be very interesting. He may be speaking 
at the very moment when the House Judiciary Committee actually takes 
the vote. That was going to be my question. That's awkward. To say 
the least. It's his choice; he's the president, so... Certainly an 
unprecedented circumstance here in the U.S. That's right. That's right. 
But certainly, the president has not spoken on this publicly in a 
while, and obviously it's a sign the White House is very concerned. 
Republicans may have the votes to push an impeachment, and they think 
it's time for public appeal. And the president's been getting a lot 
of advice both from in the Democratic Party and from people outside 
the White House. The president now coming out of the Oval Office, 
walking down the portico area toward the rose garden where he's going 
to be speaking. Let's go to the president. Good afternoon. As anyone 
close to me knows, for months, I have been grappling with how best 
to reconcile myself to the American people, to acknowledge my own 
wrongdoing, and still to maintain my focus on the work of the presidency. 
Others are presenting my defense on the facts, the law, and the Constitution. 
Nothing I can say now can add to that. What I want the American people 
to know, what I want the Congress to know is that I am profoundly 
sorry for all I have done wrong in words and deeds. I never should 
have misled the country, the Congress, my friends, or my family. Quite 
simply, I gave in to my shame. I have been condemned by my accusers 
with harsh words. And while it's hard to hear yourself called deceitful 
and manipulative, I remember Ben Franklin's admonition that our critics 
are our friends, for they do show us our faults. Mere words cannot 
fully express the profound remorse I feel for what our country is 
going through and for what members of both parties in Congress are 
now forced to deal with. These past months have been a torturous process 
of coming to terms with what I did. demands consequences, and I'm 
prepared to accept them. Painful though the condemnation of the Congress 
would be, it would pail in comparison to the consequences of the pain 
I have caused my family. There is no greater agony. Like anyone who 
honestly faces the shame of wrongful conduct, I would give anything 
to go back and undo what I did. But one of the painful truths I have 
to live with is the reality that that is simply not possible. An old 
and dear friend of mine recently sent me the wisdom of a poet who 
wrote, "The moving finger writes, and having writ, moves on. Now all 
your piety nor wit shall lure it back to cancel half a line, nor all 
your tears wash out a word of it." So nothing, not piety nor tears 
nor wit nor torment can alter what I have done. I must make my piece 
with that. the work of the American people. Thank you very much. Mr. 
President, can a reasonable person conclude that you lied under oath, 
sir? Do you agree with your attorney's assessment of that? You've 
been listening to President Clinton giving a brief speech from the 
White House regarding the impeachment vote that's about to take place 
in the House Judiciary Committee. Jim Malone, we heard a number of 
statements from the president. One was contrition saying he was sorry 
and that he had misled the American people and the Congress. How are 
we supposed to read that? I think the important thing we heard from 
the president, one we heard, one we didn't hear. First of all, the 
president said he would accept censure. That is to me the headline 
coming out of this. He has not said that previously. The White House 
officials have indicated they would but there's a firm statement now 
from the president of the United States that he will accept the judgment 
of censure, which has only happened once in American history, that 
to Andrew Jackson back in the 1820s. But what we did not hear from 
the president, although we did hear contrition, we did not hear an 
admission that he lied, and that was a specific demand that a number 
of moderate Republicans and even a few Democrats had been hoping he 
would do to satisfy their demands that he would admit guilt in what 
they felt was wrongdoing and lying before the grand jury. Was this 
enough to sway any minds on Capitol Hill? That, of course, is not 
for us to judge. My sense is it may not go too far. And since the 
vote in the House we expect not till next Thursday, I'm not sure we've 
heard the last from President Clinton on this. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>