<DOC>
<DOCNO> VOA19981211.0500.0362 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
By Saturday, Bill Clinton could become only the third president in 
U.S. history to face impeachment charges in the U.S. Congress. Republicans 
insist they have enough votes to impeach the president in the House, 
setting up a trial in the Senate which could lead to the president's 
removal from office. Democrats are pushing a milder form of punishment 
known as censure which would amount to a public scolding of Mr. Clinton 
by Congress, but would allow him to remain in office and avoid a Senate 
trial. Our national correspondent Jim Malone explains how each option 
would work. If the House Judiciary Committee approves one or more 
articles of impeachment against President Clinton, the matter is automatically 
referred to the full House for a vote. If the House were to approve 
one or more articles of impeachment by a simple majority vote, Mr. 
Clinton would then become only the second president in U.S. history 
to be impeached, joining Andrew Johnson who was impeached by the House 
in 1868. Think of impeachment as the political equivalent of a criminal 
indictment by the House, the first step in a two-step process. Impeachment 
by the House would then lead to an impeachment trial in the Senate. 
The chief justice of the U.S. Supreme Court would preside over the 
Senate trial and all Senate business would stop until the president's 
fate was determined. The Senate would in effect act as a 100-member 
jury during the trial, which could go on for months. A 2/3 vote, or 
67 senators, would be required to convict the president of what the 
Constitution calls high crimes or misdemeanors, and then remove him 
from office. In 1868, President Andrew Johnson was impeached by the 
House because of a dispute over whether he or the Senate had the power 
to dismiss members of his cabinet. Mr. Johnson remained in office 
when the Senate failed to convict him by a single vote. In 1974, the 
House Judiciary Committee approved three articles of impeachment against 
President Richard Nixon in connection with the Watergate scandal, 
but Mr. Nixon resigned before the full House could vote on impeachment 
after Republican congressional leaders told him he would not survive 
a trial in the Senate. In the case of President Clinton, many Democrats 
favor censuring the president with a public rebuke by the Congress, 
perhaps combined with a fine. The only U.S. president ever censured 
was Andrew Jackson. Mr. Jackson was censured by the Senate but not 
the House in 1834 because of a political dispute over the U.S. Central 
Bank. Three years later, the Senate voted to expunge the censure from 
the congressional record. Unlike impeachment, there is no set congressional 
procedure for censure. It could include a financial penalty, and both 
the House and Senate could consider different censure measures if 
they wanted to. But historically, Congress has had much more experience 
with censure than impeachment. Dozens of members of Congress have 
been censured over the years for offenses ranging from financial misconduct 
to sexual indiscretions. Jim Malone, VOA News, Washington. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>