<DOC>
<DOCNO> VOA19981211.1600.2158 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
A historic day here in the United States. The Judiciary Committee 
of the U.S. House of Representatives has approved one article of impeachment 
against President William Jefferson Clinton for perjury in the Monica 
Lewinsky scandal. The Republican-controlled committee voted along 
party lines just moments ago, 21 to 16, who approved one count of 
perjury for Mr. Clinton's testimony before a grand jury in August. 
The committee is moving forward at this moment to vote on three other 
articles of impeachment: that's obstruction of justice, abuse of power, 
and one count of perjury. The full House of Representatives is poised 
to take up the impeachment issue later in the week. And Erin? Victor, 
just before that historic committee vote, President Clinton addressed 
the nation from the White House rose garden saying that he is ready 
to accept censure, a milder form of punishment that is being advocated 
by Democratic lawmakers, censure being a public scolding, if you will, 
by the Congress. And to help us now, bring all of this together is 
national correspondent Jim Malone. Jim? Well, Erin and Victor, we 
have now crossed the rubicon, as they say with one article of impeachment 
approved by the House Judiciary Committee. That means that this matter 
now automatically is referred to the full House of Representatives 
for an impeachment vote next week, probably Thursday or Friday. If 
the House on the simple majority vote were to approve impeachment 
- that is the political equivalent of a criminal indictment in the 
House of Representatives - that would automatically set up a trial 
in this Senate, an impeachment trial presided over by the chief justice 
of the United States Supreme Court, a trial which could go on indefinitely. 
In order for the president to be convicted and removed from office, 
we would require a vote of two-thirds of the senators or 67 of the 
100 sitting senators who act as a jury in that trial. And I believe 
that we'll be talking with our Senate correspondent David Swan in 
a few moments to tell us more about the prospects for that. But as 
of now, we're definitely going to a full House vote on impeachment, 
something which has not happened since 1974. And in fact, in 1974, 
it never even made it that far because the House Judiciary Committee 
approved three articles of impeachment against Richard Nixon, but 
the president resigned a few days after that. It never got to a full 
House vote. The only time we've had a full House vote and the last 
time, I should say, was in 1868, Andrew Johnson, who was impeached 
but who survived his trial in the Senate by a single vote. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>