<DOC>
<DOCNO> ABC19981120.1830.1325 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> CAPTION </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
We're going to take "A closer look" tonight at what is supposed to 
be a Brand new, exciting, daring, good for mankind era in space. Yes, 
note the superlatives. They are all in jeopardy. At the baikonur rocket 
base in Kazakhstan this morning, the Russians launched the very first 
part of what is supposed to be the new international space station. 
What went up today is supposed to be the power and communications 
component for the early stages of the space station's construction. 
But as of tonight, that's about as good as it gets. This is primarily 
a U.S.-Russian effort. And it may be falling apart on the issues of 
money and pride. Here's ABC's Ned Potter. It is so large you will 
be able to see it from earth. It will be longer than the statue of 
liberty is tall. And it will have more space inside than two 747s. 
It will take five years and 90 launches by the U.S. and Russia to 
get all the parts into orbit. It's going to be tough. It's not going 
to be pretty. But we are going to have a real international space 
station, not a Western-Bloc space station. But for the Russians, the 
new station is not a beginning, it's the end of an era. Remember that 
Russia's battered old space station, Mir, is still up there after 
14 years, so they are supposed to send Mir crashing into the pacific 
ocean next summer. It's still a national pride issue. So we're not 
saying, we're not telling them, hey, you got to kill Mir and get that 
thing out of here. We're saying, "we're concerned because we're not 
seeing any evidence that they can support both." Losing Mir would 
be yet another blow to Russia's status as a Superpower. It always 
made Russia different from the smaller countries it wanted to impress. 
Russia's cosmonauts won't like answering to Americans on the new space 
station. Anatoly solovyov, the most experienced space Walker in history, 
is retiring rather than be second in command. What the space station 
has done is to basically rein in everybody else's space programs into 
a subservient position to the United States. Though the U.S. is in 
charge of the new station, involving 16 countries where 12 languages 
are spoken, it cannot solve the money troubles of its biggest partner, 
Russia. A case in point -- two weeks from now, the U.S. shuttle "endeavor" 
will bring up a second station component and then the whole project 
will grind to a halt for at least six months. Because the next part, 
from Russia, has been sitting unfinished for two years for lack of 
funds. The station is a very complex structure. It will take years 
and years to finish it. It may never be finished. Never be finished? 
Some at NASA concede that may happen, but to them, even a partly complete 
station could support some work by astronauts. Never in peacetime 
has a building project like this been mounted. And nobody said it 
would be easy. Ned Potter, ABC News, Johnson space center, Houston. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>