<DOC>
<DOCNO> APW19981120.0877 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Ethnic Albanian rebels were accused of ambushing a Serb police vehicle 
Friday, killing two policemen and severely wounding three others in 
the latest outbreak of violence in Kosovo. As fresh white snow blanketed 
this troubled province of Serbia, making roads hazardous and disrupting 
aid convoys, the low level of conflict that has persisted despite 
an official cease-fire continued. The official Serb Media Center said 
``Albanian extremists'' struck early Friday near Prilep, on the road 
from Pec to Djakovica about 100 kilometers (60 miles) from the provincial 
capital Pristina. The policemen were returning to barracks after completing 
their shift, the center said, when guerrillas fired an anti-tank round 
into their vehicle and then opened up with small arms. The dead were 
identified as Zoran Vrbaski, 25, and Janos Cizmadzija, 45. Three of 
their colleagues were badly wounded and transported to the hospital 
in Pristina. A fourth suffered light injuries. The attack could not 
be independently confirmed, but it typifies the violence between Serb 
security forces and ethnic Albanian rebels since last month's cease-fire 
and the Oct. 12 agreement between American negotiator Richard Holbrooke 
and President Slobodan Milisevic. Three Serb policemen were wounded 
in the same area Wednesday. Another was reported abducted earlier 
this week in Podujevo, northeast of Pristina. Ethnic Albanians make 
up roughly 90 percent of the two million people living in the province. 
Their political leadership is seeking independence from Serbia. Hundreds 
of Albanians, mostly civilians, were killed and hundreds of thousands 
displaced during a government crackdown from February to October. 
The U.N. refugee agency was forced to divert three aid convoys Friday 
carrying food, blankets and mattresses. The supplies originally were 
destined for distribution points west of Pristina, but were sent instead 
to Podujevo after a snowfall of between 20 and 50 centimeters (8 and 
20 inches), said spokesman Fernando del Mundo. The United Nations 
High Commissioner for Refugees says no refugees now live in the open. 
Many are sheltering in the homes of friends and relatives or have 
managed to rebuild a warm room in their damaged houses. But they still 
need supplies to survive the winter, Del Mundo said. ``It's going 
to be a major problem, especially in mountain areas,'' he said. ``Even 
in the towns and cities, people are sharing food with displaced people. 
... Until the next harvest, they will need support.'' The UNHCR says 
about 60,000 refugees have returned to their homes over the last few 
weeks. But High Commissioner Sadako Ogata said the fragile peace ``is 
marred by virtually daily incidents.'' Mrs. Ogata, speaking in Geneva, 
called on countries hosting Kosovo refugees to be patient and for 
the Yugoslav authorities and ethnic Albanians to refrain from violence. 
The UNHCR estimates that 68,000 Yugoslav citizens, mostly Kosovo Albanians, 
have applied for asylum in Western Europe this year. Germany, Switzerland 
and the Netherlands have the largest numbers. Meanwhile, the top U.S. 
mediator for Kosovo dismissed the idea that Serbian President Milan 
Milutinovic had rejected a U.S. draft plan that reportedly would give 
ethnic Albanians virtual self-rule. ``We don't consider the Serbs 
have rejected our agreement and expect to be talking to them in the 
next few days,'' mediator Christopher Hill said in Lisbon, Portugal. 
Serbian President Milan Milutinovic on Wednesday dismissed the U.S. 
proposal for giving too much power to independence-minded ethnic Albanians. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>