<DOC>
<DOCNO> APW19981120.0267 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
A real-life soap opera unfolded this week at Hong Kong's second-biggest 
television station when a 9-year veteran resigned and a property developer 
was appointed to replace him. Feng Xaioping has little experience 
with broadcasting and his extensive ties to mainland China have stirred 
concerns about self-censorship at Asian Television Ltd. Feng is the 
station's majority shareholder, but his move into the chief executive's 
office capped a bizarre management succession that began last year 
when ATV's then-chairman, Hong Kong businessman Lim Por-yen, was detained 
in Taiwan on corruption charges. Kenneth Kwok resigned as acting chief 
executive Tuesday and ATV appointed Feng to succeed him the next day. 
Feng is also executive director of Crossprofit Development Ltd., a 
real estate company with projects in China. Staff at ATV have been 
left in the dark on why Kwok resigned _ he only cited ``personal reasons'' 
at a press conference on his departure. Kwok's resignation is also 
seen as the major reason behind chief operating officer Bruno Wu's 
decision to step down. Although Wu's departure has not been formally 
announced, he will only stay at the station for another six months, 
ATV said. Wu, a Chinese American who came to ATV only this year, had 
been seen as someone who could pull the station out of its position 
as Hong Kong's perennial second-place terrestrial network behind Television 
Broadcasts in the words of one industry publication, ASIAcom. But 
some staff expressed concern that Feng could impose censorship on 
coverage of sensitive mainland Chinese affairs, while others were 
concerned about getting their year-end bonuses. ATV denied that there 
would be any changes to broadcasting as a result of the management 
shuffle. When Hong Kong reverted to China from Britain last year, 
there were widespread concerns about censorship or self-censorship 
in the territory's free press, but media have continued to aggressively 
report on sensitive issues, including corruption and social unrest 
in China. Appointing someone with little journalism background and 
strong ties to the mainland aroused concerns over the editorial independence 
of ATV, said Eric Ma, assistant professor of journalism at Chinese 
University of Hong Kong. The latest management shakeup is one of several 
recent hurdles facing the station since the arrest of Lim, who was 
chairman of ATV at the time but now has been given the title of honorary 
chairman. Lim, also chairman of Hong Kong property developer Lai Sun 
Development Co. Ltd., is not allowed to leave Taiwan, where he was 
indicted in March on charges of paying 55.7 million Hong Kong dollars 
(U.S. dlrs 7 million) in bribes to a Taipei County official to help 
Lim's Taiwan-registered company in a government land deal. Kwok was 
appointed acting chief executive when Lim got into trouble. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>