<DOC>
<DOCNO> APW19981120.0236 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Japan's Fair Trade Commission has ruled that Microsoft Corp. violated 
the country's anti-monopoly laws by promoting software in a way that 
put competitors at a disadvantage, the commission said Friday. The 
trade watchdog issued a warning to Microsoft and its Japanese subsidiary 
against engaging in unfair business practices following an investigation, 
which began in January when officials raided the company's Tokyo offices. 
The admonition came as the Redmond, Washington-based software giant 
faces anti-trust allegations in a high-profile case in the United 
States. The trade commission said Microsoft attempted to unfairly 
restrict competitors' access to the market by bundling pre-installed 
word-processing and spreadsheet software, said FTC spokesman Kanichiro 
Nakanishi. Microsoft Co., the wholly-owned Japanese subsidiary of 
Microsoft Corp., issued a statement in Tokyo late Friday saying it 
had already voluntarily stopped the practices cited by the FTC and 
did not anticipate having to make any additional changes in its marketing 
activities in Japan. Makoto Naruke, the president of Microsoft Co., 
said in the statement that he welcomed the conclusion of the FTC's 
investigation and was confident that his company had acted in accordance 
with the law. A company official speaking on condition of anonymity 
said Microsoft does not plan to formally protest the ruling, but that 
the company does not believe it violated any laws. Brad Smith, general 
counsel for international affairs at Microsoft's headquarters, said 
the ruling in a way was positive for the company because the Japanese 
FTC decided not to pursue separate allegations involving dominance 
over Internet services. Similar allegations are central to the U.S. 
Justice Department's case against Microsoft. ``It's certainly ironic 
that the Japanese government has dropped all of the browser allegations, 
but our own government is continuing its attack on one of America's 
leading exporters,'' Smith said. The Japanese ruling has no bearing 
on the U.S. case, in which the Justice Department and 20 states contend 
Microsoft has used its dominance in PC operating systems to quash 
competition. Microsoft had contracts in Japan whereby companies offering 
Internet access were promoted via a list linked to its Windows software. 
In return, these service providers had agreed to promote Microsoft's 
Internet Explorer browser. Those contracts were criticized for being 
exclusionary, and Microsoft modified them earlier this year, the Microsoft 
lawyer said. In January, agents from the commission raided Microsoft's 
Tokyo offices, confiscating information about Microsoft's Windows 
operating system and Internet Explorer browser software. It also collected 
information about Microsoft's word processing program Word and spreadsheet 
Excel. Microsoft's Windows operating software controls the basic functions 
of 85 percent of the world's personal computers. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>