<DOC>
<DOCNO> APW19981120.0882 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Leaning out of jeep windows, Palestinian policemen triumphantly hoisted 
assault rifles into the air Friday and fired quick volleys to celebrate 
their takeover of this West Bank farming town after Israel's troop 
pullback. ``At last the sun of freedom rises,'' declared a banner 
at the entrance to town greeting the convoy of powder blue jeeps. 
Israel's departure from Qabatieh and 35 other small towns and villages 
gave Palestinian leader Yasser Arafat full or partial control over 
an additional 9.1 percent of the West Bank and took him one step closer 
to his final goal _ statehood. By late January, Israel is to have 
carried out two more pullbacks under the Wye River agreement, awarding 
Arafat joint or sole jurisdiction over 40 percent of the West Bank, 
or 920 square miles, roughly the size of New York City's five boroughs. 
However, support for the land-for-security agreement is slipping in 
Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu's hard-line government, and Israeli 
media said Friday the prime minister might call early elections in 
the spring, more than a year ahead of schedule. In the month since 
the signing of the accord in Washington, Israel and the Palestinians 
have incessantly argued about each others' obligations, and Friday's 
pullback was four days behind schedule because of Israeli delays in 
ratifying the accord. Last-minute glitches also threatened to hold 
up the pullback itself. Without informing the Palestinians, Israel 
made changes in the redeployment map Thursday night, such as keeping 
several roads, including the one to Qabatieh, under full Israeli control 
for the time being, rather than handing them to the Palestinians. 
Israeli soldiers had already been busy for several hours moving 130 
brown-and-yellow road markers to intersections in the northern West 
Bank to delineate the new borders when the Palestinians raised questions 
about the Israeli changes. The withdrawal screeched to a halt. Maps 
in hand, Israel's army commander in the West Bank, Maj. Gen. Moshe 
Yaalon, flew by helicopter to Arafat's headquarters. The two looked 
at the maps, Arafat gave his okay and the crisis was over. Palestinian 
negotiator Saeb Erekat, usually a tough critic of the Israeli government, 
said that surprisingly the arguments of recent weeks may have brought 
the two sides closer together. But more needed to be done, he said. 
``We have to concentrate ... and have to exert maximum efforts to 
build the trust required between us,'' Erekat said. On Friday afternoon, 
once the map crisis was over, Palestinian police took up their new 
positions in 36 towns and villages near Jenin and the West Bank town 
of Nablus. In Qabatieh, a town of 17,000 resident, hundreds turned 
out to watch the jeep convoy slowly making its way along the main 
street. Two teen-agers jumped onto the roof of the lead jeep and hoisted 
a large Palestinian flag. Officers in blue camouflage uniforms hanging 
out of the windows raised their Kalashnikov assault rifles and fired 
quick volleys into the air. Half a dozen Qabatieh residents joined 
in the chorus, firing their own machine guns, M-16 assault rifles 
and pistols. The display of fire power is not unusual for Qabatieh 
which was a stronghold of resistance to Israeli occupation during 
the 1987-1993 Palestinian uprising. At the height of the revolt in 
1988, hundreds of residents had rushed to the main square to cheer 
as vigilantes strung up the body of a suspected collaborator with 
Israel on an electricity pole. On that pole, residents on Friday draped 
a banner reading ``Today Qabatieh, tomorrow Jerusalem,'' a reference 
to Palestinian hopes to one day establish their capital in the holy 
city. At the ``Abu Halala Cafe' on main street, opinion was divided 
over whether the new rulers would bring sweeping changes. Teissir 
Mansour, a 50-year-old merchant sitting on a chair on the sidewalk, 
puffing on a cigarette, said it was time police put an end to rampant 
lawlessness. Many town residents are driving unlicensed cars without 
insurance, he said, prompting clan feuds over who will pay for the 
aftermath of accidents. His neighbor in the cafe, 55-year-old Khalil 
Abu Rub, was upset that he would still have to pass an Israeli checkpoint 
on his way to Jenin. ``I think nothing will change,'' he said grimly. 
The withdrawal left several Jewish settlements in the area as isolated 
enclaves, and Israeli troops began reinforcing them with cement trenches 
and shooting positions. In Ganim, a community of 51 families, many 
were thinking about leaving. Ilan Amar, 34, who had just moved to 
Ganim with his wife Rikki and three children three months ago, said 
he felt cheated. ``If this place turns into an armed camp, it's not 
the way we wanted to live,'' said Amar, who sells car paints in the 
Israeli port city of Haifa. Israel also released 250 Palestinian prisoners 
Friday, including 150 criminals. Arafat had demanded that all those 
freed be Palestinians who fought against Israeli occupation and despite 
some joyous family reunions Friday, many Palestinians felt disappointed. 
In a third step, Israel and the Palestinians signed the protocol for 
operating Yasser Arafat International Airport in the Gaza Strip town 
of Dahanieh. The airport, a strong symbol of fledgling Palestinian 
independence, will open Tuesday with a flight from Cairo carrying 
Egyptian government officials. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>