<DOC>
<DOCNO> APW19981120.1191 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
PARIS (AP) - Americans Nicole Bobek and Michael Weiss surprised Russia's 
world and European champions by taking the lead in the short programs 
at the Lalique Trophy competition Friday, one of the skating Grand 
Prix series. French couples led in both the ice dance and pairs to 
temporarily stop the Russian advance, who won all four titles at last 
week's meet. Bobek, who has had a up-and-down skating career lately, 
skated a clean program to Flamenco music from the movie `Zorro.' That 
put her in first ahead of Ukraine's Elena Liashenko, winner of Skate 
Canada, and European champion Maria Butyrskaya, who beat Bobek at 
Skate America. Weiss, second in the U.S. championships to Todd Eldredge 
the last two years, skated early and saw his lead hold up over world 
champion Alexei Yagudin. Bobek landed a superb triple lutz-double 
toe loop and a triple toe loop. She received marks from 5.3 to a high 
of 5.8 and earned a 4-3 decision on judges over Liashenko, who also 
skated clean. Bobek was the U.S. champion in 1995 but has had an checkered 
career since. After her coach Carlo Fassi died at the 1997 world championships, 
Bobek fell apart in the long program at Lausanne, Switzerland. She 
rebounded at the 1998 U.S. championships where she placed third to 
Michelle Kwan and Tara Lipinski with talk of a U.S. sweep at the Olympics. 
However at Nagano she barely stood up in her short program and long 
program and finished 17th. ``I've had plenty of downs followed by 
ups,'' said Bobek. ``And ups followed by downs'' ``Now it's time to 
tie the ups together,'' said new coach Richard Callahan, who trained 
Lipinski last year. Weiss skated second in the men's short and had 
marks of 5.4 to 5.7 for his routine to Van Halen music. He included 
a triple flip-triple toe loop as well as an optional triple axel, 
new to the short program this year. ``It is always hard to skate early 
and then watch the rest of the skaters,'' Weiss said. He plans a quadruple 
toe loop in the long program. ``I have been doing it a lot lately 
and it feels good,'' Weiss said. He has just missed it in Skate America 
where he was second to Yagudin. Yagudin, who came into Lalique with 
four victories in four events, faltered for the first time this year, 
barely holding his triple axel and tacking on only a double toe loop. 
He had been consistent this season landing a triple-triple easily. 
Then he scaled down a triple lutz to a double and scored technical 
marks in the 4.9 to 5.4 range. His presentation marks were higher, 
up to 5.8 but Weiss took six of the seven judges, losing only the 
Russian judge. Marina Anissina and Gwendal Peizerat of France fell 
in the original dance when he was swinging her around on a lift and 
lost about .4 from each judge for their composition marks. That dropped 
them down to the 5,1 to 5.4 range. For presentation the marks were 
mostly 5.7 to 5.8s which held them in first. The skated to the ``Masquerade'' 
Waltz. The Italian couple of Barbara Fusar-Poli and Marizio Margaglio 
came close but were not able to overtake them in the marks. Despite 
the fall, the French team took six of seven judges over the Italians. 
In the pairs, the French couple of Sarah Abitbol and Stephane Bernadis 
took the short program edging Russia's former world champions Marina 
Yeltsova and Andrei Bushkov. All the top couples tried triple toe 
loop jumps and throw triple moves with only slight mistakes separating 
them, such as Bushkov putting a hand down to steady himself after 
a jump. The long programs of all the events will be held on Saturday. 
The Lalique Trophy is the fourth in the International Skating Union's 
that features Olympic-eligible skaters. Winners of the events receive 
dlrs 30,000. The next event is the Cup of Russia in Moscow. The series 
culminates with the March final in Russia, two weeks before the world 
championships in Finland. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>