<DOC>
<DOCNO> APW19981120.0595 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Despite last-minute glitches, Israel withdrew troops from parts of 
the northern West Bank on Friday, fulfilling the first step of the 
new Mideast peace accord and moving the Palestinians a step closer 
to statehood. The withdrawal was already well under way when Palestinians 
raised questions about changes Israel made in the redeployment map 
on short notice. The pullback was put on hold and only resumed two 
hours later, after a meeting between Palestinian leader Yasser Arafat 
and the Israeli troop commander in the West Bank. The map incident 
was only the lasted hiccup in the implementation of the Wye River 
peace agreement which has been marred by delays and bitter disputes. 
``We have to exert maximum efforts to build the trust required between 
the two of us,'' said Palestinian negotiator Saeb Erekat. The pullback 
gives Arafat full or partial control of an additional 9.1 percent 
of the West Bank, or 510 square kilometers (204 square miles) and 
takes him a step closer to his final goal _ statehood in the West 
Bank and Gaza Strip. Israeli Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu, on 
the other hand, faces a mounting challenge by hawkish allies who oppose 
land concessions and threaten to topple the government. Netanyahu 
reportedly is considering calling early elections. ``We signed the 
agreement with a heavy heart, and with a heavy heart we proceed to 
implement it,'' Defense Minister Yitzhak Mordechai wrote Friday in 
the Yediot Ahronot daily. Israel also released 250 Palestinian prisoners, 
including 150 criminals, drawing complaints from the Palestinians 
who demanded that all those freed be security prisoners. ``It's a 
shame and a defeat for the Palestinian people,'' said Hisham Abdel 
Razek, a senior Palestinian Authority official in charge of prisoner 
affairs. Abdel Razek stayed home, instead of greeting returnees arriving 
by bus at the Nahal Oz crossing between Israel and Gaza. Mahmoud Obeid, 
a TV cameraman, was filming the arrivals when he recognized one of 
the prisoners as his brother Ahmed, whom he had last seen 11 years 
ago. Obeid dropped his camera, ran to his brother, a security prisoner, 
and hugged and kissed him. Israel and the Palestinians also signed 
a protocol for the operation of the Palestinian international airport 
in Gaza. Arafat said the airport would open Tuesday with a flight 
from Cairo carrying Egyptian government officials, the Palestinian 
news agency Wafa said. Planes from Morocco, Jordan, Spain and Holland 
were to follow, Wafa said. The Israeli redeployment began Friday morning. 
Israeli army trucks loaded with 130 red-and-yellow border markers 
left the Dotan army base south of the Palestinian town of Jenin and 
drove to road junctions to demarcate the new borders between Israeli- 
and Palestinian-controlled areas. On the outskirts of Silt al-Harthiye 
village near Jenin, a crane lifted a border stone the size of a washing 
machine from a truck. Nearby, Israeli and Palestinian officers pored 
over a map spread on the hood of a white Palestinian jeep to make 
sure the marker was being placed in exactly the right spot. A Hebrew-Arabic 
interpreter translated between the two sides. At the end of the withdrawal, 
an additional 36 smaller towns and villages had come under full Palestinian 
control, said Palestinian police commander Brig. Gen. Ismail Jaber. 
The Palestinian Authority already has full control over the seven 
West Bank cities and has joint jurisdiction with Israel in some 400 
villages. In Qabatieh, a town of 17,000, Palestinian police made a 
triumphant entry Friday afternoon. A convoy of more than a dozen police 
cars drove through the main street and officers shot their Kalashnikov 
assault rifles in the air. Thousands watched the arrival, but the 
despite the momentary festiveness, many remained skeptical. ``Outside 
of town, there are still Israeli checkpoints. So what will change?'' 
said Khalil Abu Rub, a 55-year-old merchant sitting in a nearby coffee 
shop. To Jewish settlers in the area, the pullback meant new anxiety, 
and some were toying with the idea of returning to Israel. ``If life 
becomes intolerable and dangerous, and there is even a chance that 
a child will be killed or injured, I think we should seriously consider 
leaving, provided the government will compensate us,'' said Ovadia 
Yaacov, 48, a retired army officer and father of three who lives in 
the Ganim settlement which after the pullback was surrounded on three 
sides by Palestinian-controlled areas. In the troop pullback, 2 percent 
of the West Bank, or 110 square kilometers (44 square miles), were 
transferred from sole Israeli control to joint jurisdiction. In addition, 
7.1 percent of the land, or 400 square kilometers (160 square miles), 
moved from joint jurisdiction to sole Palestinian control. Friday's 
withdrawal marks stage one of a three-phase pullback that is to be 
completed by the end of January. By then, Arafat will have full or 
partial control of 40 percent of the West Bank. While a vast majority 
of Israelis favor the withdrawal _ with polls consistently showing 
more than 70 percent approval _ Netanyahu had difficulties keeping 
his hard-line allies on board. ``Today is one of the worst days, as 
far as I'm concerned, in the inspiring history of Zionism,'' Jewish 
settler leader Aharon Domb, a former Netanyahu supporter, wrote in 
Yediot. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>