<DOC>
<DOCNO> MNB19981120.2100.0501 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> CAPTION </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
A fundamental now, what next? How far and how fast should the investigation 
go from here? We're joined by two committee members television viewers 
saw on the job yesterday, republican congressman Bob Inglis from Greenville, 
South Carolina, and democratic congressman Thomas Barrett. As usual, 
Anne Lewis is doing a great job of attacking the attacker. When the 
facts are against you argue the law. When the law is against you argue 
the facts. When both are against you, just change the subject and 
attack the attacker. This White House has conducted a campaign of 
character assassination against Ken Starr and it is truly despicable 
to have the chief law enforcement officer of the United States empowering 
people like Anne Lewis to run out in front of cameras and conduct 
a systematic campaign to destroy the rule of law in America. This 
is a very serious challenge to our whole constitutional framework 
to have people like Anne Lewis out there saying basically it's partisan, 
it's all about this rancor. It's not, Anne, it's about the rule of 
law and how your boss is engaged in a pattern of attacking the attacker 
rather than dealing with the facts. Why doesn't the president tell 
us about the facts? Why doesn't Anne Lewis tell us anything about 
the facts? Why didn't Mr. Kendall talk anything yesterday about the 
facts in this case? The reason is they know that the president of 
the United States lied, he lied under oath, and he's admitted that. 
Now he says he's not difficult of the technical crime of perjury. 
We'll see. I think it's an impeachable offense and it's a despicable 
attack on the rule of law in a systematic way by this White House 
and we just heard it from somebody from the White House who is systematically 
dedestroying the rule of law in this country. Congressman Barrett, 
Sam dash had something to say about the rule of law today by resigning 
and criticizing Starr for take sides in this argument. Obviously and 
he could have resigned prior to Ken Starr's testimony if he felt that 
Ken Starr should simply not appear at all before the committee but 
he waited until after Ken Starr appeared and made it very, very clear 
to the American people that he was an active, aggressive advocate 
in this case. Ken Starr is not independent. Ken Starr wants to have 
the president removed from office and that became very, very clear 
yesterday. I thought Ken Starr did a good John. He's a good litigator 
and he litigated very, very well on behalf of what he believes in. 
The problem is that that's not his job. His job is to bring the facts 
to our committee and let the members of congress make the decision. 
the Congressman Inglis when you read the statute that set up Ken Starr's 
job in this case it really does not say that he will be an advocate. 
It paints that job as more a conduit of information. That's what he 
was yesterday. I couldn't disagree more with what my colleague said. 
Yesterday he said repeatedly, did you hear him, Tom, he said this 
is not my decision to make. It's a decision resting solely with the 
Congress of the United States. If he said that once yesterday he said 
it 10 times. What are you talking about? Specifically when he said 
he was quoting a political pundit and said with relish in his voice, 
"it's the seven months, stufmentde" I know you've got your tear sheet 
from the White House. No, I didn't get anything from the whoufments 
I was in the room and heard him -- White House. I was in the room 
and heard him say that. To hear the independent prosecutor come in 
and make a political statement like that I think was wrong. Well, 
I really don't follow that kind of lonlic because basically what we've 
got here say statute that charges somebody with going out and lineding 
the facts. This man has done that and concluded that there is credible 
evidence tending towarded commission of crimes, crimes, Tom, not private 
indiscretion, crimes by the president of the United States and he's 
got to bring that evidence forward. He can't just sit back and say 
well, since Anne Lewis and the folks reading off the tear sheets from 
the White House are saying it's all about partisanship, we will climb 
under a rock. You don't feel that he editorialized at all and took 
a side in this? No, I think that really is just a complete whitewash 
of the situation. The basic situation is that this man is charged 
with finding facts and then proceeding. He has done that and he's 
presented to the committee now some very, very disturbing facts or 
allegations against this president. Allegations. Allegations. Yeah, 
but Tom, what is he supposed to do? Say I'm not really sure, we've 
talked to a lot of people, I don't know, maybe Anne's right and it's 
all just about private sex? Is that what he's going to do? No, he's 
going to come forward with a compelling case and say to us, he's said 
it repeatedly, that he's not delau drawing conclusions, he's just 
saying these are are the facts. Oh, Bob, come on. I know you guys 
just want to talk about partisanship because the White House has decided 
the way to destroy the rule of law -- I'm not the ethics advisor, 
would be Bob. Is to say it's partisan. It's not. It's about the rule 
of law. I'm not the ethics advisor who quit today. Gentlemen, on that 
note we have to run. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>