<DOC>
<DOCNO> MNB19981120.2100.2063 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> CAPTION </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
20 years ago, one of the worst mass suicides in history took place. 
13 members of the people's temple died after their leader, Jim Jones, 
persuaded them to drink fruit punch laced with cyanide at their compound 
in yawn yawn. Killed along with Ryan, NBC news correspondent Don Harris 
and cameraman Bob brown. A sound technician and producer survived 
the attack. One of the first journalists to arrive in Jonestown after 
the massacre, veteran Washington-based NBC news correspondent Fred 
Francis who tonight remembers that day for us in his own words. The 
plane flew over Jonestown at about 300 feet. It was a light plane. 
The bullet holes were still in the plane from where congressman Ryan's 
people, the survivors had escaped and the wind was whistling through 
the plane as we were going very low over the scene and we couldn't 
believe our eyes. It was a carpet, it was like a quilt, and it went 
on for half a football field, and they were bodies. When they were 
giving the poison out, men were standing around the perimeter here 
with cross approximated bows. I'd been a reporter for 12 years. I'd 
just come out of covering the nicaraguan civil war where every time 
you walked into a town there would be bloated bodies in the street. 
Nothing prepared me for this. Nothing prepared me for the little children 
with no marks on them, holding hands with their momies. Nothing prepared 
me for whole families, mom, dad and two kids with hands entwined around 
a rosary. We did the first body count and it took us about 20, 2 aminutes 
and came to a body count of roughly 500 and that's what I reported 
on the air that night and it wasn't until two days later we learned 
the body count was much, much higher. Our first task was to get out 
the survivors and we couldn't get out Steve sung because he was badly 
wounded but we could get out the NBC producer, and we did that. Every 
time somebody would fall down wounded, they would walk over and shoot 
them in the head with a shotgun. We looked at the tape for the first 
time that was in Bob brown's camera and we were in shock that brown 
was shooting while he was being killed. I raced into San Juan, Puerto 
Rico, on the wildest ride to the airport and getting to the yesterdaying 
-- editing point, an hour before "NBC nightly news" went on the air 
and I had the raw tape of one of the most heinous events in modern 
history and we had to edit it for the world. And people just sort 
of backed away from me and that's when I realized I had the stench 
of jouns Jonestown, it was in my shoes, my clothing, in my hair. The 
mind control that Jim Jones exerted on these people, in my view, has 
never been seen, had never been seen up until that time and certainly 
has never been seen since. And the sad thing about all this, it could 
happen again. I I wowoululd D hohopepe S so.O. it could HT thehe N 
negegototiaiatitionons David Koresh. Wiwithth K kororesesh H to you 
tell me David cut from the same cloth as the jim Jones? It could happen 
again. Those children that died in that fire, many people want to 
blame it on the a.T.F. and the F.B.I. David Koresh killed those children. 
He was just a latter-day Jim Jones. It could happen again, and will. 
The chilling account and memories of that day from veteran NBC nshes 
correspondent Fred Francis. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>