<DOC>
<DOCNO> MNB19981120.2100.1804 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> CAPTION </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
President Clinton in Seoul, south Korea tonight, the second stop on 
his asian tour, and it's being called a dangerous time for a reason. 
This state visit comes amid reports that north Korea may be cheating 
on an agreement to freeze it's huge nuclear weapon program at a time 
when the people are starving. David Sanger, former head of the torque 
times Tokyo bureau, takes a look at where things stand in tomorrow's 
paper and he joins us P tonight from our washington bureau. David, 
what should Americans know about what's going on over there? The big 
issue, Brian, is what we don't know. In 1994 there was an agreement 
signed that was supposed to freeze the north korea nuckler program 
and a small contribution from south Korea and the U.S. was supposed 
to provide energy for them and ultimately build two nuclear power 
plants that could not be easily used to extract plutonium for north 
Korea weapons nuclear weapons. The question is whether they are now 
cheating on that. Earlier this year, American spy satellites saw a 
huge mountain development near the plants that appeared to have a 
giant tunnel built into T the suspicion is that they are once again 
trying to build a nuclear repro -- reprocessing facility to build 
weapons. We were led to believe over the last decade that it was the 
loose nukes of, frequent, the former Russian reps that were the real 
danger in the Middle East. Now at least this is a Devil we know, we 
just can't get our arms around the extent TV, correct? That's right. 
This is a program the United States U.S. has been watching since the 
late 1980's. We came very close to war, far closer than any of us 
knew at the time, in 1994 when President Clinton was just on the verge 
of reinforcing our troops in south Korea and declaring very major 
sanctions on the north. What's odd right now is that the Clinton administration 
had claimed this as a very major foreign policy success, that they 
had gotten this program frozen and I think the fact that it's coming 
unwound right now say source of concern all the way around. And a 
horrifying human rights angle to all this -- it's not an overstatement 
to say that babies are starving, they are skin and bones in north 
Korea. Is that a knowable figure in north Korea, how much they are 
spending on weapons? It's not. The main knowable figure we have about 
north Korea is that their economy was shrinking at 5% or 6% a year 
well before the Asian economic crisis struck. Now we know they have 
very massive food short anlse, which makes it all the more astounding 
they have put money into this nuck -- nuclear program. One of the 
theories about this has always been that their real interest is in 
coming up to a nuclear program that they could sell off to the west, 
in other words get bribed not to build it. David, thank you very much 
for coming on. The story will appear in the morning in the "New York 
Times." Appreciate it. Thank you, Brian. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>