<DOC>
<DOCNO> MNB19981120.2100.2504 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> CAPTION </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
This Sunday will Mark the 35th anniversary of President John F. Kennedy's 
assassination. For the first time we are hearing publicly now from 
someone who was right there in the car that day in Dallas, the widow 
of Texas governor John connally. Nellie Connally was riding in the 
car along with her husband and the kennedys and remembers the horror 
of seeing both men shot. NBC news correspondent Jim Cummins talked 
to her recently and filed this report. We were indeed a happy foursome 
that beautiful morning. I had my yellow Roses in my arms, Jackie had 
her red Roses in hers. Nellie Connally was in the limousine that day, 
next to her husband John, the governor. J.F.K. and the first lady 
sat behind them. We had passed through the downtown area and it's 
great happy crowds. I turned to the president and said, "Mr. President, 
you certainly cannot say that Dallas doesn't love you." Upon discovering 
a diary she wrote shortly after the assassination, Mrs. connally is 
finally speaking about with an account of the horrifying events in 
Dallas 35 years ago Sunday. I heard a loud noifments I turned and 
looked at the president just in time to see him clutch his neck and 
sink into the seat. Quickly there was a second shot. John said no, 
no, no, was hit himself by the second shot and said, "my God, they're 
going to kill us aufment" then there was another shot. I thought my 
husband was dead. Mrs. Kennedy was saying, Jack, Jack, they have killed 
my husband. She says the warn commission was wrong when it concluded 
the first bullet wounded both the president and her husband. Your 
account does differ from the warne admission account. They say one 
of the shots missed the car. They're wrong. No one bullet went through 
two people and if I haven't proved that to you by what I've said, 
then there's no way I can. Her diary continues when the motorcade 
rushes to parkland hospital. The car screeched to a stop. Secret service 
agents were everywhere, crying, Mr. president, begging Mrs. kennedy 
to get out of the car. Did you feel left out because of all the attention 
paid to the president? I didn't feel left out. I feel all the doctors 
are on the other side and I know the president is gone. And you know, 
anybody would have that feeling. I just wanted to be sure they took 
care of John. They did and John Connally died in 1993 without ever 
knowing about nellly's diary. She rediscovered it after he was gone. 
She's modest about her writings. There's nothing new in these notes 
except a woman who was in the car, having this heinous experience 
is telling you about T I didn't write it for the world. I wrote it 
for my children -- children, grandchildren, and any little connallys 
that might come along later that might have some interest in how i 
felt when they're studying it in their history books. What do you 
think about on the anniversary? I personally think it's time to let 
the president rest in peace. But I don't think they'll ever do that. 
Do you? Nellie Connally's diary is being preserved at the L.B.J. presidential 
library in Austin, Texas. Jim Cummins, NBC news, Houston. Nellie Connally, 
the former first lady of the state of Texas. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>