<DOC>
<DOCNO> MNB19981120.2100.0059 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> CAPTION </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
And good Friday evening to you. The reviews are still coming in from 
the hill. So are the questions, a lot of them, like where is the impeachment 
process headed now after a marathon first day that turned into night 
and went right into morning. This morning brought bad news for Kenneth 
Starr. His ethics advisor, a big name in the law, Watergate counsel 
Sam dash, resigned from Starr's team following his performance yesterday. 
His reason, Starr didn't just present the facts he presented a case, 
a Strong one, again the president, he picked a side, went after the 
commander in chief. Any republican desires for a smooth impeachment 
process have now been dashed in the process. Some say the entire effort 
is now unraveling and there is plenty of politics to go around. We 
get the very latest from NBC's Lisa Myers. It is a tougher punch than 
any landed by democrats during 12 grueling hours of testimony. In 
resigning, Starr's ethics advisor, Sam dash, accuses Starr of abuse 
of office, claiming he crossed the line yesterday, became part of 
the political process in which a truey independent counsel should 
have no role. I resigned because he used most of his opening statement 
not as a defense of his office but as a aggressive advocate in reviewing 
the facts and the law, urging impeachment. Starr says he's saddened. 
I love Sam. I respect him, I admire him, I think he's a toment man 
of principle. But he has no regrets about his tefment In my judgment 
I think it was proper for me to do what I did. I had a duty to do 
what I did. Privately sources say Starr is stunned, his prosecutors 
furious. Dash has special status because of his role in the last impeachment 
crisis as democratic counsel on the Senate Watergate committee. Dash 
previously had defended Starr from what he called unfair attacks. 
Compounding the hurt, Starr was caught by surprise when dash resigned 
so soon and suddenly but the White House apparently was not. The president's 
defenders were quick to capitalize, saying this further taints Starr's 
evidence. When his ethics advisor quits right after he presents the 
evidence is just a spectacle. I do not think that Ken Starr was an 
advocate yesterday. I think Ken Starr was doing what the law required 
him to do. But this trouble for Ken Starr can only further slow momentum 
for impeachment and cause republican leaders to look even further 
for a quick way out. Sources familiar with the investigation say Starr 
may still indict three minor players but he's largely focused on his 
own exit strategy. Sources say he is talking about returning to private 
practice in January. Lisa Myers, Washington. Here to offer the White 
House reaction is the White House communications director Anne Lewis. 
She is with us from our Washington bureau. Anne, obviously the White 
House must see this as some sort of vindication. Let me be very clear. 
Here's one White House staffer who was very surprised by the news 
this morning, especially coming after the events of yesterday but 
I do think if you look at a certain pattern that's come up, if you 
look at some of the questions that have been raised, Ken Starr's tactics 
are now being investigated by a grand jury in Little Rock, now his 
ethics advisor resigns, again those questions continue to arise and 
I guess the total of it should not come as a surprise to us. What 
we've been seeing increasingly, and yesterday made that clear, a very 
partisan, very one-sided, unfortunately very political attempt to 
sort avenue tack the president and I don't think that's the direction 
the american people would want thising to. We have the conundrum of 
the fundamental facts of the case remaining. Even Mr. Kendall, the 
president's lawyer, did not dispute those. Where does the White House 
come down on the subject of punishment? What should happen then, provided 
it's something short of impeachment, when this is all over? Two important 
issues. I want to address both for a moment. First, Mr. Kendall's 
office, the president's lawyer issued a very detailed rebuttal of 
the charges issued on September 12. Because so much of that report 
got leaked, not surprisingly, the day before, to make the television 
news, we did a preliminary memorandum, an initial response, very clear 
and extensive, September 12, it's on a vrite of web sites, it's out 
there. Really taking on these charges and make the case again and 
again, persuasively, these charges did not -- do not rise to the level 
of impeachment. Secondly as Mr. Starr told us, since he is not a witness 
to any of the facts, never met Monica Lewinsky, did not participate 
in any of the questioning, questioning him about the facts would not 
have been very useful. It was important to raise the questions about 
what were the tactics, what were the judgments that were made? How 
did he come to be as we heard today such an aggressive advocate for 
impeachment? Well, let's go back to the question of punishment. Should 
it be censure? Should it be something formal in front of Congress? 
That is clearly, the constitution says those are decisions the house 
must make. The president has said I did something that was wrong, 
I am sorry, he was apologized. We also think we need to move on and 
get to the work the American people want us to do and the people sent 
that message pretty clearly earlier this month as well. There have 
been a lot of conversations, not surprisingly, in Washington -- this 
town is famous for that -- but ultimately this is going to require 
a Bipartisan consensus in Congress. How much do you think the cock 
is going to get out of this? When you look back at the last couple 
months, the budget, we have accomplished sovep so many of the president's 
priorities, from the 100,000 new teachers, to his message to say we're 
going to save social security first, I think he displayed the kind 
of leadership the American people want their president to have. We're 
going to save social security first. We're going to keep working on 
education, on a patients' Bill of rights. Those are the issues the 
American people want us to work on. Anne Lewis, White House communications 
director, thank you for coming in tonight. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>