<DOC>
<DOCNO> MNB19981120.2100.2874 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> CAPTION </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
We have with us tonight another person who was there that day in Dallas, 
texas, 35 years ago Sunday. Jack valenti was a public relations executive 
in charge of the press that day, riding in the motorcade when J.F.K. 
and governor Connally were shot. Within hours he found himself on 
air force one, hiredly Johnson as special assistant. These days, Jack 
valenti is president of the motion pictures association of america. 
He is with us tonight from Washington. Jack, it's good to see you 
again. As you listen to nellie Connally, what sticks out at you from 
her comments? Ello, Brian. Well, what sticks out is 35 years later, 
every second of that grotesque day is scarred into my memory. I'll 
never forget it. It's as vivid as if it happened yesterday. Listening 
to nellly just now was almost too much. These the -- she's the last 
survivor of anybody left in that car that day. It brought back terrible 
memories, but then those memories have never left me. In the confusion, 
Mrs. Kennedy and Mrs. Connally on two chairs in the hospital hallway, 
Mrs. Connally worried that her husband is getting proper medical attention, 
then you go out to love field, she draw the shades on the plane, buff 
know it you are wheels up and on your way to Washington and on your 
way to a new life for you? In the words of yeats, the ceremony of 
innocence was drowned in the nation that day. The swearing-in ceremony 
was to me a real epiphany to watch the constitution in action, L.B.J. 
with hand upraised, Mrs. Kennedy in aa catatonic trance. On the extreme 
left is the distraught face of a dark-haired young man struck with 
the great historic occasion that while the light in the White House 
may flicker, what that ceremony says is that the light in the White 
House never goes out. It was -- it was incredible. Jack, when did 
you first realize in the motorcade the extent of what had happened? 
I was six cars back in the motorcade and we had come into the underpass 
onto deal -- dealey plaza, just going by this building with undistinguished 
architecture, later to be called the called the Texas school book 
depository, and suddenly the car in front went from 8 miles an hour 
to 80 miles an hour, without any precursor or warning and I didn't 
even want to think about what it possibly meant. I said well, the 
president is late for his speech at the Dallas trade Mark, so I directed 
the driver there where about 2,000 citizen of Dallas were there but 
no president and then we knew something desperately was wrong. The 
secret service men told me the president had been shot, my old friend 
john Connally had been shot. We commandeered a car to go to the hospital. 
With me was Mrs. Lincoln, President Kennedy's secretary, in a state 
of total collapse. Later in the basement, there were people standing 
around, mute, somber. Just to my left, the emergency room operating 
room, where lay, though we did not know it, the lifeless body of the 
president and thun one of Lyndon johnson's political aides tapped 
me on the shoulder and said the president wants -- the vice president 
wants you rightow. Then he hesitated and said softly, the president 
is dead. When we got to the room where Johnson was sequestered, there 
was one lone secret service man there. We got in a police car and 
went speeding out to where the plane had been removed to a remote 
corner of the field and was guarded by a cordon of heavily armed, 
very men acing-looking men and we got on a 707. It was crowded with 
congressmen, and officials from Dallas, thickly crowded, and then 
suddenly from the rear part of that office came the 6'4" figure of 
Lyndon Johnson and I recall, Brian, that congressman Thomas, who is 
now deceased, a congressman from Houston, said, "Mr. President, we 
want to help you in every way we can." And I thought, owe, my goodness 
-- that's the first time I had heard him called "Mr. President. " 
it was just a nightmarish moment that I simply cannot describe to 
you. Jack, I know you willause along with all Americans of a certain 
age on sunday and I want to thank you by way of saying it's good to 
see you again, thanks for coming on the airport Thank you very much, 
Brian. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>