<DOC>
<DOCNO> MNB19981120.2100.1023 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> CAPTION </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
The British press and parliament are getting a taste of what their 
American counterparts just went through in the Lewinsky sordid mess. 
Over there the scandal involves a government official who resigned 
after being caught in a questionable situation. When the tabloids 
had a field day covering it and started delving into the private lichese 
of other public officials, they discovered something surprising -- 
the public really didn't care about all that. More from Keith Miller 
in London. It all started in a park, and set off a nationwide debate 
about homosexuals in government. Ron Davies' political career was 
destroyed when he was robbed while vifingt a notorious gay cruising 
ground. He called it a nightmare and offered the government his resignation 
and this apology. We are what we are. We're all different, the product 
both of our genes and our experienced. Members of apartment are no 
different. The scandal sent tabloids into a frenzy. Suddenly the minister 
of agriculture said he was gay and another member of the government 
was outed on a TV show. The sex scandal in Britain looks a lot like 
the scandal in Washington. Politicians here and the media are furious 
but not the public. Just like in America, public attitudes about a 
person's sexual behavior seems to be changing. A recent poll shows 
56% of British voters said homosexuality is acceptable. As long as 
you don't frighten the horses -- you know we're always very worried 
about animals in this country -- you can do what you like. So if homosexuals 
have a stable relationship, the brits will accept it. And when the 
minister for agriculture, Nick brown, recently met with farmers, he 
discovered he had a lot of friends. He's got a tremendous wave of 
public sympathy even from people who a few years ago maybe wore tweeds 
and smoked pipes and didn't put up with this airy -- fairy sort of 
business. I think the average Brit on didn't like the Lynch mob mentality 
being whipped up by certain papers. So the newspapers are in retreat, 
with the largest voug not to reveal a Person's sexuality except in 
cases of overwhelming public intd. People are saying that provided 
you lead a reasonably orderly life, in a Way that seems appropriate 
for a senior politician, then that's OK. Being gay doesn't matter. 
Behaving like a sexual loose Cannon does matter. So the public has 
shown it's just not that interested in the private lives of public 
oofinges and 30 years after homosexuality was legalized in britain, 
it's now apparently OK to be gay. Keith Miller, NBC news, London. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>