<DOC>
<DOCNO> NBC19981120.1830.1566 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> CAPTION </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
You know how you feel so penlly violated when something personal is 
stolen? A burglarly or a pickpocket. How about if your neighborhood 
mile box is rifled. And what if is U.S. postal service knew but did 
nothing. It seems impossible, but it's not. Here's NBC's Mike Boettcher. 
They stand as neighborhood monuments to American stability and security 
-- those clunky blue mailboxes. I'm debating whether this is a safe 
mailbox. But in Seattle, that security has been shattered, the boxes 
compromised and, for years, nobody warned. Thieves somehow obtained 
and copied the master key to the city's 3,500 blue boxes, making them 
little more than personal mail boxes for crooks who steal and forge 
checks, sometimes draining their victim's bank accounts. Something 
I had taken for granted for years had up and left. Diane Gallagher 
is one of thousands of victims. She's angry that the U.S. postal service 
knew about the thefts but issued no warning. Had they done that, I 
certainly would have taken alternative methods of putting my mail 
out. Thieves have been using the counterfeited keys for four or five 
years. So why didn't the post office warn the public? We've been aware 
of the problem for several years. And frankly, we thought more traditional 
methods of law enforcement would take care of the problem. We were 
wrong. Thieves have stolen the master keys that unlocked the boxes. 
Only after Seattle media reported the problem did the postal service 
begin to replace Seattle's blue boxes with new, tamper-resistant mail 
drops. So once the 3,500 blue collection boxes in the Seattle area 
are replaced, problem solved, right? Well, not quite. Still at risk 
-- the mail boxes for 30,000 apartments and condominiums. Incredibly, 
the master key that opens the official blue boxes is the same key 
the Seattle post office uses to deliver mail to private boxes. But 
what about other cities? 1,000 miles away near Pasadena, mail recovered 
from more blue-box thefts. Sometimes mail thieves will try to pry 
into our collection boxes. Other times, they commit violent armed 
robberies of our letter carriers to try to steal a key. But postal 
authorities contend only Seattle has a major problem with counterfeit 
keys. Ellen Porter would agree. Thieves stole checks she mailed, forged 
and cashed them. $1,660 -- they walked away with cash. Neither rain, 
nor sleet, nor snow can stop the mail. But in Seattle, a stolen key 
produced a storm that the old blue boxes could not weather. Mike Boettcher, 
NBC news, Seattle. On the other hand, it might be a handy excuse for 
your creditors. You didn't get that check? Gosh, I mailed it from 
Seattle. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>