<DOC>
<DOCNO> NBC19981120.1830.0842 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> CAPTION </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
NBC news "in depth." Tonight, the shocking death of a famous Hollywood 
director raises new concerns about hazards on the nation's roads. 
Director Alan pakula was killed yesterday on a New York highway when 
a Steel pipe smashed through his windshield. Last year, police estimate 
there were more than 6.7 million motor vehicle crashes in this country, 
killing more than 41,000 people many of those accidents involved debris 
on the road. As this untimely death remipds us, too many of those 
accidents involves debris on the road. NBC's Kerry Sanders tonight 
"in depth" on the danger to every traveler. This ten-pound piece of 
metal fell off the back of a truck. Another car hit it, throwing it 
in the air, causing it to Pierce the windshield of a car on a New 
York highway, killing the driver, Hollywood movie director Alan pakula, 
known for works including "all the president's men" and "to kill a 
mockingbird." Police today still unsure who, if anyone, is responsible. 
There's always a possibility of criminal charges if we find out there 
was some intent involved here or some negligence involved. Across 
America, road debris -- fenders, tires, hunks of metal, scattered 
across the roadway. Commercial bread trays, an 18-wheeler's load of 
pipes. Even a safety cone. All hazards causing deadly accidents. Six 
children killed in this Van in Milwaukee when a trucker's metal mud 
flap bounced under the Van, puncturing the gas tank and causing an 
explosion. Here in Florida, last year 789 road debris accidents causing 
9 deaths, 492 injuries. Overall, the federal government says debris 
was a factor in 51 fatal highway accidents last year, but they suspect 
far more of these cases go unreported. This is a three-foot long steel 
Rod that's used for construction. And it became a missile earlier 
this year on interstate 95 in south florida. The 17-pound metal stake 
bounced off a construction truck, went airborne and impaled 13-year-old 
Stephanie Murray sitting in the front seat of the family Van. The 
stake missed her heart by less than an inch. I'm really lucky. And 
I thank my lucky stars Today, Stephanie and her family hope something 
good will come from her near tragedy. Her father, a police detective, 
now works on a task force trying to solve the debris problem. It's 
frustrating. I just want to take someone and say, "hey, get to work 
here. Get this stuff cleaned up please." In Florida, with over 114,000 
miles of highways. Work crews assigned to pick up debris say they're 
overwhelmed. In broward county, a two-man crew patrols 166 miles of 
interstate. All day, patrols aimed at hazards like this multi-ton 
backhoe, held illegally in place with just one chain. If that breaks 
away, you've got nothing. This mother of three takes no chances. Every 
day when I go out there and put the kids in the car, it's scary. Her 
solution -- the biggest truck she could buy. But still, the roads 
today, deadly -- an obstacle course of debris. Kerry Sanders, NBC 
news. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>