<DOC>
<DOCNO> NBC19981120.1830.0071 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> CAPTION </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Good evening. In poll after poll and in other ways as well, the public 
says it does not want President Clinton impeached. That hurt the republicans 
in the elections. Special prosecutor Ken Starr offered no new smoking 
guns in his long appearance before the Judiciary committee and tonight, 
a stunning new blow to Starr's reputation -- his own ethics adviser 
has quit in protest, and that only accelerated the unravelling. NBC's 
Lisa Myers with the latest. It is a tougher punch than any landed 
by democrats during 12 grueling hours of testimony. In resigning, 
Starr's ethics adviser Sam dash accuses Starr of "abuse of office," 
claiming he crossed the line yesterday, became part of a political 
process in which a truly independent counsel should have no role. 
I resigned because he used most of his opening statement, not as a 
defense of his office, but as an aggressive advocate in reviewing 
the fact and the law urging impeachment. Starr says he's saddened. 
I love Sam. I respect him. I admire him. I think he's a total man 
of principle. But he has no regrets about his testimony. In my judgment, 
I think it was proper for me to do what I did. I think I had a duty 
to do what I did. Privately, sources say Starr is stunned, his prosecutors 
furious. Dash is not just any adviser. He has special status because 
of his role in the last impeachment crisis as democratic counsel on 
the Senate Watergate committee. Dash previously had defended Starr 
against what he called "unfair attacks." Compounding the hurt -- Starr 
was caught by surprise when dash resigned so soon and so dramatically. 
But the White House, apparently, was not. A lawyer involved in daily 
White House strategy calls began whispering to the press yesterday 
morning about a coming "defection" on Starr's team. The president's 
defenders were quick to capitalize, saying this further taints Starr's 
evidence. Having his ethics adviser quit right after he presents the 
evidence is just a spectacle. Republicans came to Starr's defense. 
I do not think Ken Starr was an advocate yesterday. I think Ken Starr 
was doing what the law required him to do. But this blow to Starr 
can only further slow momentum for impeachment and cause republican 
leaders to look even harder for a quick way out. Sources familiar 
with the investigation say Starr may still indict three minor players. 
But he's focused on his own exit strategy. Starr's friends say he's 
talking about returning to private practice in january. Lisa Myers, 
NBC news, Washington. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>