<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981120.0292 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
After turning in meager half-year earnings, Japanese banks have begun 
to request funds from the government's $500 billion bank bailout to 
strengthen their weak capital bases. So far, most of the banks have 
said they would ask for sums of taxpayers' money ranging from $2.5 
billion to $5 billion. Collectively, the requests from nine major 
banks announced so far could reach 4.1 trillion yen, or $34 billion, 
which would easily exceed the $16.7 billion drawn down by the banks 
under a failed bailout scheme carried out earlier this year. The prospect 
that the government's new fund might actually help give the banks 
a stronger financial footing helped the stock market to rally on Friday 
to a 10-week high. The market also welcomed the news that the governing 
Liberal Democratic Party had struck a deal Thursday to form a loose 
coalition with the Liberal Party, an opposition group led by Ichiro 
Ozawa, who walked out on the Liberal Democrats five years ago. The 
coalition, still under negotiation, would smooth prospects in Parliament 
for passage of the latest economic package, worth $200 billion, and 
the national budget. Still, with a recessionary economy, a nationwide 
credit shortage, and a mountain of at least $650 billion in bad debt, 
there are enormous pressures on financial institutions. Many are scaling 
back overseas operations, cutting the number of branches and employees 
at home and overseas and selling real estate and other assets. Japanese 
banks, which expanded rapidly overseas during the 1980s, have paid 
a high price this year to borrow in dollars to finance overseas operations. 
Though core business profits at the banks have risen modestly from 
the same period a year ago, at least seven major banks said that they 
were anticipating losses for the fiscal year ending on March 31. Many 
are cutting dividends. Core business profits for the six months that 
ended Sept. 30 rose, partly because banks had enjoyed relatively inexpensive 
access to funds and partly because some banks benefited from profitable 
bond trading. A number of banks are using these profits to write off 
bad debts. Collectively, Japan's nine largest banks said they were 
disposing of roughly 1.3 trillion yen, or $11 billion, in debts in 
the first half of the fiscal year. Sanwa Bank announced Thursday that 
it had applied a new stricter standard for evaluating bad debts. As 
a result of using this standard, which the government's Financial 
Supervisory Agency will require by the end of this fiscal year, Sanwa's 
problem loans rose to 2.4 trillion yen, or $20 billion, up 70 percent 
from the amount calculated in the old way. To set aside enough of 
a cushion to offset potential losses from write-offs of the bad loans, 
Sanwa said it would apply for about 600 billion yen in taxpayers' 
money. The bank said it planned to report a consolidated loss of 250 
billion yen, or $2.1 billion, for this fiscal year. Bank of Tokyo-Mitsubishi 
and Fuji Bank also reported their bad loans under the new standards 
on Friday. Fuji Bank said it would post a consolidated net loss of 
310 billion yen, or $2.6 billion. Fuji said its reserve cushion equaled 
68 percent of its problem loans. Fuji Bank has been the focus of concern, 
partly because it belongs to Fuyo Group, a group of companies that 
includes Nissan Motor Co., the troubled automaker with a $33 billion 
debt burden. Bank of Tokyo-Mitsubishi, which has indicated that it 
does not plan to request public funds, said that it expected to post 
a modest net income of 55 billion yen in the fiscal year. Sumitomo 
Bank, which reported a modest first-half profit of 53.9 billion yen, 
or $449 million, projected a net consolidated loss for the fiscal 
year of 240 billion yen, or $2 billion. Much of the losses is expected 
to reflect the disposal of bad loans totaling about 800 billion yen, 
or $6.7 billion. But investors were impressed with Sumitomo's aggressive 
revamping plan, and its stock price rose 3.3 percent Friday. Sakura 
Bank, which posted a modest midyear profit, also expects to post a 
net loss of 260 billion yen, or nearly $2.2 billion, for the fiscal 
year. Sakura had previously said it would turn to business partners 
to raise about 86 billion yen, or $716 million, and on Friday it issued 
a list of those 21 companies, including Tokyo Electric Power Co. and 
Mitsui &AMP; Co. Toyota Motor Corp., which had earlier suggested it 
might buy a sizable amount of the shares, was not on the list, but 
bank officials suggested that they would continue pressing Toyota 
to take part, according to a report by Kyodo News Service. Sakura 
said it would raise 260 billion yen, or nearly $2.2 billion in the 
capital markets overseas and would probably request up to $5 billion 
in public money. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>