<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981120.0500 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Following are the texts of the letter of resignation submitted Friday 
by Samuel Dash, ethics adviser to the Independent Counsel Kenneth 
Starr, protesting Starr's decision to testify in the House impeachment 
hearing against President Clinton, and of Starr's letter in response: 
Dash's Letter I hereby submit my resignation as outside consultant 
and adviser to you and your Office of Independent Counsel, effective 
at noon today. My decision to leave has nothing whatsoever to do with 
the many unfounded and misinformed attacks on your conduct as independent 
counsel. Through most of your tenure, I have been fully informed by 
you and your staff on all major decisions made by your office. I have 
advised you on these matters and have approved most of the decisions 
made. On some I agreed with you and your staff at the outset. As to 
others, where I disagreed, you showed your willingness to be open 
to my advice and you came to different decisions. From my special 
vantage point, as an experienced professional outsider with no personal 
or professional stake in the outcome of your investigations, I found 
that you conducted yourself with integrity and professionalism, as 
did your staff of experienced Federal prosecutors. I resign for a 
fundamental reason. Against my strong advice, you decided to depart 
from your usual professional decision-making by accepting the invitation 
of the House Judiciary Committee to appear before the committee and 
serve as an aggressive advocate for the proposition that the evidence 
in your referral demonstrates that the President committed impeachable 
offenses. In doing this you have violated your obligations under the 
independent counsel statute and have unlawfully intruded on the power 
of impeachment, which the Constitution gives solely to the House. 
As independent counsel you have only one narrow duty under the statute 
relating to the House's power of impeachment. That one duty, under 
Section 595(c) of the statute, is to objectively provide for the House 
substantial and credible information that may constitute grounds for 
impeachment. The statute does not, and could not constitutionally 
give the independent counsel any role in impeachment other than this 
single informing function. The House is not dependent on the independent 
counsel for information related to its impeachment role. It can get 
its information from many sources, including through its own process, 
and does not need a referral of information from the independent counsel 
before it can decide to have an impeachment inquiry. The referral 
you made to the House was proper under the statute. But your role 
and authority as a provider of information to the House stopped there. 
You have no right or authority under the law, as independent counsel, 
to advocate for a particular position on the evidence before the Judiciary 
Committee or to argue that the evidence in your referral is strong 
enough to justify the decision by the committee to recommend impeachment. 
Constitutionally, as you have recognized, the House has the sole power 
of impeachment. As an executive branch independent prosecutor you 
may not intrude on that sole power, even if invited by the committee. 
Your referral to the House under the statute presented all the evidence 
you had about the Lewinsky matter which you believed was substantial 
and credible. As I have said, that was your only lawful responsibility 
under the statute governing your office. The House committee has excellent 
lawyers advising it and did not need you to summarize your referral 
and to argue for impeachment. Indeed, the committee does not have 
a right to impose upon you as independent counsel to be its prosecuting 
counsel for impeachment. By your willingness to serve in this improper 
role you have seriously harmed the public confidence in the independence 
and objectivity of your office. Frequently you have publicly stated 
that you have sought my advice in major decisions and had my approval. 
I cannot allow that inference to continue regarding your present abuse 
of your office, and have no other choice but to resign. Starr's Letter 
I have received your letter of today. As you know, I have the greatest 
respect and admiration for your integrity, your wisdom and the invaluable 
assistance you have provided throughout my tenure as independent counsel. 
You were there at the beginning, and save for a teaching sabbatical, 
you have been there throughout. I am, of course, also gratified by 
your statement that you ``found that I conducted (my)self with integrity 
and professionalism as did ((my)) staff of experienced Federal prosecutors.'' 
As you and I frequently discussed, we are fortunate to have on our 
staff experienced and dedicated career prosecutors who have performed 
outstanding service at the highest levels of the Justice Department. 
With deep respect, however, I must say that your letter reflects an 
inaccurate view of the law, as well as of the events that unfolded 
yesterday. The fundamental legal point on which we part company is 
the following: Because the statute requires a written referral of 
information that ``may constitute grounds for an impeachment'' _ and 
you supported our referral _ it seems to me that it cannot reasonably 
be a violation of law to personally appear before Congress, at its 
invitation, to summarize and explain the substance of a referral and 
the process that went into it. Moreover, the statute speaks to this 
point. The second sentence of Section 595(c) of the statute states: 
``Nothing in this chapter ... shall prevent the Congress or either 
house thereof from obtaining information in the course of an impeachment 
proceeding.'' For that reason as well, an independent counsel can 
hardly cite the independent counsel statute as a basis for refusing 
to cooperate and appear before Congress in an impeachment proceeding, 
as you suggest we should have done. It is important to stress that 
I did not ask to appear before the committee. I was invited to appear. 
And as a practical matter, moreover, I believed _ and I think virtually 
all members of the committee would agree _ that it was thoroughly 
appropriate and worthwhile to provide an oral rendition of the key 
points of the written referral, to provide a general status report 
on the state of the overall investigation and to discuss the process 
that went into the investigation and referral. No member of the committee 
expressed the objection that you have raised. And it is important 
to note that my status report on the overall investigation included 
exonerations for the President on several issues. You suggest that 
by appearing, I harmed public confidence in the independence of the 
office. With respect, I disagree with that. Indeed, had I chosen to 
refuse the invitation to testify, I believe that would have harmed 
public confidence in the office. A refusal to appear would have suggested 
that we have something to hide, or that we are unwilling to defend 
and stand by the written referral. In addition, I emphasized yesterday 
that the House has the sole power to impeach. I said it over and over 
and over again. I could not have been more clear. I stated that Congress 
has the absolute and unfettered discretion to discard the referral, 
use it, or hold hearings on other issues. As Congressman Graham said, 
a House member voting on impeachment may choose to consider a wide 
variety of factors, and I did not purport to provide any guidance 
on what factors a member should apply, or how to balance all of the 
factors. My abiding concern was merely the evidence, the law and the 
process that my colleagues and I used. In closing, let me again thank 
you for years of service. Today's developments will not alter my deep 
affection for you and profound appreciation for all you have done 
for us. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>