<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981120.0437 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Struggling to respond to President Clinton's request for immediate 
advice on the hybrid cow-human cell announced earlier this month, 
the National Bioethics Advisory Commission has delivered a guarded 
and somewhat tentative reply, based on the few facts available to 
it. The chairman of the commission, Dr. Harold Shapiro, the president 
of Princeton University, said in a letter to Clinton that the news 
raised ``concerns about crossing species boundaries and exercising 
excessive control over nature.'' The proposed use of the hybrid cells 
to grow human tissues for transplant into a patient would or would 
not raise new ethical issues, depending on the nature of the cells, 
Shapiro said. The cells are obtained by fusing a human skin or blood 
cell with a cow egg whose own nucleus has been removed. The cow egg 
is thought to make the nucleus of the human cell revert to the embryonic 
state. The human nucleus then takes over control of the cell, displacing 
most of the cow proteins with human proteins, and the cell divides 
into a cluster of embryonic stem-like cells, according to Dr. Michael 
West, president of Advanced Cell Technology, who announced the technique 
earlier this month. As embryonic stem cells have the potential to 
develop into any tissue of the body, West's company hopes to grow 
whatever replacement tissues a patient might need from his or her 
own cells. Shapiro's letter pointed to the ambiguous nature of the 
cells apparently created in the technique. If the embryonic cells 
that result from the human cell-cow egg fusion are capable of developing 
into a fetus when transferred to a uterus, then they raise the same 
``important ethical concerns'' as any other research on human embryos. 
But if the embryonic cells are not capable of developing into an embryo, 
then ``we do not believe that totally new ethical issues arise,'' 
Shapiro said. His letter implies that the only issue raised in this 
case would be that of mingling human and animal cells, noting that 
this is done routinely for certain medical purposes. The ability of 
the embryonic cells to grow into an infant cannot at present be determined. 
The original experiments were taken only to a very preliminary stage, 
and no scientific tests were performed on the cells that resulted. 
Other experts said they would need more evidence to know if human 
embryonic, stem-like cells had indeed been produced, as the company 
asserted, although one expert, Dr. John Gearhart of Johns Hopkins 
University, said when shown a photograph of the cells that they could 
be embryonic stem cells. West said previously that his company had 
no intention of transferring the embryonic cells created in this way 
to a person's womb and that it would be wrong to do so. Shapiro said 
the commission also held this view. Thus, it seems unlikely that the 
potential of the cells to become a person will be tested directly. 
In his letter to the commission a week ago, Clinton said he was ``deeply 
troubled'' by news of the cow-human hybrid cells. In interviews, several 
commission members expressed a somewhat lesser level of alarm while 
saying they understood the reasons for the president's concerns. Dr. 
Carol Greider, a biologist at Johns Hopkins, said that the thought 
that someone might transfer to a uterus the embryonic cells created 
by the hybrid technique was deeply troubling, but that she had fewer 
problems with the company's stated purpose of making transplantable 
tissues. ``I think there are some ethical issues there but they are 
much less worrisome,'' she said. The commission plans in a later report 
to address a second issue that Clinton raised, the ethical problems 
and medical benefits of research on human embryonic stem cells derived 
from human tissue. Earlier this month two groups of university scientists 
isolated embryonic stem cells from embryos and from aborted fetuses, 
the first time that these primordial cells had cultured in the laboratory. 
The company that sponsored the research, the Geron Corp. of Menlo 
Park, Calif., also plans to use the cells to grow transplantable tissues. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>