<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981120.0053 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
It took a journey to the opposite corner of the continent for the 
Rangers to find a team playing worse than themselves. That team was 
the injury-riddled Kings and the Rangers beat them by 5-1 on Thursday 
night in the Forum. The result ended a three-game streak without a 
victory for New York, and it extended the Los Angeles losing streak 
to six games. Aleksei Kovalev led the Rangers with his first two goals 
of the season. Also scoring were Manny Malhotra, Adam Graves and John 
MacLean. The Rangers got a strong performance in front of their net 
from the backup goalie Dan Cloutier. Two of the goals were scored 
on the revived power play, which had gone more than 14 minutes without 
a goal the night before in a 3-1 defeat in Anaheim. The Rangers will 
play the third game of their five-game trip on Saturday night in San 
Jose. The game was marred by an ugly incident late in the third period 
when Jeff Beukeboom, the big Ranger defenseman, was knocked semiconscious 
by a punch to the head that was thrown from behind by Matt Johnson 
of the Kings. Johnson may have been retaliating for an incident a 
few minutes before in which Beukeboom tripped Glen Murray of the Kings 
with a ``slew-foot'' technique that is often a cause for suspension. 
Johnson was ejected from the game with a match penalty and will be 
suspended automatically, pending a league review. Beukeboom was revived 
and left the ice with help from medical personnel. Under the league's 
crackdown against slew-footing and blows to the head this season, 
it is very likely that Johnson will miss several games. It is also 
possible that Beukeboom's unpenalized trip will be reviewed. Earlier 
in the game, the Rangers got another scare when Todd Harvey, one of 
their best players, left the game after blocking a shot with his arm. 
He remained on the ice for a couple of minutes and then left the playing 
surface with medical personnel. But the Rangers announced later that 
Harvey had only cut his elbow. He returned in the third period. Coming 
into Thursday night's game, the Rangers' winning percentage of .382 
was the worst in the Atlantic Division and the worst in the Eastern 
Conference. In the 27-team National Hockey League, their record was 
worse than all but the Chicago Blackhawks and Los Angeles, who play 
in the Western Conference. Even the expansion Nashville Predators 
were doing better at .406. The Kings, at .342, had the lowest winning 
percentage in the league entering tonight's game. During the season, 
winning percentage is the most accurate method of rating teams relative 
to each other. Although point totals determine final standings, they 
are often misleading during the season when teams have played an unequal 
number of games. The Kings have reasons for their poor percentage. 
They played again without Rob Blake, their captain and star defenseman, 
who has not played since Nov. 5 because of a broken right foot. Blake 
won the Norris trophy last season as the league's best defenseman. 
His recovery is listed as week to week. Los Angeles also played without 
right wing Russ Courtnall, a former Ranger, who fractured his right 
ankle when he was struck by a puck during the Kings' 5-4 loss to San 
Jose on Wednesday night. Courtnall will miss four to six weeks, the 
team said. Cloutier was making his fifth appearance of the season 
in goal for the Rangers on Thursday night. His record was 1-1-1 and 
his goals-against average was 2.30. Mike Richter started Wednesday 
night's game, a 3-1 defeat in Anaheim that left the Rangers with a 
three-game streak without a victory. Monday night's game was Wayne 
Gretzky's final visit to the Forum. In this building, he starred for 
the Kings from 1988 through 1996 before leaving first for St. Louis 
and then for New York. The Kings will move next season to a new building 
in downtown Los Angeles. Gretzky assisted on Kovalev's second goal 
late in the game. ``All my memories there are good,'' Gretzky said 
of the Forum. ``It was a wonderful time in my life and I really enjoyed 
playing there. A lot of great moments, a lot of wonderful times. In 
a lot of ways, it's disappointing that the Forum won't be there anymore. 
But realistically, it's time to move on. They need a change.'' In 
the Kings' best season, they lost to Montreal in the 1993 Stanley 
Cup finals. On Monday night, the Rangers led by 3-0 after one period 
and by 4-1 after two. Malhotra scored his fourth goal of the season, 
a remarkable total for a player who has appeared in only 12 games 
and has played few minutes in most of them. At 3 minutes 35 seconds, 
he took a drop pass from Mike Knuble and slapped the puck past Kings 
goalie Manny Legace. Kovalev, who has played well in recent games, 
scored his first of the season at 6:33, on the power play, when he 
stood near the crease and turned in a pass from Niklas Sundstrom. 
Graves, at even strength, made it 3-0 at 13:28 by deflecting Harvey's 
shot. It was the sixth of the season for Graves, tying him, momentarily, 
for the team lead with Harvey and MacLean. But after the Kings got 
one back, by Mark Visheau, MacLean gave the Rangers a 4-1 lead at 
11:38, on the power play, by flipping in a Mathieu Schneider rebound. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>