<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981120.0271 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Battered by the panic that swept emerging markets in the wake of Asia's 
financial crisis and Russia's default, Latin America is a region that 
seems more sinned against than sinning. But whatever the cause, the 
damage there has been real. For months, stock prices spiraled lower. 
And the sharp rise in interest rates on emerging-markets debt has 
closed the capital markets to even creditworthy Latin American companies 
and countries. Now there are signs of life. Earlier this month, Brazil, 
the hardest hit, signed off on a $41.5 billion rescue package led 
by the International Monetary Fund. Last week Argentina became the 
first Latin American borrower since May to tap financial markets, 
when it sold $1 billion worth of bonds. Stock markets have rallied 
accordingly. Jose M. Barrionuevo, director of global sovereign markets 
strategy at Lehman Brothers, took some time last week to talk about 
the region's prospects. Q. (italics)Latin America spent the 1980s 
dealing with a foreign bank debt crisis. In the process, many countries 
made structural changes _ of a kind that countries in Asia are only 
now contemplating. So why has the region been hit so hard by this 
crisis?(end italics) A. Latin America was brought into the crisis 
because every time we have seen a real or potential slowdown in the 
United States, the region gets affected. The experience is that it 
doesn't matter where Latin America stands at a particular point in 
time. If the United States slows down, that has an impact. Q. (italics)The 
steep rise in interest rates for emerging-markets borrowers has hurt. 
Are credit conditions improving for potential Latin borrowers?(end 
italics) A. We have seen a significant compression of interest-rate 
spreads over the last month, reflecting significant improvement in 
global credit conditions. That is almost entirely due to a very pre-emptive 
and forceful Federal Reserve, which understands better than anyone 
what is happening to global credit conditions. You can't really claim 
that the crunch or credit squeeze is over, but there is a clear sense 
of improvement. Q. (italics)Will the Fed's actions be enough to stave 
off a recession here and in Latin America?(end italics) A. We don't 
see a recession, but if you see a slowdown it will be more pronounced 
in Latin America. Clearly, Brazil will be depressed next year, with 
its economy contracting about 1 or 2 percent. But we don't see recessions 
in either Mexico or Argentina. Growth in those countries will be enough 
to keep the region from going into recession, assuming the U.S. economy 
keeps growing. Q. (italics)You just came back from Brazil. Will this 
package cure the country's problems?(end italics) A. The package is 
good. The key issue is how quickly President Cardoso implements it. 
A critical factor is the budget. If it is approved by the end of December 
you will have seen the government's sense of urgency to deal with 
Brazil's problems that investors have been looking for for a long 
time. But even if that happens, Brazil is still looking at a recession. 
The key test for the program's strategy will be sometime in the first 
quarter, when political pressure to ease the economic pain will increase. 
Q. (italics)So far this year, mutual funds that invest in Latin American 
stocks have fared worse than emerging-markets funds over all. If the 
region is starting to come back, is it time to consider Latin stocks?(end 
italics) A. From a fundamental perspective, people will invest in 
Latin America because the growth prospects there are high. Nonetheless, 
we still have to look at these markets on a daily basis. And I don't 
think people should start looking to Latin equity markets until we 
get a clear sense of the direction in U.S. equities. Timing is a key. 
Q. (italics)Which industries are likely to return to health the fastest?(end 
italics) A. Typically, you see utilities doing better in the early 
phases of recovery, then telecommunications and then manufacturing. 
Q. (italics)Does that mean you like a company like Telebras of Brazil?(end 
italics) A. Telebras is a company we like, but it is too early to 
get in, because Brazil is going into a recession. If the rescue package 
is implemented correctly, the recession could bottom in the second 
quarter. At that point it might be worth taking a look. Q. (italics)Are 
you concerned that the experience of the last couple of years has 
had an adverse effect on long-term demand for Latin American securities?(end 
italics) A. You could argue there has been some structural damage 
in that hedge funds have been hurt, that pension funds and mutual 
funds will not be back because they feel they may not be getting a 
return comparable to the risk they are taking. But one of the reasons 
people are still focused on these areas is that they are worried they 
will not be there when things turn around. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>