<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981120.0503 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
The state takeover of the HIP Health Plan of New Jersey was stalled 
Friday by proceedings in a federal bankruptcy court in Delaware. Judge 
Joseph Farnan Jr. of that court issued a temporary restraining order 
Friday blocking the state takeover of HIP. The order also blocked 
HIP from breaking its contract with Pinnacle Health Enterprises, which 
filed for Chapter 11 bankruptcy in the Delaware court. The judge said 
the loss of the contract would interfere with Pinnacle's efforts to 
begin reorganization. Faced with this order, Judge Jack Lintner of 
New Jersey Superior Court did not immediately grant the state's motion 
to complete the takeover of HIP, the state's fourth-largest health 
maintenance organization. Amy Mansue, president of HIP Health Plan 
of New Jersey, said the judge observed that the ``issue of jurisdiction 
was a gray area'' in the case and that he would direct state officials 
to supervise HIP until Dec. 1, when a full hearing on Pinnacle's temporary 
restraining order would be held in bankruptcy court. But even that 
could change sooner than expected, the New Jersey commissioner of 
banking and insurance, Jaynee LaVecchia, said in an interview. She 
added that Lintner had directed New Jersey state attorneys to move 
as soon as Monday in the Delaware bankruptcy court ``to dissolve the 
restraints'' blocking the state takeover. Ms. Mansue said in a telephone 
interview that ``the judge is trying to make sure that because of 
these questions there will be continuity of care.'' Pinnacle, which 
provided medical care to HIP's customers in exchange for 91.5 percent 
of the premiums collected by HIP, is supposed to continue to provide 
medical and other services, Ms. Mansue said. But officials of Pinnacle, 
which has invested $140 million in the HIP deal, could not be reached 
for comment after the day's court actions. Ms. Mansue said that, in 
a worst-case scenario, if Pinnacle were to stop providing medical 
care, the state, under the terms of the supervision order, would provide 
those medical services. Even as the courts were taking action Friday, 
the state was sending a message to HIP's 194,000 members through Ms. 
Mansue and from state workers who were traveling to HIP and Pinnacle 
health centers: The doctor is still in. Fran Kantrowitz, a registered 
nurse with the state Department of Health and Senior Services, approached 
a man sitting in the waiting room of the center here Friday afternoon, 
and insisted that nothing would change. She said HIP had broken with 
Pinnacle because the Virginia-based medical management company had 
violated the terms of the contract they entered into a year and a 
half ago. Now, she said, the state was coming in to supervise things 
and all would go smoothly. ``The sign outside might be the only thing 
that changes,'' said a smiling Ms. Kantrowitz, pointing to the ``HIP 
Health Plan of New Jersey, Pinnacle Health Enterprises'' sign. On 
Oct. 27, state officials moved in state court to take over HIP and 
to end its contract with Pinnacle, noting that the health maintenance 
organization was more than $20 million in debt and owed tens of millions 
in unpaid claims to hospitals and doctors. Initially, HIP and Pinnacle 
fought the takeover move together. But amid an angry exchange of charges, 
HIP moved to break its contract with Pinnacle and joined the state 
in requesting that the court put them under state supervision. HIP 
charged that Pinnacle had failed to use more than $345 million in 
premium payments it received over the last 18 months to pay off claims 
incurred by plan members. But, judging from interviews with patients 
leaving two of the Pinnacle centers Friday, there was little need 
for Ms. Kantrowitz's calming bedside manner. John Thomas, a driver 
with a limousine service who lives in Union Township, said he had 
heard about the health maintenance organization's financial problems 
but had seen no signs of it himself. He had requested an emergency 
appointment for Friday and had gotten it without difficulty. When 
he arrived, the waiting room was practically empty, and he got in 
to see the doctor within minutes. ``They're right on the ball,'' Thomas 
said. But he did note that the plan's handling of a hospital bill 
he had incurred a year ago had left much to be desired. ``It's a $100 
bill and the hospital is hounding me, and I call HIP and wind up waiting 
on hold listening to that music for 20 minutes.'' One of the problems 
facing HIP and Pinnacle is an estimated $46 million in overdue and 
unpaid claims owed to about a third of the 112 hospitals represented 
by the New Jersey Hospitals Association. Outside of a HIP/Pinnacle 
health center in Edison, Monica Gonzalez, 26, and her mother, Cecilia, 
also said they had heard about the plan's problems but had not seen 
any change in the service, which they termed ``excellent''. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>