<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981120.0447 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
If Kenneth Starr forcefully restated his case against President Clinton 
on Thursday, he did nothing to resolve the political dilemma facing 
the Republican-controlled House: whether to defy public opinion and 
impeach Clinton for his efforts to cover up his relationship with 
Monica Lewinsky. For those lawmakers who had clung to the hope that 
Starr might yet provide them with a wider-ranging case against Clinton, 
his testimony was a disappointment. Starr said there were no impeachable 
offenses in the Whitewater land deal, the travel-office firings, and 
the use of FBI files. Other members of Congress said Starr had simply 
reinforced already existing opinions. ``I think no one's opinion was 
influenced by the events of yesterday,'' said Rep. Richard Boucher, 
a Virginia Democrat on the House Judiciary Committee. And so on Friday 
Rep. Lindsey Graham, a Republican member of the committee walked before 
a bank of television cameras and delivered a plea to Clinton. Graham 
said he knew that the country did not want Clinton removed from office. 
He said he had decided Paula Jones' sexual harassment case was irrelevant 
to impeachment. Yet, he said, ``I believe with the bottom of my heart, 
unless the facts change, that our president lied to a federal grand 
jury.'' ``If there's something that can be said to change that fact 
pattern even slightly, say it,'' the South Carolinian implored, seeking 
a way not to vote for impeachment. ``Put up or shut up. Please, God, 
do it soon. Because when this train leaves the station, it will affect 
the course of history.'' Graham's dilemma was emblematic of the problem 
facing the whole House. Most Democrats and some Republicans resist 
the idea that the case deserves impeachment. The public has made its 
views known and overnight polls showed no change. An impeachment vote 
could be an agony for moderate Republicans in particular, torn between 
the swing voters that can decide elections in their districts and 
the party's hard-right core. But as Rep. Henry Hyde's end-of-year 
deadline looms, and his Judiciary Committee prepares to depose four 
more witnesses, there is still no one brokering a way out for those 
in Congress who hope for some escape from the issue. With Speaker 
Newt Gingrich gone, it is now Rep. Robert Livingston's role as the 
incoming speaker to decide how his party wants to handle the issue. 
He met on Monday with Rep. Dick Gephardt of Missouri, the House minority 
leader, and the two men agreed that they would like to put the issue 
behind them before the next Congress. But the question still is how. 
Many members believe it now seems almost inevitable that the Judiciary 
Committee will send to the full House on a party-line vote at least 
one article of impeachment on perjury, perhaps as early as the week 
of Dec. 7. At that point House Republican leaders face hard decisions 
on whether they want to impeach Clinton on a near party-line vote, 
knowing the Senate will not convict him; whether they can even muster 
the votes for impeachment, or whether to look for some alternative. 
A number of House members favor some kind of censure short of actual 
impeachment. ``I would not be comfortable voting for articles of impeachment,'' 
said Rep. Lee Hamilton of Indiana, one of the 31 Democrats who broke 
with his party in October to support the Republicans' broad impeachment 
inquiry. ``But on the other hand I would not be comfortable dropping 
the entire event as if nothing happened.'' Politically such an option 
would have to have some Republican backing to be viable. ``This is 
not going to end unless Livingston steps in here and takes some kind 
of leadership role,'' said Laura Nichols, Gephardt's press secretary. 
Rep. W.J. ``Billy'' Tauzin, a Louisiana Republican close to Livingston, 
says that with the Republican scramble for new leaders now complete, 
``the leadership will have some time to discuss this.'' He describes 
Livingston as ``very anxious to start his tenure as speaker with an 
agenda rather than a scandal.'' What kind of resolution is worked 
out may well depend on vote counting to see if impeachment could even 
prevail in the House. Democratic strategists say they expect only 
a handful of the 31 Democrats who broke ranks to support the Republican 
impeachment inquiry to vote for Clinton's actual impeachment. That 
means if 15 or so Republicans oppose impeachment, it could be defeated. 
A question for Livingston is this: If a vote to impeach the president 
would be defeated, would he want the vote to go ahead? The White House, 
which has been quietly sounding out a handful of moderate Republicans 
about their mood, faces a decision as well. Does Clinton agree to 
censure if he thinks it is possible that articles of impeachment could 
be defeated? If the votes are there to impeach Clinton narrowly on 
a party-line vote, other figures could intervene. Does Sen. Trent 
Lott of Mississippi, the majority leader, want the issue sent to the 
Senate to dominate its opening weeks or months? Does the Senate become 
the venue for a censure deal? And does anyone want to consume the 
year with a Senate trial when it is known that the Republicans lack 
the 67 votes to convict the president? ``If the House were to vote 
impeachment,'' said Rep. Jerrold Nadler, D-N.Y., ``then you get six 
or seven months of torturing the country with impeachment in the Senate.'' 
</TEXT>
</DOC>