<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981120.0296 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Peter Gatien wants to make you a nice cup of hot cocoa. A magnate 
of New York night life, he was acquitted on charges that he operated 
two of his clubs as virtual drug supermarkets, and he officially reopened 
the Limelight this weekend, billing the former Episcopal church in 
Chelsea as a community-friendly, arts-oriented complex that will feature 
puppet shows, photography exhibitions, a juice and coffee bar, and 
a courtyard sandbox for toddlers. Chastened by his near brush with 
prison and still dogged by community opposition, Gatien is trying 
to rehabilitate the Limelight's wild, drug-suffused reputation _ and 
his own tarnished image _ by offering an unlikely array of wholesome 
activities that will keep the landmark church open long after the 
last inebriated club kid has stumbled home at dawn. ``We want the 
neighborhood to feel like this is the kind of place they can come 
to for lunch or for a cup of coffee,'' said Gatien, who still faces 
tax-evasion charges and the possible loss of his liquor license. ``We 
don't want to be self-serving.'' Has the man whose anything-goes megaclubs 
embodied the excessive 1980s undergone a religious conversion? Those 
who live near the club, which is at Avenue of the Americas and 20th 
Street, are not convinced. ``Nice try,'' said Laura Michaels, executive 
director of the Flatiron Alliance, a local civic organization. ``We'll 
believe it when we see it.'' Until his arrest two years ago on federal 
charges that he allowed the sale of Ecstasy and other drugs at both 
the Limelight and the Tunnel, Gatien, whose empire included the Palladium 
and Club USA, was impervious to outside scrutiny. ``Peter was truly 
a mogul, a nightlife czar,'' David Hershkovitz, editor of Paper magazine, 
said. ``In many ways he represented the spirit of New York before 
it was cleaned up by Giuliani.'' Bruised and nearly bankrupted by 
his legal battles, Gatien is not the club king he once was. Last summer, 
he was forced to sell the Limelight to a developer, who is leasing 
him back the building. The Palladium and Club USA have been leveled, 
and the Tunnel, while commercially successful, draws the kind of youthful, 
baggy-pants crowd that scares off models and their followers, a demographic 
most Manhattan clubs covet. The Limelight's return is not only a chance 
for Gatien to thumb his nose at those who predicted his demise, but 
also an opportunity to recapture some of his lost glory. The born-again 
Limelight, he predicts, will usher in a new era of clubbing, one that 
grafts high-minded culture onto a traditional big-box dance hall. 
Rotating art shows will grace the walls, avant-garde dance troupes 
will make appearances in the soaring chapel, and patrons will be able 
to gab in a smoke-free, oxygenated cafe. ``We want to help new talent, 
incubate new deejays, artists and performers,'' he said. Although 
the club has operated sporadically since last summer, it is still 
a work in progress. Gatien says he has spent $1 million so far renovating 
the church interior _ a ``reinvention,'' as he calls it _ but much 
remains to be done. A half-dozen announced grand-opening dates have 
come and gone since his acquittal last February, and the club's heavily 
touted Giger Room, created by H.R. Giger, the German sci-fi designer 
behind the creatures in the ``Alien'' movies, is still under construction. 
Another opening, which Gatien promises will be celebrity-soaked, is 
scheduled for Dec. 3. While Gatien says the extended soft opening 
is intentional, the delays have only deepened suspicions within the 
nightlife business that he is floundering financially. ``I'm not hearing 
any buzz about the place on the street, and in the club world, that's 
not a good thing,'' said Mark Baker, a promoter who worked at the 
Tunnel and now helps fill the VIP room at Life, the sprawling dance 
club on Bleecker Street. Besides his unabated legal troubles and the 
uncertainty over Limelight's liquor license, Gatien's biggest challenge 
will be keeping New York's party crowd interested in a club first 
christened 15 years ago (with an opening bash that had Andy Warhol 
as its host). Although it drew a parade of glamor-drenched names and 
gossip-column mentions in its early years, the velvet rope came down 
in the late '80s as AIDS and the recession thinned the ranks of party 
hoppers. It was the open-door policy of the '90s that prosecutors 
said helped turn the club into a haven for Ecstasy-gulping adolescents. 
Many of Gatien's competitors are eagerly predicting that Limelight 
will be a failure, much like Studio 54's stillborn revival a few years 
ago. Some say Gatien's inability to hire the promoters-of-the moment, 
his shaky finances and abundant bad blood in the club scene all conspire 
against him. ``That place is like a haunted house with a lot of ghosts 
rattling around and no exorcists in sight,'' said Steve Lewis, a former 
Limelight promoter who runs Life, the only dance club in Manhattan 
that could be considered competition. ``I give the place three weeks 
and it's over.'' Limelight's huge capacity, 2,000 people, presents 
an additional challenge. If the Fabulous crowd can't be persuaded 
to return week after week, the door policy will have to be liberalized, 
which will bring the club's cachet down a notch. ``It's sad to say, 
but in this day and age, the A crowd doesn't want to mix with the 
masses,'' said Noel Ashman, the owner of Veruka, a restaurant and 
lounge that has done well by excluding hoi polloi. ``Still, Peter 
has a good sense of the business, and he will find a way to pack the 
club.'' On a recent afternoon, Gatien, 47, chain-smoked Newports as 
he slowly paced around his office on the third floor of the former 
vestry. He seemed both excited and preoccupied, and bitterness over 
last year's ``government witch hunt,'' as he calls it, continues to 
haunt him. His trademark eye patch, which covered an eye damaged in 
a teen-age hockey accident, has been replaced by green-tinted glasses. 
It was insurance money from the mishap, $17,000, that helped finance 
his first nightclub venture near his hometown, Carelton, Ontario. 
The club, an old tavern he renovated, opened with an unknown local 
band called Rush. Those who know him say Gatien is passionate about 
the nightlife business, and not just because he sees clubs as ego-boosting 
opportunities to hobnob with celebrity. To him, they are valuable 
incubators of cutting-edge culture and places where different types 
of people can mix. He employs a full-time creative staff, is quick 
to hire or promote unheralded talent, and has a keen interest in new 
music. ``Peter is a master of seeing the creative gifts of younger 
people and the influence they can have on trends,'' Baker said. Gatien, 
for example, is widely credited with importing techno from the outer 
boroughs, and unlike many club owners, he is not phobic of bridge-and-tunnel 
patrons. ``I think these folks can be far more sophisticated and on 
the mark than Manhattanites,'' he said. As he spoke, workmen were 
tearing apart a series of nearby rooms. The new design, which Irv 
Johnson, the club director, describes as a mix of ``gothic, industrial 
and high-tech,'' includes a glass-topped bar over flowing water, a 
generous helping of loungelike sofas, and unisex bathrooms. Banks 
of video monitors, a nod to the '80s, and giant lightboxes for oversize 
transparencies, fill front rooms. The entrance hall, a macabre statement 
on Mayor Rudolph Giuliani's quality-of-life crackdown, includes black 
clarions, a black steeple that hangs from the ceiling, and two walk-in 
freezers with law books, funerary bouquets and angel wings inside 
blocks of ice. Julian LaVerdiere, a partner in the design firm Big 
Room, said the entrance hall's anti-establishment theme was originally 
slated for the entire club, but Gatien, aware of his vulnerability, 
scaled back the provocation. Gatien and his wife, Alessandra, are 
still facing state charges that they failed to pay $1.3 million in 
taxes, and the state Liquor Authority is considering whether or not 
to renew the club's license. (Even though the club was shuttered by 
police in 1996, it is still operating under its old license.) In weighing 
its decision, the agency will take into account neighborhood sentiment, 
the tax-evasion indictments and even the drug charges that were dismissed 
by a jury. ``The burden of proof is not as strict as it is in a criminal 
hearing,'' Thomas McKeon, the authority's counsel, said. Last week, 
Community Board 5 voted to oppose a new license for the club, although 
it agreed to revisit the issue in three months. ``The Limelight has 
caused this neighborhood extreme distress for 13 years,'' Lola Finkelstein, 
chairwoman of the board, said, citing noise and drugged and drunken 
patrons who wreaked havoc. ``We are, however, willing to give them 
a second chance.'' Gatien seems intent on keeping the community happy. 
``Hopefully, we'll be able to coexist peacefully,'' he said. Ms. Gatien, 
the mother of the couple's 4-year-old son, Xander, is overseeing the 
outdoor playground, its community-oriented programs, and the juice 
and coffee bar, to be called Xander's Window. It remains to be seen 
whether this eclectic mix will fly, but the club's promoters, among 
them the singer Donovan Leitch, say that New York is ready for another 
dance club. Maya Ben-Avner, a promoter who is overseeing the club's 
performance roster, said: ``Everyone is so bored with what's out there. 
We want to bring back the old days of club-going, when designers and 
filmmakers, uptown and down, gay and straight, all mixed.'' She said 
the door policy would be tight but not impenetrable. If Limelight 
wants a taste-making crowd, it has gotten off to a good start. On 
Friday night, Liz Cohen, a publicity agent, and Lauren Dupont, a fashion 
editor at Vogue, had their joint birthday party at Limelight. The 
affair, which included several hundred of their friends, was a gift 
from Gatien, who also provided two hours of open bar and a champagne 
waterfall. Last year, the two had their party at Bowery Bar, which 
yielded a prodigious amount of media coverage. At first, Ms. Cohen, 
28, was hesitant to accept Limelight's offer ``because of the bad 
press, the drugs and the club kids,'' she said. ``But when we saw 
the space,'' she continued, ``we were blown away.'' Her crowd, she 
said, is one that Limelight undoubtedly wants to call its own: young, 
hip and sprinkled with names like Von Furstenberg, Lauren, Paltrow 
and Hawke. ``We're really a great mix of New York,'' she said. ``A 
little bit of everything.'' Of course, too much diversity is not always 
a good thing. Ms. Cohen said she was assured that an iron-clad door 
policy would be in effect for the benefit of her 600 invited guests. 
``I mean, I don't exactly want guys with stockings on their head crashing 
my party,'' she said. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>