<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981120.0343 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Sister Nirmala padded into the austere room on bare feet, a small 
brown sparrow of a woman, and alighted next to a hauntingly lifelike 
statue of another tiny nun, an ancient, wrinkled woman sunk in prayer 
and dressed in the same simple white sari edged in blue. As the liturgical 
murmuring of 100 nuns' voices mingled with the racket of trucks on 
the street outside, Sister Nirmala sat in stillness on the stone floor 
through the dawn Mass. At its end, she left her rosary beads in the 
statue's lap and touched a lifeless hand. In the year since the death 
of Mother Teresa, the impish, charismatic founder of the Missionaries 
of Charity, her successor, Sister Nirmala, has gladly cast herself 
in the inimitable stooped shadow of the woman who began the Catholic 
order almost half a century ago to succor the poorest of the poor. 
With a humble, quiet way of her own, Sister Nirmala, who was born 
in Bihar 64 years ago to an ardent Hindu Brahmin family, said she 
cannot replace Mother Teresa, only try to carry on her work. ``I never 
try to fill her shoes,'' she said in an interview at Mother House, 
headquarters of the order. ``I have to wear my own small shoes. I 
don't have to be Mother Teresa, just Sister Nirmala, and being Sister 
Nirmala isn't so difficult. If I had to be Mother Teresa, I would 
have collapsed.'' When Mother Teresa died in September 1997 at the 
age of 87, there were dire predictions that donations to the order's 
worldwide network of homes for the dying, the disabled and the orphaned 
would wither. But Sister Nirmala said that to the contrary, more money 
has come in. The order does not release figures about how much money 
is contributed, but Sister Nirmala said the number of homes run by 
the order and its 4,000 nuns has grown by 20 since Mother Teresa died. 
There are now 614, and the number is to expand by another 15 before 
summer. Sister Nirmala's time is consumed by the daunting job of administering 
the order's work. She is also gathering evidence of the miracles that 
will be needed to win sainthood for Mother Teresa from the Vatican. 
``They will accept only instantaneous physical cures,'' she said. 
``So far we do not have documented ones. Little gradual ones are there.'' 
The keepers of Mother Teresa's memory are scattered across the teeming, 
traffic-clogged city of Calcutta _ a place where poverty is as inescapable 
as the children begging on the streets. The nuns live in ascetic quarters 
as well as elegant flats. And while none would venture that Sister 
Nirmala has the star power of the Nobel Prize-winning Mother Teresa, 
they say she has provided quiet, firm leadership. For decades the 
Rev. Edward Le Joly, a Jesuit, served as spiritual father to the Missionaries 
of Charity. He is 89 now and lives in an unadorned room with a big 
wooden desk where he has written books about Mother Teresa. His hands 
shake, his voice quavers and his face is covered with liver spots, 
but he proudly declares himself ``the authority on Mother Teresa.'' 
``Sister Nirmala will not have Mother Teresa's charisma, and she will 
not need it,'' he said. ``Mother Teresa had a special grace of God, 
as foundress, to start the society. Now Sister Nirmala takes over 
a society that is established.'' Moving in a different sphere of Calcutta 
is Sunita Kumar, a cultured, stylish matron. The wife of a successful 
Hindu businessman, she has done volunteer work for the Missionaries 
of Charity since 1967. In that time she has opened her wood-paneled 
living room, lined with the paintings of India's greatest modern artists, 
to a weekly gathering of women who fold pieces of paper that lepers 
can open easily to reach their pills. ``They have no fingers,'' Mrs. 
Kumar explained. For years she was Mother Teresa's liaison to the 
international press corps, and she has continued in that role for 
Sister Nirmala. Mrs. Kumar said some mistake the sister's unassuming 
demeanor for weakness. But when three of the order's nuns were killed 
in Yemen in July by a man the police described as unstable, Sister 
Nirmala immediately got on a plane to go there. ``It was exactly what 
Mother would have done,'' Mrs. Kumar said. ``If you had seen her before 
and now, you would see she has blossomed out.'' Sister Nirmala was 
chosen to head the order in March 1997, when Mother Teresa was gravely 
ill. A conclave of 120 sisters deliberated for two months before picking 
her. Sister Nirmala, who joined the order in 1958 after converting 
to Catholicism, had helped open the order's first home outside India, 
in Venezuela. She also helped to open and run a house in New York 
for contemplative nuns who tended to the spiritual rather than the 
material needs of the poor. For 21 years, she lived a relatively secluded 
life in the order's contemplative wing, passing her days in solitary 
prayer and ministering to the poor. ``I like to be quiet, hidden,'' 
she said. As Mother Teresa's health worsened, Sister Nirmala often 
came to Mother House to pray with her and they became closer than 
ever. But suddenly, after Mother Teresa's death, she found herself 
thrust into the public eye. Facing sharp-toothed questions at her 
first news conference, she gave answers that at times seemed a bit 
uncharitable. That day, she said the poor should accept their lot 
and ``not moan and groan.'' Asked what would happen if the poor became 
rich, she joked, ``We would lose our jobs.'' Her comments were not 
well received in the local press. The media comments fed a deeper 
criticism of the order's approach to poverty, one that is based on 
charity, rather than giving the poor the means to learn to stand on 
their own feet. The nuns also condemn the use of contraceptives, in 
a city grimly unable to support its growing population of more than 
13 million. Sister Nirmala has become more diplomatic in handling 
difficult questions, but still has not altered the order's philosophy. 
Like Mother Teresa, she opposes ``artificial'' contraception, like 
condoms or the pill. ``To have the pleasure but not the responsibility 
only degrades the human being,'' she said. The way of life at Mother 
House remains largely unchanged. And Sister Nirmala said she believes 
Mother Teresa is still ``managing from the top.'' As Mother Teresa's 
health failed, Sister Nirmala and the other nuns came to feel lonely 
for the irrepressible woman who once led them. So Sister Nirmala decided 
to have a statue of Mother Teresa placed in the room where the nuns 
gather every morning and evening to pray. ``Mother had looked at it 
and said: `Hide it. Don't let the sisters see it,''' Sister Nirmala 
recalled. ``Later, when Mother passed away, that place was so empty 
where she used to sit. So we had it brought up. That is her presence 
among us.'' 
</TEXT>
</DOC>