<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981120.0347 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Momentum advisers are the surfers of the investing arena. They constantly 
look for waves that are strong enough to carry them a long time. Although 
there are momentum investors of different stripes, the advisers I'm 
talking about define momentum in terms of a stock's recent performance. 
They seek shares with the best performance over the last few months. 
One might worry that this approach entails buying stocks that are 
already awfully expensive. A momentum adviser, however, thinks that 
such stocks will keep going _ after all, they have momentum. Instead 
of ``Buy low, sell high,'' their motto is ``Buy high, sell higher.'' 
As any surfer will tell you, the sport is exhilarating. But what happens 
when your wave disappears? The answer is provided by what happened 
to momentum investors during this summer's selloff: a wipeout. From 
mid-July through August, the typical portfolio of a momentum newsletter 
shed between a quarter and a third of its value. Investors shouldn't 
have been surprised. Stocks with the most momentum during rallies 
_ like technology stocks earlier this summer _ are almost always big 
losers in the initial stages of declines. They may look irresistible 
as long as their wave is rolling, but they also have the farthest 
to fall. In deciding whether momentum investing is appropriate, it 
is important to examine performance for an entire market cycle. Momentum 
investors need to earn huge bull-market gains in order to weather 
their bear-market losses. This is illustrated by one of the best-performing 
momentum-based newsletters: MPT Review, edited by Louis Navellier. 
When the market rises, MPT's performance is nothing short of spectacular. 
Consider its gains during months in which the broad market rose over 
the last 13 years: It outperformed the Wilshire 5000, a broad market 
benchmark, by more than 30 percentage points, annualized _ 81.8 percent 
a year to 51.4 percent. But for the entire 13 years, including months 
of both market gains and declines, MPT Review beat the broad market 
by ``just'' 8.6 percentage points, annualized: 25 percent vs. 16.4 
percent. To be sure, that kind of outperformance is nothing to sneeze 
at. But there is another issue here: risk. In achieving that return, 
I figure, MPT Review's portfolios were 84 percent riskier than the 
overall market, as measured by volatility. That makes MPT Review's 
performance less impressive. In fact, without incurring any more risk 
than MPT Review, you could have performed almost as well by buying 
an index fund on margin _ borrowing $84 for every $100 of your portfolio's 
net worth. What this means is that during rallies, MPT Review needed 
to beat the market at an annualized clip of more than 30 percentage 
points simply to weather its huge losses during declining months and 
still keep pace with the market on a risk-adjusted basis. MPT Review's 
example raises this question: Why not combine momentum stocks with 
a market-timing system that sidesteps declines? Fine, but Navellier 
shuns timing, always staying fully invested. The momentum newsletter 
with the best success at avoiding market declines is The Chartist, 
edited by Dan Sullivan. I calculate that Sullivan's timing has reduced 
by 31 percent the risk, or volatility, otherwise associated with his 
recommended momentum stocks. But his timing hasn't been perfect: It 
has also kept him in cash during some market rallies. I estimate that 
_ at 17.3 percent, annualized, over the last 18 years _ his portfolio's 
performance was about 20 percent less than it would have if it had 
remained fully invested at all times. As a matter of pure statistics, 
Sullivan's achievement is creditable: He reduced risk by more than 
he forfeited return. But it still is a far cry from the fantasy of 
capturing all the upside and none of the downside. Momentum investing, 
like surfing, is not for the faint of heart. The approach can beat 
the market over a market cycle, but prepare for a wild ride. Mark 
Hulbert is editor of the Hulbert Financial Digest, a newsletter based 
in Alexandria, Va. His column on investment strategies will appear 
every other week. E-mail: strategy(AT)nytimes.com. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>