<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981120.0435 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Federal agents have cracked an international ring that made hundreds 
of millions of dollars smuggling thousands of Indians and other Asians 
into the United States over the last three years, the government announced 
Friday. The smugglers filled orders from small businesses looking 
for workers, the government said. The businesses or the immigrants' 
families typically paid $20,000 or more for each of those smuggled, 
who made ``long, grueling trips fraught with danger'' that often took 
months, said Paul Coggins, U.S. attorney in Dallas, who is the lead 
prosecutor in the case. Once in the United States, some immigrants 
were kept as virtual captives by employers or the smugglers until 
the debt was paid, the officials said. ``This is the largest alien 
smuggling organization ever dismantled in United States history,'' 
Attorney General Janet Reno said at a news conference here. In three 
indictments unsealed in Dallas Friday, 31 people were charged with 
bringing illegal aliens into the United States, transporting them 
within the United States, conspiracy and money laundering. Twenty-one 
of those indicted, including two of the three men identified as leaders 
of the ring, were seized in arrests that began last Saturday and lasted 
through Thursday, in the Bahamas, Puerto Rico and several cities across 
the United States. The rest are at large. The ring brought about 300 
people a month, and as many as 12,000 over three years, into the United 
States, said Doris Meissner, commissioner of the Immigration and Naturalization 
Service. Some of those undocumented workers, almost all adult men, 
have been found and are being held as witnesses, officials said. This 
is how the smuggling operation worked, the officials said: The ring 
leaders solicited orders from families in the United States and employers 
who were prepared to pay for illegal aliens. The people they helped 
bring to the United States were mostly Indians, but some were from 
Pakistan, Syria or Afghanistan. In many cases, they were provided 
false passports and other documents. From India, the people were taken 
to Moscow and then to Cuba. From Cuba, the officials said, some workers 
were taken to the Bahamas and then to Miami. Others were taken from 
Cuba to Ecuador and then to Miami or across the Mexican border into 
the United States. They arrived by air, land and sea. The money raised 
from the smuggling enterprise was shipped from the United States to 
India through Canada, Dubai and the United Arab Emirates. One of the 
secret houses where the immigrants were held was in Miami. Another 
was in northern New Jersey. Most of the immigrants ended up on the 
East Coast, but some have been identified in 38 states. One of the 
stash houses was located in New Jersey, and for a period beginning 
last May, four members of the ring held 22 illegal aliens there until 
a smuggling fee of $14,000 was paid for each, according to a separate 
federal indictment that was unsealed in Newark Friday. The indictment 
said the four set up the house and collected smuggling fees of over 
$300,000. The indictment, announced by the U.S. attorney for New Jersey, 
Faith Hochberg, charged them with conspiracy and harboring illegal 
aliens. The indictment did not disclose the location of the stash 
house. But it said some of the four suspects' illegal planning and 
acts took place in Hudson County. Only one of the four has been arrested. 
He was identified as Pankaj Brahmbhatt, of Union City, N.J. The three 
at large were identified as Manish Patel, Nilesh Mistry, and Amrish 
Patel, of Jersey City. The officials in Washington refused to say 
what kind of businesses sought the immigrants. They said the investigation 
was still under way and that they expected to arrest the owners of 
some of these businesses. The businesses employing the smuggled immigrants 
were primarily in the service industries, especially fast food, according 
to one Immigration and Naturalization official who did not want to 
be identified for fear of impeding the investigation. He said the 
smuggling appears to have been arranged by fast food restaurant owners 
and franchisees, rather than larger corporations. ``There is no indication 
that any parent companies were aware of or involved in that type of 
activity,'' he said. As Coggins described it, the investigation began 
about a year ago when some of the smuggled immigrants were arrested 
in Dallas. With ample highways and one of the nation's largest airports, 
Dallas became a major transshipment point. ``All the same factors 
that make Dallas a great city of legitimate trade make Dallas a great 
city for illegitimate trade,'' he said. ``It's a lot like a drug cartel, 
except they substituted people for drugs.'' He said the indictments 
would spin off hundreds of other investigations into the businesses 
that employed the workers. Ms. Meissner estimated that the ring collected 
about $220 million over three years. The investigation, called Operation 
Seek and Keep, lasted a year, she said. ``Operation Seek and Keep 
is an important landmark in the administration's goal of protecting 
authorized workers in the United States and putting unscrupulous employers 
out of business,'' she said at the news conference. Still, the 300 
illegal immigrants a month brought in by the smuggling ring is a tiny 
fraction of the number that illegally crosses the Mexican border into 
the United States every week. The ring involved three overlapping 
but competing cartels, the officials said. They said that the head 
of one of these organizations, Nick Diaz, who is also known as Nitin 
Shettie, was arrested in the Bahamas last Saturday and was in custody 
in Miami. He was said to be 30 years old and a resident of the Bahamas 
and Ecuador. Another man said to be a top leader, Navtej Pall Singh 
Sandhu, was arrested in San Juan, Puerto Rico, on Wednesday. He was 
said to be 40 years old and a resident of London. The alleged leader 
of the third organization, Niranjan Maan Singh, was said to be 58 
years old and at large in India. Other arrests were made at LaGuardia 
Airport and on Staten Island; in North Bergen, Somerset and Perth 
Amboy, N.J., and in Florida, California, Texas and Pennsylvania. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>