<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981120.0252 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
There is something compelling about the notion of a cutting garden, 
conjuring visions of a figure moving gracefully down large pathways 
of flowers, bending here and there to snip a bloom for the willow 
basket on an arm, gathering flowers to fill the house with thoughtfully 
arranged bouquets. Unfortunately, most people these days have neither 
the space for such a garden nor the time to maintain it. Like a vegetable 
garden, a cutting garden is a production garden. It may look gorgeous 
as well, but its main purpose is to produce flowers to be cut, rather 
than to be admired in the landscape. Most people think of production 
gardens as needing large spaces, but they also can be grown on a near-Lilliputian 
scale. Some of the best flowers to grow in a small space or a container 
for cutting are daffodils, tulips, sweet peas, zinnias and dahlias. 
Forget the spacing instructions on the tags or the seed packets. They 
should be planted very close together, creating a veritable thicket 
of flowers from which to cut without destroying the harmonious appearance 
of the space. Choose a spot that gets sun for at least three-quarters 
of the day. In the fall, plant tulips and daffodils for spring bloom, 
and in the spring plant sweet peas, zinnias and dahlias for summer 
bloom. In areas where bulbs in containers might freeze, the containers 
can be stored for the winter in an unheated garage or closet. When 
tulips are planted outdoors at the recommended spacing of 40 or so 
bulbs in a square yard, or the large daffodils at 25 to 30 a square 
yard, they will be several inches apart. Consequently, when they bloom 
there will be empty spaces among them, which is fine for the landscape 
scheme and for eventual naturalizing. But for the nearly instant gratification 
of having a mass of blooms that you can cut from without leaving huge 
holes in your flower patch, plant the bulbs so they touch each other. 
Better yet, plant a double layer. Dig out an area about 18 inches 
square and 6 to 7 inches deep for full-size tulips and daffodils (less 
if the bulbs are small). Place a layer of the bulbs touching, pointed 
tip up. Add a second layer, nestling the bulbs on top of the first 
layer. Cover with soil to a depth of an inch, and water to settle 
the soil. If you prefer to use a container, choose one at least 18 
inches deep and 18 inches across. Fill it to within 8 inches of the 
rim with potting mix, and then layer the bulbs as described. A double-layer 
planting like this will hold 50 standard-size tulip or daffodil bulbs. 
For maximum effect, it is best to plant all the same variety so they 
will bloom at the same time. If you can't bear having just one variety, 
choose varieties that bloom together. Mixing early, mid- and late-season 
tulips, for example, will produce a scattered bloom, rather than a 
massed one. At home, I like to plant old-fashioned King Alfred long-cupped 
daffodils in one container and Cheerfulness, with its fragrant, dangling 
blossoms, in another. I combine two single early tulip varieties in 
a container, the luscious Apricot Beauty and the fragrant, cherry-pink 
Christmas Marvel. The recommended spacing for sweet peas is 4 to 6 
inches apart for both vine and dwarf varieties. But I find that putting 
them only 1 inch apart produces far more plants, and consequently 
flowers. One or two square feet of ground or a container 18 inches 
deep and 18 inches wide is sufficient. A trellis, stakes, wires or 
string are helpful for the vine varieties. I much prefer the vine 
types, even in containers, because I cut single stems and vines 12 
to 18 inches long, with flowers in full bloom and buds to open later. 
Cutting this way lets more light into the densely packed plants, while 
allowing lots of bouquets. Soaking the seeds overnight in water before 
planting will speed up germination. Zinnias and dahlias are excellent 
choices for small cutting gardens because they both branch, producing 
more branches and blooms throughout the season after cutting. There 
are dozens of dahlia varieties in 13 different classes, ranging from 
single to multipetaled and from dwarf to more than 5 feet high. The 
flowers range in diameter from 1 to 12 inches. For a densely planted 
space, choose varieties that are 2 to 3 feet tall, with flowers 2 
to 4 inches across. Plant them about 9 inches apart instead of the 
recommended 18 inches. Thus, in an area 1.5 to 2 feet square, you 
can plant six to eight tubers. Or put three tubers in a container 
18 inches deep and across. Zinnias, too, come in a wide range of colors 
and shapes, though they are not as varied as dahlias. For cutting, 
I prefer the California Giants and the Cactus, both of which branch 
heavily and grow to 2.5 to 3 feet tall. For a dense planting, scatter 
the seeds about an inch apart over prepared garden ground and rake 
them in, covering them with about a quarter-inch of soil. Once they 
have germinated, you can thin them to 2 inches apart. When the flowers 
are in bloom, put on a straw hat, pick up a gathering basket and flower 
shears and head out to the cutting garden, even if it is just an overflowing 
container on a balcony, bursting with tulips. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>