<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981120.0348 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
President Boris Yeltsin ordered an inquiry Friday into spectacular 
charges leveled earlier this week _ so far without evidence _ that 
Russia's equivalent of the FBI plotted to kill one of the country's 
most influential tycoons. The tycoon is Boris Berezovsky, an oil magnate 
and director of Russia's biggest television network who was a leading 
supporter of Yeltsin during the last presidential campaign in 1996. 
Berezovsky, who is still alive, released a letter last week asserting 
that the Federal Security Service, a spinoff of the Soviet Union's 
KGB, which is responsible for domestic law enforcement, had plotted 
last winter to murder him. On Tuesday his source, a Security Service 
colonel named Alexander Litvinenko, called a news conference to promote 
the accusation and warn that a rogue element is running wild within 
the agency. Moscow has talked about little else since. On Friday Yeltsin's 
spokesman, Dmitri Yakushin, said the president had ordered the security 
service and his chief national security aide to investigate the accusation. 
Yeltsin ``is seriously worried by the latest media reports that FSB 
officials have allegedly committed illegal actions,'' Yakushin said. 
FSB is the Russian acronym for the service, which is responsible for 
investigating organized crime, terrorism and foreign intelligence 
operations. At his news conference, Litvinenko and several other agents 
_ some thinly disguised in dark glasses _ said the agency was infested 
by a ``criminal group'' which had been using it ``for their own private 
political purposes, including settling accounts with unwanted people.'' 
Besides the verbal order to murder Berezovsky, which Litvinenko contended 
was issued by leaders of the agency, other FSB officers detailed what 
they said was a plot to kidnap the brother of another prominent Moscow 
businessman, Umar Dzhabrailov. Why the orders were supposedly issued 
_ and why the plots were not carried out _ was not clear. The agents 
took pains to note that all of the plots unraveled before the service's 
current director, Vladimir Putin, took command in August. But Putin 
reacted angrily anyway, saying he had written evidence that some of 
the same officers who staged the news conference were themselves rogues 
who had pushed illegal crimefighting methods. Some of them, he said, 
had actually been Berezovsky's own personal bodyguards in past lives. 
``They will be dismissed in strict accordance with the law,'' he said. 
Putin ridiculed the allegations, arguing that experienced investigators 
like Litvinenko would have secured proof of their charges, perhaps 
through video surveillance, if they were true. Berezovsky's Communist 
Party critics suggested that the once-powerful industrialist, his 
stature lowered by Russia's economic downfall, was simply seeking 
to recapture lost limelight. Berezovsky was one of Yeltsin's principal 
backers in the last election, and the president's own drift away from 
the center of power may have reduced Berezovsky's influence. Still, 
Muscovites were not dismissing the allegations out of hand. A separate 
criminal investigation of corruption within the security service already 
has led to several prosecutions, and Putin has dismantled the agency's 
organized-crime unit on the grounds that it was unprofessional. And 
Berezovsky has some reason for concern. Russia's ORT television network, 
the nation's largest broadcast company and a locus of much of Berezovsky's 
influence, was raided by government officials this week and some of 
its equipment confiscated for nonpayment of taxes. While the network's 
arrears are real, so are those of scores of other major corporations, 
and some have speculated that the raid was part of the early jockeying 
to control the media among candidates for the 2000 presidential election. 
The last month has also seen an upswing in overt anti-Semitism among 
nationalist and communist politicians. Berezovsky is of Jewish descent 
and is a strong supporter of Israel. Berezovsky already has survived 
one attempt on his life, a 1995 car-bombing that killed one man and 
left his bodyguard seriously wounded. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>