<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981120.0421 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Iraq has thrown up significant obstructions to the work of international 
arms inspectors less than a week after backing down on its ban on 
cooperating with them. U.S. and British officials have warned that 
air strikes remain an immediate option if the government of Saddam 
Hussein does not honor its pledge to renew cooperation with the inspectors. 
The Iraqis appear to believe that they can balk on major issues until 
they win a comprehensive review of their relations with the United 
Nations. But that review, the Security Council decided on Oct. 30, 
cannot take place until there is full cooperation with inspectors. 
Iraq appears to be defiant on several fronts, including in its crucial 
biological weapons program, which remains potentially the most immediately 
dangerous of Iraq's prohibited arms. With the right components _ and 
Iraq is suspected of harboring a large quantity of them _ biological 
weapons can be produced in a matter of days. The confrontation with 
Iraq, sooner than expected, raises questions about the stability of 
the Iraqi president and his understanding of the seriousness of the 
threat he faces and the limited help _ if any _ he can expect from 
former friends. Experts had assumed that it would take the appearance 
of a short-notice, spot inspection team to provoke Iraq. These teams 
are only beginning to be assembled, however, as routine monitoring 
systems are restored after a week-long break. At the heart of the 
renewed confrontation are Iraqi documents that Richard Butler, the 
chief inspector, has said are critical to a full accounting of what 
prohibited weapons Iraq possessed before the 1991 war in the Persian 
Gulf. Without those records, it is all but impossible to determine 
what arms remain _ or have not been adequately accounted for. Among 
the disputed documents is at least one that President Clinton confidently 
predicted on Sunday would be turned over, to the surprise of some 
diplomats here. It is an Iraqi air force account of what kind of ammunition 
was loaded and used _ or destroyed _ in the 1980-1988 Iran-Iraq war. 
U.N. inspectors believe that the missing document _ literally snatched 
away from the inspection team that found it in July _ indicates that 
Iraq may have been left with more chemical and biological munitions, 
when the war with Iraq ended, than it has declared . In a letter to 
Butler, Iraq's deputy foreign minister, Riyadh al-Qaisi, said that 
the request for the air force document had overstepped the bounds. 
``The request you made seems to be provocative rather than professional,'' 
the Iraqi official said in a letter Thursday night. This letter is 
interesting for several reasons. First, it underscores Iraq's apparently 
misguided hope that it can undercut Butler by portraying his requests 
as out of line. Considering that Baghdad is making a direct challenge 
to the authority of the Security Council, Iraq can never hope to unseat 
Butler. The council created his disarmament commission. Moreover, 
it ordered the Iraqis to turn over the air force document several 
months ago. Second, the prominence of al-Qaisi in recent exchanges 
reinforces rumors that he is about to be sent to New York to represent 
Iraq at the United Nations, replacing Nizar Hamdoon sometime in December. 
Finally, the Iraqi move may deplete whatever sympathy or understanding 
Saddam may have found in the office of Secretary-General Kofi Annan, 
who has seen his February agreement with Saddam violated brazenly 
and repeatedly in recent months, and his more recent pleas for Iraqi 
compliance cavalierly rejected. In general, al-Qaisi argued, the documents 
Butler wanted either did not exist or were already accounted for in 
information provided earlier to UNSCOM, the U.N. Special Commission. 
As a possible concession, the Iraqis said that the contested air force 
document might be looked at in the presence of the secretary-general's 
special envoy, Prakash Shah. Diplomats dismissed this as another Iraqi 
ploy to circumvent the special commission and the Security Council. 
On Friday, Butler fired back in a nine-page letter to Ambassador Peter 
Burleigh, the U.S. representative at the United Nations and this month's 
Security Council president, detailing his most recent exchanges with 
Iraq. He had written to Iraq this week outlining what information 
he needed as inspections resume. A copy of the letter to Burleigh 
was sent to Annan. Butler said Friday that Iraq ``declines to furnish 
the commission with any information on its biological-weapons program,'' 
preferring to wait for the promised comprehensive review. But that 
option was never in the cards. Butler also told Burleigh that Iraq 
also appears to be denying access to archives in the Ministry of Defense, 
the Military Industrialization Corp. and other government departments. 
``Access by UNSCOM to the archives, to be provided as I hope, through 
cooperation by Iraq, would be the most effective and least controversial 
way of the commission obtaining the necessary evidence for the accounting 
of Iraq's prohibited weapons programs,'' Butler wrote. ``It would 
avoid seeking out such documents through intrusive inspection which, 
as council members are aware, has sometimes been the source of tension 
and blockage.'' Iraq has furthermore refused to answer questions about 
the extent of its production and loading into warheads of the nerve 
agent VX, an odorless, colorless gas that can kill within hours. Questions 
on missiles and inexplicable quantities of missile fuel are also being 
ignored. Iraq is also apparently trying to conceal as ``state secrets'' 
important diaries and memoirs of Iraqi military officers with knowledge 
of the extent of Iraqi weapons programs. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>