<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981120.0382 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Both Kenneth Starr and the White House agreed Friday that the independent 
counsel had ``exonerated'' Clinton on several matters that Starr had 
long been investigating. Exoneration is not, of course, the same as 
an ethical gold star, as one legal expert put it, and the exact facts 
in each of the matters are different. The White House complained that 
Starr was tardy in disclosing that he had found no wrongdoing on these 
other matters and sought to define exoneration broadly, as covering 
everything except the Monica Lewinsky saga. Starr's testimony to the 
House Judiciary Committee did not go quite that far. The independent 
counsel said Clinton had done nothing wrong in two matters, the firing 
of White House travel office employees and the improper gathering 
of FBI files of government officials in the White House. On Whitewater, 
where it all started, Starr's testimony fell well short of clearing 
the president of wrongdoing. Starr said that he had prepared a draft 
impeachment referral on Whitewater late last year, but decided not 
to forward it to the Congress because he was unsure whether the credibility 
of the witnesses against Clinton was sufficient to make a strong case. 
A prosecutor's failure to bring charges is not the same thing as granting 
a public official a clean bill of ethical health, lawyers noted. ``There 
is a distinction between not being charged and being exonerated,'' 
said Irvin Nathan, a Washington criminal defense lawyer who served 
in the Clinton Justice Department. ``A prosecutor doesn't give out 
gold medals for good conduct.'' Nor are the investigations of the 
travel office and FBI file matters, colloquially known as Travelgate 
and Filegate, closed. Starr said he is continuing to investigate both 
matters and could pursue charges against lower-ranking officials. 
Still, White House officials insisted Starr had cleared the president 
on all non-Lewinsky matters. And they complained that he had been 
tardy in publicly disclosing his findings. ``Conclusions of innocence, 
no matter how belated, are important,'' said Paul Begala, one of Clinton's 
top political advisers. On Whitewater, Starr said his prosecutors 
had difficulty ``establishing the truth with a sufficient degree of 
confidence.'' ``We drafted a report,'' he explained. ``But we concluded 
that it would be inconsistent with the statutory standard.'' The independent 
counsel cited the cases where he was not still pursuing the president 
as evidence of self-restraint. ``We are proud not only of the cases 
we won, but also of our decisions not to indict,'' Starr said, after 
citing the 14 criminal convictions he had won on Whitewater, including 
those of former Justice Department official Webster Hubbell and former 
Arkansas Gov. Jim Guy Tucker. Democrats, however, insisted that Starr's 
testimony was tantamount to an admission that he had nothing with 
which to tar the president on Whitewater. ``It seems that Ken Starr 
could not bring himself to say the words, but a fair reading of yesterday's 
statement certainly strongly implies that we're done on Whitewater,'' 
said Jim Jordan, a spokesman for the Democratic minority on the House 
Judiciary Committee. ``Our members, however, feel very strongly that 
Starr was ethically remiss in not exonerating the president months 
earlier.'' Starr said his attempts to investigate President Clinton 
and Hillary Rodham Clinton on Whitewater had been stymied by the refusal 
of key witnesses, like Hubbell and Susan McDougal, a former business 
partner of the Clintons, to cooperate. Starr indicted Hubbell for 
a third time last week and plans to bring Mrs. McDougal to trial on 
criminal contempt charges early next year. Thus, while Starr has not 
uncovered sufficient evidence on Whitewater to bring criminal charges 
against the Clintons or impeach the president, his office is still 
hoping for a breakthrough. And while it remains unlikely that pivotal 
figures such as Hubbell or Mrs. McDougal will ever supply one to Starr, 
his investigation continues. But even Starr pn Friday acknowledged 
that he had exonerated the president on several matters, though he 
was not specific. In a letter Friday to Samuel Dash, who resigned 
Friday as Starr's ethics adviser, Starr wrote, ``And it is important 
to note that my status report on the overall investigation included 
exonerations for the president on several issues.'' As the recent 
indictment of Hubbell revealed, Mrs. Clinton is not completely out 
of Starr's line of fire. The indictment refers to her obliquely as 
the ``billing partner'' on a legal matter that is at the heart of 
the new case against Hubbell. Even though it is thought unlikely that 
Starr will bring charges against Mrs. Clinton, he could embarrass 
her by calling her as a witness in the Hubbell case. By focusing on 
the active aspects of the Whitewater investigation during his testimony, 
Nathan said, Starr was making ``a half-hearted effort to show that 
there was more than Monica.'' He, too, faulted the independent counsel 
for offering only a belated exoneration of the president in the travel 
office and files matters. ``It is obvious his investigation concluded 
long ago that there was no basis to bring charges on Filegate and 
Travelgate, '' Nathan said. ``It was his responsibility to report 
that at the first opportunity.'' Some conservatives, meanwhile, were 
bitterly disappointed over how Starr resolved the travel office and 
FBI files issues. Larry Klayman, chairman of Judicial Watch, is representing 
government officials who charge in a multi-million dollar class action 
lawsuit that their files were unlawfully obtained by the White House. 
Klayman said that Starr had done an ``unthorough'' investigation of 
the travel office and files matters. He said that he has already deposed 
about 20 witnesses in his case and that only two of them had been 
interviewed by Starr's office. ``He comes up with virtually nothing,'' 
Klayman said. ``All he comes up with is a stained dress. Most conservatives 
are very disappointed in Ken Starr.'' 
</TEXT>
</DOC>