<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981120.0429 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Northwest Airlines acquired a controlling stake in rival Continental 
Airlines for $430 million in cash and stock Friday, despite a lawsuit 
filed by the Justice Department last month that charged that the deal 
violates federal antitrust laws. The two airlines also said that they 
would form the country's fourth- largest airline network next month 
when they begin combining their frequent-flier programs and selling 
seats on 850 of each other's domestic and international flights. Both 
actions were widely expected, but the start of the country's most 
comprehensive domestic airline alliance in the face of government 
opposition raises the stakes in a simmering national debate over airline 
competition. Ever since Northwest and Continental first announced 
their so-called virtual merger in January, consumer advocates, politicians, 
large corporations and small airlines have charged that it would inhibit 
competition, making it easier for major airlines to charge higher 
prices. Northwest and Continental have countered that their alliance 
would enhance competition by creating a stronger fourth rival to the 
three largest U.S. carriers: United Airlines, American Airlines and 
Delta Airlines. But critics say that if Northwest and Continental 
are allowed to align, it will only encourage the other airlines to 
cooperate rather than compete. United and Delta have already combined 
their frequent-flier programs and airport lounges, as have American 
and US Airways. Executives at the airlines say they are waiting to 
see what happens with Northwest and Continental before they strengthen 
their alliances. ``Domestic alliances represent a consolidation of 
the airline industry that will undoubtedly leave consumers with fewer 
choices and higher fares,'' Rep. William Lipinski of Illinois, the 
ranking Democrat on the House Aviation Subcommittee, said in a statement 
Friday. ``Northwest and Continental are setting an unhealthy precedent.'' 
The stock transaction was allowed to close Friday despite the government's 
lawsuit because the Justice Department, in an usual move, did not 
ask the courts to block the deal while its case was wending its way 
through the courts. Government lawyers said that unlike a merger, 
in which companies fire employees and close down plants, a stock deal 
can be easily reversed. In order to insure Continental's independence, 
Northwest has agreed to put the shares in a trust for six years, voting 
on them only when Continental's future was at stake, such as during 
a takeover bid. After negotiating with the Justice Department, Northwest 
agreed to extend the restrictions for four more years and to give 
up its right to a seat on Continental's board, features it agreed 
to retain in the deal closed Friday even though negotiations with 
the government collapsed. ``Nothing we have heard changes our view 
that this transaction is anticompetitive,'' said Gina Talamona, a 
spokeswoman for the Justice Department's antitrust division. ``We 
are moving ahead with our lawsuit. If we prevail, the parties will 
have to sell their stock.'' Of course, that will take time, during 
which Northwest and Continental will continue to do business. Northwest 
has still not responded to the government lawsuit and no trial date 
is set. Asked if it was in the airline's interest to delay a resolution 
of the case for as long as possible, Douglas Steenland, Northwest's 
general counsel, replied: ``One could speculate that it might be.'' 
But the alliance could face further government scrutiny. Both the 
Justice Department and the Department of Transportation are investigating 
the arrangement. According to a new law recently passed by Congress, 
the Transportation Department can force airlines to delay the implementation 
of their joint ventures while it reviews them. A Transportation Department 
spokesman said Friday that the frequent flier portion of the Northwest-Continental 
alliance is subject to a 30-day waiting period that expires on Dec. 
4. The department also has the power to extend the review by another 
60 days. But despite its far-reaching powers the Transportation Department 
has done virtually nothing to police airline competition since the 
industry was deregulated in 1978. ``The DOT is closing its eyes and 
hoping this is all going to go away,'' said Samuel Buttrick, an analyst 
at Paine Webber in New York. ``Sooner or later they are going to have 
to adopt a coherent domestic alliance policy.'' One hitch in closing 
Friday's deal had nothing to do with the government. Certain investors 
in Air Partners, the investment group led by financier David Bonderman 
that was selling the Continental shares to Northwest, were not happy 
about receiving Northwest shares because their price had fallen much 
farther than Continental stock has since January. In the end, the 
investors were allowed to hold on to 854,000 shares of Continental 
stock but gave Northwest their proxy to vote the shares. ``They were 
able to salvage some value by taking fewer Northwest shares,'' Buttrick 
said of the investors. Separately Friday, the Aircraft Mechanics Fraternal 
Association won the right to represent Northwest aircraft mechanics, 
displacing the International Association of Machinists. The vote clears 
the way for Northwest to negotiate a new contract with both the mechanics 
and other workers who are still represented by the Machinists. In 
addition, Northwest must also negotiate a contract with its flight 
attendants, who are represented by the International Brotherhood of 
Teamsters. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>