<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981120.0350 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
The sneakers are off. The stilettos are on. Tennis's most marketable 
sweethearts since Chris Evert are seeking the kind of supermodel clout 
bestowed on those creatures famous enough to be known by first names 
only: Martina and Venus and Anna are in full orbit. They still list 
``tennis star'' as their primary occupation, but what they want to 
be are rock stars, fashion stars, movie stars. They want to be ubiquitous 
without needing to spell it. Now, some of them are playing air guitar 
with their rackets; some are pretending to play tennis while selling 
shampoo; some are grabbing dinner with Leonardo DiCaprio at Nobu in 
New York, some dancing with Kevin Spacey at Iman's Paris disco. It's 
not just the players who are seeking the status of crossover stars. 
They are being facilitated by agents, publicity agents and executives 
of the Women's Tennis Association, who want the sport to raise its 
hemlines and project a more glamorous image, in order to take advantage 
of the blurring of sports and entertainment. That this comes at a 
time when women's tennis is looking for a title sponsor capable of 
lavishing millions on it the way Virginia Slims once did isn't much 
of a coincidence. ``Tennis has become very smart about marketing its 
stars,'' said Michael Wolf, head of media and entertainment at Booz-Allen 
&AMP; Hamilton, the consultant and trend-spotter. ``They've come out 
of the woodwork, and out of uniform, and they're attending the music 
awards, getting photographed at the right parties, and selling everything 
from makeup to computers. They're more accessible than the supermodels, 
they make better role models, and this is what transforms athletes 
into brands. Celebrity is the universal currency, and they're going 
after it.'' No wonder the skeptics on the sidelines suspect that the 
girls of summer, along with the executives of the sport that made 
them household names, may be on the verge of taking a lethal injection 
of glamour. The stars of the makeover of women's tennis are teen-age 
players with a Generation X appetite for celebrity: Martina Hingis, 
18, the most vivacious Swiss import since Heidi; Venus Williams, 18, 
the beaded Valkyrie from Compton, Calif., whose outrageous Reebok 
tennis dresses merge ``Star Trek'' and ``South Park,'' and Moscow's 
Anna Kournikova, 17, the blond bombshell who aspires to be a movie 
star as soon as she's done playing the femme fatale of tennis. The 
sport even has a second Williams sister stashed in the wings: Serena 
Williams, 17, a muscular motormouth who may wind up rivaling Jesse 
``The Body'' Ventura when it comes to crossover versatility. ``I'm 
for sale!'' chortled the high-spirited Ms. Hingis, who is the poster 
girl for the tour's campaign to reinvent itself as a vehicle that 
marries sneakers, sweat and sex appeal. Her congeniality and hubris 
seem limitless _ as do her endorsements. ``It's business that wants 
this from us, and we're playing the game, me and Anna and Venus. We're 
the Spice Girls of tennis.'' Ms. Hingis was in New York last week 
to compete in the $2 million Chase Championships, the last tournament 
of the year, whose finals are on Sunday. Ms. Kournikova, who has yet 
to win a title but already receives royal treatment from the fashion 
world, handled the disappointment of a first-round loss with consummate 
poise. After all, she had other plans for Thursday night. While most 
of her peers put on their sneakers and game faces, she turned up in 
head-to-toe Prada to emcee a party for the Next modeling agency, with 
music by Mark Ronson, the house deejay to the fashion set. The arrival 
a couple of years ago of this current crop of talented, photogenic 
teen-agers coincided with the hiring of Joe Favorito as the Women's 
Tennis Association's public relations director. He had monitored plenty 
of crossover marketing during a stint with the National Basketball 
Association, and was charged by tennis with the task of getting the 
top women in tennis off the sports pages and into the fashion and 
entertainment media. ``These days you have to be a utility player: 
if you only do one thing, you're not sellable; you have to be able 
to sing AND dance,'' said Favorito, who oversaw a remarkable run of 
appearances by players this year in publications like Vogue, Rolling 
Stone, GQ and Vanity Fair, not to mention on the television shows 
of David Letterman, Jay Leno and Rosie O'Donnell. Sex appeal, hitherto 
an unmentionable, is prominent in the campaign to glamorize the players 
and the game, which the sport seems to have decided is required to 
sell itself in an overcrowded marketplace. Bart McGuire, the chief 
executive of the Corel WTA Tour, denied that the effort was exploitative. 
``We are not involved in sexploitation,'' he said. ``I will admit 
that this is not the traditional way in which women's tennis has been 
marketed. The truth is that we're competing for the public's entertainment 
dollar, and to get it, we've got to give them an entertaining product. 
I realize that can be done tastefully or distastefully. I don't see 
us crossing any lines.'' Last week, Ms. Hingis, wearing a black turtleneck 
above narrow black trousers that segued into black platform brogues, 
was trying to explain how she, a Slovakian-born bumpkin, found a compass 
for negotiating the glitter and galas now standard territory for nouveau 
celebrities like her. ``It's not so hard to figure out what to do,'' 
Ms. Hingis said. ``I just think of Julia Roberts in `Pretty Woman': 
put on the right clothes, and work your forks and spoons from the 
outside in, and you're going to be all right.'' Ms. Hingis' extracurricular 
endorsements include everything from Clairol to Ocean Spray, adding 
another $8 million a year to the $3 million in prize money she derives 
from her day job on the tennis court. A multimillionaire by the time 
she was 16 and the youngest No. 1 champion in the history of the game, 
Ms. Hingis is obviously a quick study. Asked about the strapless, 
$750 Michael Kors concoction that swathed her body contours like a 
glorified ace bandage on GQ's June cover, Ms. Hingis tattled on the 
battalion of stylists who produced the shoot: ``For two hours the 
dresses got shorter and shorter, and of course they picked the sexiest 
dress! If I was 13, it would have been a little strange. But I'm not, 
so it's fun.'' And if her choice of the streetwalker-turned-Cinderella 
of ``Pretty Woman'' as a role model seems strange, as things transpired, 
it was right on the money. In May, the Women's Tennis Association, 
hitherto a dowdy bunch when it came to marketing, signed its worldwide 
television rights over to the producer of ``Pretty Woman,'' Arnon 
Milchan, the holder of a 49.5 percent stake in Regency Enterprises, 
a production company whose other hits include ``L.A. Confidential'' 
and ``City of Angels.'' Milchan (pronounced MILL-shawn) said the nine-year 
deal was worth a potential $120 million to the tour. So, starting 
in 1999, women's tennis will have a bona fide executive producer pulling 
the television marketing strings and deciding the proper packaging 
of a product viewed by an estimated 5.5 billion. And make no mistake: 
Milchan plans to redesign the package. ``It's not necessarily about 
turning them into pinup girls,'' he said last week from his suite 
at the Mercer Hotel in Soho. ``In television terms, I want to change 
the tournaments from wallpaper into main events. Make the players 
into stars.'' And he's hiring Azzedine Alaia and courting other designers 
to outfit them. Milchan's immersion in the tennis business stemmed 
from a chance meeting with the German player Anke Huber at Rupert 
Murdoch's birthday party two years ago, as well as his not-by-chance 
purchase of 25 percent of Puma, a German sportswear company. He celebrated 
the television deal by whisking Ms. Huber and Iva Majoli, the 1997 
French Open champion, off to the Cannes International Film Festival 
and onto a borrowed yacht jammed with celebrities like Don Johnson 
and Naomi Campbell. ``He's a show business kind of guy,'' Ms. Huber 
said of Milchan, ``and he wants to turn tennis into show business, 
make it more exciting. I think there's room for that.'' Maybe all 
this excitement started, not so innocently, with the new logo. Before 
Ms. Hingis bared her limbs as GQ's first athlete cover girl in June, 
before Venus Williams sauntered onto Jay Leno's set in her zillion-bead 
headdress and second-skin sheath in July, before Ms. Kournikova put 
on a pair of stilettos and morphed into a rock-and-roll nymphet in 
a Rolling Stone photo session last spring, came the revised logo the 
women's tennis tour used to announce its makeover from country-club 
conventional to cutting edge. The silhouette of a curvaceous young 
woman with her tennis racket poised in mid-swing and a shock of blond 
hair tumbling from her headband, introduced in 1995, provoked a howl 
from the sport's original Martina, Martina Navratilova. It's not that 
Ms. Navratilova was anti-glamour. Long before Steffi Graf was persuaded 
to display her body in a Sports Illustrated swimsuit issue and Mary 
Pierce poured herself into those scuba-style Nike tunics, Ms. Navratilova's 
acceptance of a Gucci-designed racket commemorating her first Wimbledon 
title, in 1978, created an establishment backlash. She was accused 
of causing women in athletics to appear frivolous, and the same charge 
was levied against Monica Seles 13 years later when she received her 
makeover from Matrix. ``When I was No. 1 in 1991 and cut my hair, 
it was a big deal,'' said Ms. Seles, who couldn't understand the fuss. 
``Now it seems like everything's accepted.'' Everything in Ms. Navratilova's 
opinion, including a shift in the Women's Tennis Association's attitude 
from being protective of its athletes' sexuality to promoting it. 
She admonished the association in 1995, saying its logo was focusing 
on erogenous zones. And three years later, she's still scolding. ``I 
don't know why they have the women dolled up in these skin-tight outfits,'' 
she said recently. ``I mean, if that's what they really think it takes 
to attract an audience, why not just send them out there naked? You 
don't see them primping the men players. Why is it so necessary for 
women athletes to prove themselves as women?'' Maybe it isn't. But 
only if they don't give a hoot about, as Ms. Hingis' agent, Jeff Schwartz 
of the International Management Group, puts it, ``being seen as multidimensional 
by Madison Avenue.'' ``I don't think this is selling out,'' he continued. 
``I think it's staying current. If you don't stay with the times, 
people are going to flick the channels and find something that does 
entertain them.'' While all this preening has been taking place, Ms. 
Hingis hasn't won a title since becoming GQ's cover girl, ammunition 
for purists who suspect all that moonlighting may be hazardous to 
the health of her main job. The No. 1 rung on the tennis ladder has 
been usurped by Lindsay Davenport, 22, a Californian who happens to 
be a devout non-glamour puss. Yes, Ms. Davenport dropped 30 pounds 
from her 6-foot-2-inch frame, but no, she's not interested in ``crossing 
the lines into Hollywood hype,'' she said, adding: ``For me, being 
an athlete is enough. I get paid to win, and I'm just not comfortable 
with the idea of posing around town in a fancy hairdo and a ton of 
makeup.'' Ms. Davenport recoiled when Sports Illustrated suggested 
that she wear a gown for its year-end photo spread. ``I realize they 
want to grow our sport in a different direction, and maybe this is 
all harmless,'' she said. ``There's nothing wrong with wanting to 
look your best. Who doesn't? But I hope people remember we're athletes 
first, not movie stars or models on the catwalk.'' So does Ms. Seles, 
24, whose life story read like a movie script _ ranked No. 1 when 
she was stabbed in mid-match in 1993 by a maniacal fan of her chief 
rival, Ms. Graf _ long before Milchan came along, has learned not 
to question life's little superficialities. For Ms. Seles, who bought 
her first Chanel jacket at 17 but lives in J. Crew, this glam-tennis 
thing is one of them. ``I know Arnon has invested a lot of money in 
us,'' Ms. Seles said. ``But the skirts are getting shorter all the 
time. As long as women's tennis doesn't become all about who's wearing 
the shortest skirt or the wildest color panties, I'm OK with it. But 
this isn't Hollywood.'' Not just yet, but the credits are already 
rolling. ``They've come a long way,'' said Wolf, the entertainment 
consultant, ``from the days when their idea of a commercial crossover 
was Evonne Goolagong doing those ads for Geritol.'' 
</TEXT>
</DOC>