<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981120.0433 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
The federal Education Department's Office of Civil Rights has challenged 
Schools Chancellor Rudy Crew to show evidence that thousands of black 
and Hispanic students are being properly placed in special education 
programs, saying that a federal analysis shows evidence of discrimination 
that Crew has failed to report or investigate. The department's order 
comes 18 months after Crew agreed to federal monitoring of his efforts 
to reduce the number of children consigned to special education classes 
in New York City public schools. Federal officials had raised questions 
about disproportionate referrals of black and Hispanic students into 
the classes, which are supposed to accommodate children with learning 
or behavioral problems, but usually end up as pathways to academic 
failure. Once placed in special education classes, children seldom 
return to regular classes or receive a diploma, even though the vast 
majority have only minor impairments, not severe handicaps. In a letter 
to Crew this month, Steven Pereira, chief attorney for the New York 
Office for Civil Rights, said that federal analysts had found ``anomalies 
and omissions'' in data on special education placements. For example, 
the analysis found that a third of the city's school districts sent 
unusually high numbers of children who spoke limited English into 
special education. In 11 of the 32 districts, more than 20 percent 
of the students whose native language is not English were in special 
education classes in the 1996-97 school year. Citywide, the study 
said, the rate was 8.2 percent of students with limited English and 
4 percent for native English speakers. In nine districts, the study 
found that black students were more than twice as likely as white 
students to be referred to special education. What is more, black 
students were three times as likely as white students to be recommended 
for the most restrictive special education classes, from which they 
were least likely to be transferred back to the mainstream. Federal 
officials said that even among districts with the same rates of poverty, 
there were wide discrepancies in special education placements that 
appeared to be based on race or ethnicity. Pereira's letter suggested 
that Crew and the Board of Education had not been aggressive enough 
in tracking how individual schools and school districts place children 
in special education. ``None of these statistical anomalies were identified 
by the board as problematic, triggering further inquiry,'' the letter 
said. J.D. LaRock, a spokesman for Crew, said that the federal data 
were not up to date and that Crew was sending more recent data to 
the Office of Civil Rights that would show more progress in reducing 
special education placements. Under the agreement with the federal 
government, the Board of Education must reduce the numbers of black 
and Hispanic students in special education or lose federal aid _ about 
10 percent of its $8 billion budget. The so-called memorandum of agreement, 
signed in May 1997, came after a two-year investigation of special 
education placements in New York City found that such programs had 
become warehouses for minority children. In his letter, Pereira complained 
that Crew had provided little evidence that he had carried out plans 
to improve training for teachers, who often initiate placements for 
special education, and to inform parents of alternatives. Although 
the board submitted a description of training sessions to the Office 
of Civil Rights in May, ``many of the topics of the training seem 
extraneous to the goals'' of the federal agreement, Pereira said. 
For instance, his letter said, the board had reported that all 32 
school districts had been given training in the prevention of teen-age 
suicide. But only one district was given training in ``inclusion,'' 
which means putting special education students in regular classrooms, 
but giving them extra help. The federal report found that eight schools 
with extremely low reading and math scores had transferred large numbers 
of students into special education in 1996-97. The percentage of students 
moved ranged from 29 percent at Hostos Academy in East Harlem to a 
low of 13 percent at Public School 111 in Brooklyn. Five of the eight 
schools were on a state list of ``schools under registration review,'' 
which are threatened with closing if they do not improve. The scores 
of special education students on standardized tests are not used to 
determine school rankings. Lucila Rodriguez, director of Hostos Academy, 
where 21 percent of students were reading at grade level in 1996, 
declined comment Friday on the federal report. The proportion of black 
students moved to special education in 1996-97 ranged from a low of 
2 percent in District 5, which is in Harlem, to 10 percent in District 
21, in the Sheepshead Bay section of Brooklyn. Citywide, 3.8 percent 
of white students and 5 percent of black students were moved to special 
education that year. The share of students with limited English who 
were placed in special education in 1996-97 ranged from a low of 2.6 
percent in Harlem to 22 percent in District 31, which comprises Staten 
Island. Phil Coltoff, executive director of the Children's Aid Society, 
which has been tracking special education for years, said that although 
the numbers of black and Hispanic students in special education were 
high, often these children did need extra support. The problem, he 
said, was that they were not necessarily getting it in special education. 
Coltoff said that Crew had begun to put supports in some schools, 
including an extended school day and school year. ``If these schools 
had more extensive mental health staff, guidance staff and clinics,'' 
Coltoff said, ``a lot of those students would not have to go to special 
education.'' 
</TEXT>
</DOC>