<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981120.0440 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
The head of a municipal union local pleaded guilty to embezzlement 
Friday in the first criminal charges in a corruption investigation 
of District Council 37, the umbrella group of New York City municipal 
workers. The official, Joseph DeCanio, president of a local representing 
1,000 highway laborers, pleaded guilty to stealing more than $50,000 
as part of a broad kickback scheme in providing thousands of Thanksgiving 
turkeys to union members. The charges were part of a widening investigation 
by Manhattan District Attorney Robert Morgenthau into allegations 
of kickbacks, embezzlement, vote fraud and falsification of records 
at District Council 37. The district attorney, lawyers with knowledge 
of the investigation say, is looking into kickbacks from caterers, 
law firms and travel agencies, and officials' flying girlfriends and 
other nonunion members to labor conventions at union expense. In addition, 
they are looking into allegations that some union officials embezzled 
hundreds of thousands of dollars from the union treasury through false 
invoices and false overtime. Several union officials said DeCanio's 
guilty plea to grand larceny, principally involving kickbacks for 
providing 1,000 turkeys a year to a single union local, was the tip 
of the iceberg. These union officials said that in recent years DeCanio, 
acting as middleman, often provided more than 10,000 turkeys a year 
to union locals at the district council, which represents 120,000 
workers. DeCanio also pleaded guilty to criminal solicitation, acknowledging 
that earlier this month he gave blank ballots to the candidate he 
favored in his union local's upcoming election so that the candidate 
could fill in the ballots fraudulently to insure his victory. Lawyers 
knowledgeable about the district attorney's investigation said DeCanio 
had also told prosecutors that widespread vote fraud was committed 
in 1996 to insure the ratification of the District Council's current 
five-year contract. The allegations were reported Friday in The New 
York Times. In his guilty plea before state Supreme Court Acting Justice 
Micki Scherer, DeCanio admitted to stealing more than $50,000 over 
four years by improperly inflating the invoice price for 1,000 turkeys 
he provided each year to Local 1251, which represents 1,784 clerical 
workers with the Board of Education. In a mumbling, nearly inaudible 
voice, DeCanio told the judge that he split the embezzled money with 
Bessie Jamison, the local's president. ``Bills for the turkeys were 
inflated, and the local overpaid for the turkeys,'' DeCanio said in 
a dark, quiet courtroom. ``I, along with the other official, kept 
the overpayment.'' Ms. Jamison did not return telephone calls made 
to her office, and a receptionist who answered the phone referred 
inquiries to the district council's public relations office. Officials 
there said she was unavailable. At a news conference following DeCanio's 
guilty plea, Morgenthau said he was continuing the investigation into 
the distribution of turkeys, which have been a Thanksgiving tradition 
in District Council 37 for more than a decade. Several union officials 
said DeCanio provided thousands of turkeys each year to at least five 
other locals, including one representing school cafeteria aides and 
crossing guards, one representing computer programmers and one representing 
truck drivers. These officials said DeCanio sometimes charged $40 
for turkeys that retail for half that. Lawyers knowledgeable about 
the investigation said Morgenthau was investigating allegations that 
kickbacks occurred in the turkey purchases by other locals. ``Stealing, 
under any circumstances, is a serious offense,'' Morgenthau said. 
``But stealing from a union which represents city workers is particularly 
offensive. Our municipal employees, who work every day to make our 
city function, deserve better.'' DeCanio, a 68-year-old Westbury resident, 
was released on his own recognizance, with sentencing scheduled for 
May 5. According to the terms of the plea bargain, DeCanio faces a 
minimum of two years in prison and a maximum of 12. The plea also 
called on him to make restitution in excess of $50,000. Morgenthau 
declined to say whether DeCanio was cooperating with prosecutors, 
but other lawyers knowledgeable about the investigation said he had 
already talked to Morgenthau's office. Under the guilty plea, DeCanio 
was required to resign the presidency of the local he has headed since 
1991. In addition, he was forced to step down from his position on 
the council's executive board, which paid him $24,000 a year in addition 
to his city salary of close to $50,000. Commenting on DeCanio's guilty 
plea, Stanley Hill, the district council's executive director, said, 
``It is always deplorable when a union official takes advantage of 
his position of trust and by doing so casts aspersions on the whole 
union structure. But I would assure members that this Council remains 
strong and effective.'' Assistant District Attorney Jane Tully said 
DeCanio inflated the price of turkeys by about 20 cents a pound, often 
raising the price to $1.10 a pound from the wholesale price of 90 
cents. This meant that he might embezzle $4,000 in providing 1,000 
20-pound turkeys. But other unions officials said that when he charged 
$40 for a 20-pound turkey, DeCanio walked off with far more than 20 
cents a pound. Morgenthau has already subpoenaed records from all 
56 locals in District Council 37. Lawyers knowledgeable about the 
investigation say Morgenthau was examining allegations that a large 
clerical workers local had paid rent for several years so its president, 
Albert Diop, could use the penthouse apartment in the district council 
building, just north of the World Trade Center. In interviews, district 
council officials said that they often telephoned Diop there or forward 
phone calls to him there. But Hill said in an interview that no one 
lived in the penthouse, although he said people occasionally sleep 
there. In Friday's guilty plea, DeCanio admitted his participation 
in a scheme to rig the next election for the executive board of his 
local, Local 376. According to Morgenthau, DeCanio, knowing that he 
was under investigation and planning to retire from the presidency, 
wanted to make sure that his successor would be an ally. To this end, 
Morgenthau said, DeCanio gained unauthorized access to blank ballots 
for the next executive board election and gave the ballots to one 
of the candidates so he could fill in the phony ballots and substitute 
them for real ballots. As the investigation continued, a police union 
official said the allegations of vote fraud in the ratification of 
the District Council 37 contract called into question the validity 
of an arbitrator's ruling concerning the police contract. In a news 
release Friday, James Savage, first vice president of the Patrolmen's 
Benevolent Association, said the union was considering going to court 
to vacate the arbitrator's decision on the ground that it was based 
on the District Council 37 contract, which may have been ratified 
through fraud. The police union had refused to accept the two-year 
pay freeze that was part of the district council's council, but the 
arbitration panel ruled that the police had to follow the pattern 
set by the council's contract. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>