<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981120.0366 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
It's alive! The savings and loan debacle, which has cost taxpayers 
$165 billion, is about to become more expensive. That may come as 
a surprise to those who thought the costliest bailout in American 
history was long completed, as much a ghost of the 80s as Rubik's 
cubes, break dancing or perestroika. But two years ago, the Supreme 
Court ruled that the government had betrayed investors by changing 
the rules of the bailout at the height of the savings and loan crisis. 
And now, a little-known federal court here is getting ready to begin 
assessing the costs _ a sum that could add up to anywhere from $4 
billion to $50 billion, depending on which side is guessing. In the 
first big test case, the chief JUdge of the United States Court of 
Federal Claims is expected to decide by year-end the size of the award 
to a California savings and loan that nearly collapsed after federal 
accounting rules were changed in 1989. The judge, Loren A. Smith, 
has already indicated that he will order a sizable judgment for the 
savings and loan, Glendale Federal Bank, which is seeking $1.9 billion. 
That could set a standard for a parade of cases _ the first of more 
than 120 brought by existing and moribund savings associations and 
by shareholders _ that are set for trial over the next few months. 
The exact size of the awards is likely to be determined by appeals 
courts. But this much is certain: Whatever the tab, taxpayers will 
pay it, thanks to a two-paragraph provision that lawmakers buried 
in last month's appropriations legislation at the behest of savings 
and loan lobbyists, who feared either that the government would not 
pay or that the industry might end up being saddled with the costs. 
Administration officials, who supported the move, calculate that every 
$1 billion awarded to the industry will cost each American household 
$10. And as awards against the government mount, decade-old questions 
about Washington's willingness and ability to tackle the savings industry's 
problems are certain to be revived. Illustrating their importance 
and complexity, the savings and loan cases have engaged legions of 
lawyers _ the Justice Department is devoting more resources to them 
than to any other matter, including the Microsoft antitrust case. 
Some unusual battle lines have been drawn: Two federal agencies are 
on opposing sides, and two Nobel Prize-winning economists have been 
pitted against each other on the meaning of their own collaborative 
work. In the end, huge payouts may go to some of the nation's wealthiest 
and most aggressive financiers. In the 1980s, after loosened lending 
rules and a real estate collapse left many savings associations buried 
in bad loans, regulators decided that the cheapest way to heal the 
lenders was to encourage them to merge with healthier institutions 
or find new investors. So regulators struck deals with, among others, 
Ronald O. Perelman, who had bought Revlon with junk bonds; the Bass 
family of Texas; Jay A. Pritzker, whose family controls Hyatt hotels, 
among other properties; Lewis Ranieri, the investment banker credited 
with inventing mortgage-backed securities, and William E. Simon, the 
former Treasury secretary. Later, many of the deals were criticized 
in Congress as being overly generous. But regulators said that they 
had no choice, because Congress had refused to provide money to back 
the insured deposits of the rapidly growing list of hemorrhaging institutions. 
Now these investors and others who still own shares in the savings 
and loans stand to gain from the damage claims. That _ and the possibility 
that current and former savings executives may reap big gains _ would 
be a remarkable end to a financial calamity that once stigmatized 
the industry as a haven for incompetent managers and financial scoundrels. 
``In 1989, there was no way these people would be paid,'' said Robert 
E. Litan of the Brookings Institution. ``The political environment 
was terrible for them. Now they're no longer demonized. This was like 
the appendix of a lot of the deals of the 1980s. Now the appendix 
has burst and someone's got to fix it.'' The precedent that made such 
awards possible is known as the Winstar case, named after the consolidation 
of suits brought by the Winstar Corp., the Statesman Group and Glendale 
Federal. In July 1996, a splintered Supreme Court ruled that the 1989 
legislation that rescued the savings and loan industry also broke 
the contracts that the institutions' salvagers had made with Washington. 
Those contracts, aimed at attracting investors, had given the savings 
and loans permission to use an unusual accounting rule that had the 
effect of letting many institutions satisfy their capital requirements 
by booking huge liabilities as assets. The rule allowed the buyers 
of weakened institutions to take the difference between their purchase 
price and the market value of the institution and count that as an 
asset, calling it ``supervisory goodwill.'' Since the price often 
consisted of the assumption of the insolvent institution's liabilities, 
the move converted liabilities into capital that could satisfy regulatory 
requirements. The ability to use such accounting led new investors 
and other savings associations to infuse new capital into the weaker 
savings and loans. The rule, however, was heavily criticized by some 
experts as a gimmick destined to lead to greater bailout costs some 
day. A federal appeals judge ultimately referred to supervisory goodwill 
as ``a euphemism for spinning straw into gold.'' As the savings and 
loan crisis reached a fever pitch in 1989, the accounting arrangement 
was phased out by tough legislation endorsed by President George Bush 
and approved by lawmakers. Overnight, the law's provision ending supervisory 
goodwill turned what had appeared to be healthy balance sheets into 
ones that could not meet minimum capital requirements. Many institutions 
collapsed. Others tottered on the edge of failure or were bought by 
healthier companies, resulting in further consolidation. And the industry 
soon unleashed its barrage of lawsuits, essentially accusing Washington 
of having perpetrated an enormous bait-and-switch. In its 1996 ruling, 
a controlling plurality of the Supreme Court essentially agreed. Justice 
David H. Souter dismissed the Clinton administration's arguments that 
the contracts did not provide insurance against a legislative change. 
``It would, indeed, have been madness,'' Souter wrote, for the industry 
to have entered into the contracts without some guarantee that they 
were enforceable, ``for the very existence of their institutions would 
then have been in jeopardy from the moment their agreements were signed.'' 
The ruling breathed new life into the savings and loan lawsuits, which 
were sent back to the claims court to set damages and resolve other 
issues. Since the decision, the Justice Department has quietly offered 
settlements of hundreds of millions of dollars to some institutions. 
But the companies are waiting to see whether Smith and his colleagues 
will be more generous. The industry's lawyers, along with Smith, have 
criticized the Justice Department as moving slowly in settling the 
claims. They have accused government lawyers of dragging their feet 
and re-arguing issues that they say were resolved years ago. ``In 
many respects the Justice Department's positions have been frivolous 
and served only to delay progress in these cases and add enormously 
to the expense,'' said Charles J. Cooper, a former senior Justice 
official whose law firm represents more than a dozen savings associations 
and former owners of savings and loans. ``It's deepened the uncompensated 
damages that American citizens are suffering as a direct breach of 
their contracts.'' In response, the Justice Department has challenged 
the damage claims as pie-in-the-sky figures that have no basis in 
contract law. Its sharpest attacks are aimed at perhaps the suits' 
most costly assertions _ that companies like Glendale Federal are 
entitled to recover all the profits they would have made if the rules 
had not changed. ``This is real money,'' said Frank W. Hunger, the 
assistant attorney general in charge of the Justice Department's civil 
division. ``And it's not money that is being sought for anything productive, 
like education, housing or the Peace Corps. We're simply not going 
to pay out billions of taxpayer dollars when there are bona fide legal 
issues involved.'' The Justice Department is devoting an extraordinary 
amount of resources to the cases. Some 40 lawyers and a support staff 
of dozens more have been working full time with an annual budget of 
$60 million, nearly half the civil division's total. The plaintiffs, 
too, have been spending freely. For instance, Glendale Federal, a 
unit of Golden State Bancorp, has used two law firms and spent more 
than $43 million on its case since 1996, according to company records 
on file at the Securities and Exchange Commission. Because more than 
40 of the institutions suing the government are insolvent, the Federal 
Deposit Insurance Corp. has also entered the fray, assigning about 
three dozen of its lawyers to intervene in the cases. Like a dog chasing 
its tail, the government now has one agency, the Justice Department, 
as a defendant, and another _ the FDIC _ aligned with the plaintiffs 
in many cases. The Justice Department has asserted that the FDIC, 
which also administers a fund from which some of the judgments may 
be paid, cannot in effect make claims on itself. ``It is a fundamental 
axiom that the United States cannot sue itself,'' the Justice Department 
said in a brief. The FDIC has replied that it must pursue the cases 
because of its legal obligations as a receiver, representing the institutions 
that collapsed. The agency's lawyers are concerned that if they fail 
to intervene, the agency could be liable to shareholders and creditors. 
But as a practical matter, much of what it hopes to recover will result 
in the simple shift of money from one government account to another. 
The interagency warfare is just one of the strange battles these cases 
have spawned. In another notable conflict, two Nobel Prize-winning 
collaborators have disagreed on whether their shared work applies 
to the litigation. Professor Merton H. Miller of the University of 
Chicago, who won the Nobel in 1990, testified for the government that 
the Modigliani-Miller Theorem, or M&AMP;M Propositions, which are 
the foundation of modern corporate finance, demonstrated that the 
industry's claims were wildly overstated. He said that under the theory, 
the reduction of supervisory goodwill did not reduce the value of 
a savings association and that the profitability of the company did 
not depend on its level of goodwill. ``When you phase out goodwill, 
you're are not taking away any earning asset,'' Miller testified as 
a $1,000-an-hour Justice Department expert. ``You are not taking away 
anything but accounting smoke and mirrors.'' In a lawsuit filed by 
Glendale's sister institution, California Federal Bank, the industry 
responded with its own $1,000-an-hour expert: Professor Franco Modigliani 
of the Massachusetts Institute of Technology, the other ``M'' in the 
propositions, who won the Nobel in 1985. ``I have decided to testify 
in this case because my name is associated with the M&AMP;M Propositions, 
and, in my view, they are being misused by the government in a way 
that I regard as damaging to the credibility of the theorem,'' Modigliani 
wrote in his expert report. ``The truth is that the M&AMP;M Propositions 
are completely irrelevant to the present issue and have been dragged 
in as a red herring.'' At ground zero in the cases is Loren Allan 
Smith, 53, the judge who eight years ago wrote the first opinion in 
the Winstar case that gave the industry hope that it could ultimately 
recover what it had lost in the 1989 legislation. Not only will he 
decide the award for Glendale; he has also been issuing significant 
rulings on the common issues in the 120-plus cases and has begun to 
assign some of the dozen cases to be tried, beginning next month. 
Then the next batch of 30 lawsuits will be tried. Smith, an amateur 
magician and former host of the radio talk show ``What's Best for 
America?,'' entered Washington political circles as a young lawyer 
working on President Richard Nixon's legal team during Watergate. 
Later, he was chief counsel to Ronald Reagan's 1976 and 1980 presidential 
campaigns. In 1985, Reagan appointed him to the Court of Federal Claims, 
a specialized branch of the judiciary that hears disputes between 
the government and its contractors as well as claims against the United 
States. The judge has earned a reputation as a leading proponent of 
the legal proposition that property owners should be compensated for 
the costs they incur under federal regulations. He has rattled the 
Justice Department, lambasting its legal maneuverings and suggesting 
that he is leaning toward a substantial award to Glendale. In his 
seventh-floor office at the claims court, across Lafayette Park from 
the White House, the judge said in a recent interview that his job 
was to dispense justice, not to protect the public Treasury. ``I see 
as much a problem to giving away $1 that isn't deserved as to give 
away $100 billion that was deserved,'' he said. ``If it's the law, 
so be it. You've got to follow the law whatever the consequences. 
It's not the duty of the judiciary to guard the fisc. A judge's duty 
is to apply the law fairly.'' But Smith will not have the last word. 
Whichever side loses is certain to appeal. And another judge about 
to hear a savings and loan case has already limited the possible damage 
claims of a major plaintiff. Two weeks ago, in a significant claims 
court victory for the government, Judge Robert H. Hodges Jr. ruled 
that when California federal's case goes to trial on Dec. 12, it cannot 
pursue the claim that it is entitled to collect damages equal to the 
profits it would have earned had it been able to continue counting 
supervisory goodwill. Hodges called such a theory ``particularly speculative.'' 
For taxpayers, the crucial turn in the cases came late last month 
in Congress. With no debate and no news coverage, lawmakers decided 
that taxpayers, not the industry, would have to finance the judgments 
from all the cases. And rather than confront large and politically 
unpopular damage awards as they are handed down, legislators also 
decided to simply keep the spigot to the Treasury open indefinitely. 
Buried in the appropriations legislation that covers all federal spending 
for the new fiscal year, lawmakers inserted two paragraphs giving 
the administration the authority to spend ``such sums as may be necessary.'' 
As part of a tangled compromise, the provision was supported by the 
White House and by savings lobbyists, who had feared that either the 
industry might be levied higher deposit insurance premiums to cover 
the cases or that the plaintiffs would not be able to collect on judgments 
because Congress had not set aside money for such awards. The administration 
also prevailed on Congress to leave uncapped all spending to defend 
the lawsuits. Some industry lobbyists had sought to limit spending 
or require more oversight by Congress, hoping to prod the administration 
into quickly resolving more of the suits. With the cases now headed 
for trial, the beginning of the end is finally at hand for the savings 
and loan debacle. But other industries are looking for ways to make 
use of the precedent that the government may be liable for costs incurred 
when it changes its rules. Lawyers representing electric utilities, 
telecommunications companies and developers of low-income housing 
have begun filing lawsuits, and health care lawyers say they may be 
next. Initial successes indicate that taxpayers may end up facing 
yet more bills. Three weeks ago, a federal claims judge, citing the 
Winstar precedent, ruled that the Department of Energy violated a 
commitment to remove used radioactive fuel from a nuclear power plant 
owned by the Yankee Atomic Electric Co. In all, utilities have pending 
claims of an estimated $50 billion. ``There are a lot of lawyers who 
are now trying to shake the money tree,'' said Joshua I. Schwartz, 
a professor of law and co-director of the government procurement program 
at the George Washington University Law School.'' 
</TEXT>
</DOC>