<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981120.0235 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Stanley Tucci delivers a high-energy charge as Walter Winchell in 
Friday night's fast-breathing account of the sensational rise and 
abrupt decline of America's pioneering gossip columnist. And in sharp 
glimpses along the way, Paul Mazursky's movie digs into the connection 
between popular-front patriotism of the 1930s and '40s and the right-wing 
populism of the brief-lived but powerfully disruptive McCarthy era. 
There's smoky atmosphere in abundance here, from the Stork Club, where 
Winchell lorded over press agents and sycophants, to the barber shop 
where his cadre of ghostwriters sweated to come up with Winchell-type 
cracks (intellectual smart alecks were written off as ``brain pains''), 
to the Manhattan hotel room where Winchell disported while his wife 
raised the family back home in Westchester. Glenne Headly, as his 
favorite chanteuse, drops by frequently for a quickie until her name 
shows up on some sort of left-wing petition. Based on ``Walter Winchell: 
His Life and Times,'' by Herman Klurfeld (played earnestly by Paul 
Giamatti), for 30 years Winchell's main wordsmith, pardon the expression, 
the two-hour biography speeds along from young Walter's hustling beginnings 
as a tabloid gossip merchant (``I'm not writing for the major leagues,'' 
he announces. ``I'm writing for the minor leagues.'') to his ascendance 
as the nation's most powerful propagandist. It's a busy show, and 
Tucci carries it along at a vigorous pace. Off with the jacket, on 
with the hat, and his collection of titillating tidbits, snappy put-downs, 
uninhibited opinions and random claptrap went clicketing out to Mr. 
and Mrs. America and all the ships at sea. In his heyday Winchell 
was the perfect representative of what had not yet been elevated to 
``the media.'' He was streetwise and unfastidious, made for the bottom 
feeders at the Hearst chain; fast-talking and secret-baring, made 
for the new growth industry of radio. Tucci understands that this 
sentimental tough guy won his fans' trust not by pretending to be 
superior to them but by making sure they recognized him as one of 
their own, a guy who was on their side against the big shots whom 
he mocked and exposed even as he slavered over them. With the approach 
of World War II, Winchell was a premature anti-Nazi. As a Jew, that 
came naturally, even though it meant defying his isolationist Hearst 
bosses. And he was also susceptible to the charms of Franklin D. Roosevelt, 
shrewdly interpreted here by Christopher Plummer. Winchell, the people's 
tribune, loved to be on intimate terms with the movers and shakers 
of a smoother class. After Roosevelt's death and Hitler's defeat, 
Winchell's patriotism took a paranoid turn. His hour had run out, 
along with the sort of tabloids and radio shows that had nurtured 
him. Yet in today's cable and Internet rant, one can still detect 
the influence of the prototypical ranter. The farewell glimpse of 
him Friday night is post-journalism, when he returned to his early 
vaudeville days and did a turn as a Las Vegas hoofer. Tucci goes gamely, 
even stylishly, through the routine; it's a big change from his decades 
of influence but not out of character. PRODUCTION NOTES `WINCHELL' 
8 p.m. Friday on HBO Written by Scott Abbott, based on the book ``Walter 
Winchell: His Life and Times'' by Herman Klurfeld; Paul Mazursky, 
director; Rich Zinman, co-executive producer; Rob Fried, executive 
producer. An HBO Pictures Presentation of a Paul Mazursky Film; a 
Fried Films Production. With: Stanley Tucci (Walter Winchell), Paul 
Giamatti (Herman Klurfeld), Christopher Plummer (Franklin D. Roosevelt), 
Glenne Headly (Dallas Wayne), Xander Berkeley (Gavreau), Mary Portser 
(Janet Winchell), Jeremy Blackman (Walter Winchell, age 8), Raffi 
Di Blascio (Walter Winchell, age 20), John O'Donohue (Harry, the doorman), 
Michael Greene (Bellamy) and Megan Mullally (June Winchell). 
</TEXT>
</DOC>