<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981120.0279 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Corporate America often looks to the world of sports for inspiration 
on everything from teamwork to persistence to leadership. But what 
lesson can be drawn from the way the New York Mets recently handled 
its general manager's public acknowledgment that he had had sexual 
relations with an employee? Certainly, the topics of workplace relationships 
and sexual harassment have been on a lot of people's minds this year. 
With so much attention paid to President Clinton's relationship with 
Monica Lewinsky, companies of all sizes are looking for guidance through 
the difficult terrain of such issues. The Mets case was a curious 
series of events that seemed no less curious even after several slow-motion 
replays. On Nov. 8, the club announced that Steve Phillips, its general 
manager, would take a leave of absence to deal with an accusation 
of sexual harassment and the repercussions of a series of extramarital 
affairs. The team brought in a retired former general manager, Frank 
Cashen, as an interim replacement and left the status of Phillips' 
job in doubt. But on Nov. 16, Phillips was back on the job, with Mets 
officials saying that the best thing for the Phillips family and for 
the team was ``for Steve to get back to work.'' Announcing his return, 
Phillips stood before the media, his mouth in the tight-lipped frown 
perfected by Clinton in recent months. Lawyers who advise corporations 
on sexual harassment policies offered color commentary on the team's 
unexpected off-season activities. QUICK REFLEXES: Any company that 
learns that an employee faces a charge of sexual harassment should 
act quickly. On the day Phillips stepped aside, a week and a half 
after the accusation was made, the team said it had already looked 
into the matter and determined that there was a consensual sexual 
relationship between Phillips and an employee but found no basis for 
a sexual harassment complaint. ``Once there is an allegation, you 
must do a prompt investigation,'' said Peter Panken, who represents 
employers as chairman of the employment and labor law department of 
Parker, Chapin, Flattau &AMP; Klimpl in Manhattan. TWO BOBBLED PLAYS: 
Granted, Phillips is something of a celebrity and appears very comfortable 
dealing with the media. Still, there was little to be gained by Phillips' 
going before the media to announce that he was returning to his job, 
according to several lawyers. After all, it only increased the chance 
that Phillips might veer from the script. And, in fact, the news conference 
did create unexpected dramatic moments when a lawyer for the woman 
who had accused Phillips confronted the general manager in front of 
reporters. The Mets also made a mistake in bringing Phillips back 
so quickly, said Barbara Kate Repa, author of several books on employee 
rights and sexual harassment. When he first announced in a statement 
that he would step aside, Phillips acknowledged he had had affairs 
with other women and that he had begun ``extensive personal counseling.'' 
A lawyer for the Mets also said at the time that the threat of a lawsuit 
``brought to light some personal problems Steve has, and he's addressing 
them in counseling.'' Such a speedy return ``makes it sound and seem 
like more of a lip-service leave,'' Ms. Repa said. ``It throws a pall 
of disingenuousness over the suggestion that they were taking the 
investigation seriously in the first place. They may have undone some 
good they did by acting quickly.'' FRATERNIZING CAN DRIFT FOUL: People 
often spend more time working than doing anything else during an average 
week, so it is perhaps inevitable that some relationships start in 
the workplace, including an extramarital one like Phillips'. Employers 
normally would not ban fraternization outright, but they should advise 
managers and other employees about the harsh realities of workplace 
romances, said Jay Waks, co-chairman of the employment law department 
of Kaye, Scholer, Fierman, Hays &AMP; Handler, a New York law firm. 
Unless the relationship is discreet, he said, workplace gossip can 
harm the careers of either or both parties. Waks also noted that most 
romances in the workplace, like anywhere else, ultimately fail; if 
one party persists in trying to revive the relationship or feels very 
disappointed that it failed, it can lead to public accusations. ``The 
broadest lesson is for the manager who is contemplating a romantic 
relationship with a subordinate,'' Waks said. ``While some do result 
in lasting relationships, most don't. My advice to the manager is, 
don't get involved in the workplace.'' 
</TEXT>
</DOC>