<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981120.0410 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
You might have the grandest house in all of Buckhead and the summer 
place on Sea Island and the biggest private jet and the ranch or two 
in Wyoming, every toy a man could possibly long for _ and yet your 
failure to make the roster of the Piedmont Driving Club would always 
be hanging over you, like a reproach. _ Tom Wolfe, in ``A Man in Full.'' 
ATLANTA _ As if stepping into his own novel, there was Tom Wolfe on 
Thursday dining on herb-crusted salmon and baby carrots in the perfectly 
proportioned ballroom of Atlanta's Piedmont Driving Club, the magnolia 
blossom tint of the walls a perfect match for his creamy three-piece 
suit. The club, which was founded 111 years ago so that Atlanta's 
aristocrats could show off their horse-drawn carriages, had invited 
the celebrated writer to lunch with its members, and 470 were now 
seated beneath two grand chandeliers. They came despite their understanding 
that Wolfe's new novel, ``A Man in Full'' (Farrar, Straus &AMP; Giroux), 
had pretty well skewered their club by using it as a metaphor for 
the social separation of the races in the capital of the New South. 
The home to countless debutante balls and Junior League follies, the 
Driving Club remains a place, both in fact and in Wolfe's fiction, 
where the only blacks in view usually are wearing waiters' uniforms. 
Wolfe regaled the crowd with stories about how intrigued he had become 
with the club's history and architecture. And he recounted the night, 
which he molded into one of the book's most vivid scenes, when formally 
attired white partygoers stood on a terrace at the club and watched 
powerlessly as raucous black college students attending the Freaknik 
spring break weekend paralyzed traffic on Piedmont Road. ``I knew 
I had to make some literary capital out of this,'' Wolfe explained 
impishly, as the society matrons and managing partners who had been 
capitalized upon laughed approvingly. And so it was all across Atlanta 
this week, as Wolfe made a three-day publicity tour of the city that 
serves as the primary setting for his novel about the feeble condition 
of American morality at the turn of the millennium. Despite the reviews 
characterizing Wolfe as a modern-day Sherman, Atlantans turned his 
visit into a citywide sensation that the amused author likened to 
the Beatles' first trip to America. The 742-page book, which will 
debut atop The New York Times bestseller list Sunday, has received 
such broad attention here that even those who have not cracked its 
binding offer ready critiques. Predictably, Wolfe's trip has also 
prompted one of the periodic bouts of introspection that afflict this 
famously image-obsessed city. With his depictions of crass white developers 
and opportunistic black politicians, Wolfe lampoons both the casing 
and the core of a city that he likens to a baseball: a suburban shell 
of white economic might surrounding an inner-city nucleus of black 
political power. In the course of explaining ``the Atlanta way,'' 
the path of mutual benefit negotiated between black politics and white 
commerce, Wolfe also illuminates some dark corners of civic life. 
In his Atlanta, white corporate titans measure their worth in status 
and possessions, while black political success is determined by skin 
tone and walking-around money. While many Atlanta readers have found 
Wolfe's descriptions and characters eerily recognizable, some fault 
him for simplifying the city's racial dynamic. Because Wolfe takes 
such pride in the journalistic foundations of his fiction, and because 
his details are so precise, many have had trouble remembering that 
the book is a novel. As a result, some feathers have been ruffled. 
Several corporate sponsors and a number of guests backed out of a 
benefit Wednesday night honoring Wolfe after reading the early publicity 
on the book. ``The sponsors backed out because they were afraid of 
being involved in anything that could be racially controversial,'' 
said Mary Rose Taylor, a longtime friend of Wolfe who organized the 
dinner. ``And some guests felt if they attended the dinner they would 
appear to be endorsing the book, and they did not want to appear to 
be doing that.'' Although he has not read the book, former Mayor Sam 
Massell, who heads a business group called the Buckhead Coalition, 
was so offended by what he had heard that he made a public show of 
rescinding a luncheon invitation from the group before Wolfe had even 
received it. Massell said he was put off by a passage describing how 
Charlie Croker, the book's developer protagonist, had manufactured 
a Ku Klux Klan rally to deflate the price of property he wanted to 
buy. ``I understand this is fiction and he has the right to do what 
he wants,'' said Massell, who served as mayor from 1970 to 1974. ``But 
that doesn't mean I have to have lunch with him.'' Asked whether he 
plans to read the book, Massell paused. ``When I cool down,'' he said. 
A number of prominent Atlantans said they were more offended by Massell's 
sense of public relations than by Wolfe's book. Sam Williams, the 
president of the Metro Atlanta Chamber of Commerce, called Massell's 
disinvitation ``a little crass.'' Rick Beard, the director of the 
Atlanta History Center, said he kept hoping for a city ``that has 
a little bit more self-confidence and cares a little bit less about 
what other people think of us.'' Atlanta Mayor Bill Campbell anticipated 
Wolfe's arrival Wednesday by issuing a statement that pleaded for 
calm: ``Given our achievements and history of racial harmony, there 
is no reason to overreact to a novel that explores several important 
issues, but like all literature, from the vantage point of the author.'' 
Campbell, the city's third black mayor, said in an interview that 
he was particularly pleased that the novel explored race relations, 
a topic that he said demanded more discussion. But when Campbell, 
who has not read the book, was told that a major theme involved the 
political tensions between light-skinned and dark-skinned blacks, 
the mayor virtually denied that such an undercurrent even exists. 
``As a reality, it's not an issue at all,'' he said, although it was 
a widely, if quietly, discussed subtext of Campbell's re-election 
in 1997. ``Like the ebola plague, it's very deadly when it does rear 
its head, but it's very rare.'' Despite mixed feelings about the book, 
much of Atlanta has been flattered by Wolfe's attention, and views 
the book's publication as an opportunity to demonstrate that the city 
has developed a thicker skin since it was host to the 1996 Olympic 
Games. After all, did not Wolfe use his first novel, ``The Bonfire 
of the Vanities,'' to send up New York City, the commercial and cultural 
capital of the world? ``We Atlantans are supposed to be sitting here 
in mortal terror that our pretensions are going to be held up to ridicule, 
when the truth is, everyone I know is tickled pink about this,'' said 
Frederick Allen, a local author and city historian. ``To have someone 
of Tom Wolfe's stature hold you up to scorn is really the Good Housekeeping 
seal of approval. He wouldn't do this to Birmingham or Orlando.'' 
Wolfe was welcomed at the airport on Wednesday with camera flashes, 
and a press contingent has trailed him this week like a Presidential 
candidate in the snows of New Hampshire. The Atlanta Journal-Constitution 
instituted a daily Wolfe Watch column, and dutifully reported what 
Wolfe ate and what his wife wore. The crowd attending Wolfe's speech 
and reading at the Atlanta History Center on Wednesday night spilled 
out of the 400-seat auditorium and into a room where his address was 
shown on closed-circuit television. Later, some 150 Atlantans paid 
$600 apiece to attend the black-tie benefit honoring Wolfe who, alone 
among the guests, did not adhere to the dress code. Thursday, 200 
people joined Wolfe at a breakfast sponsored by the Atlanta Convention 
and Visitors Bureau, which hopes that his book will do for Atlanta 
tourism what John Berendt's ``Midnight in the Garden of Good and Evil'' 
(Random House, 1994) did for Savannah. Thursday night, an estimated 
1,100 fans jammed Borders Books &AMP; Music in trendy Buckhead for 
a reading and signing, some waiting up to nine hours for Wolfe's arrival. 
Like eager children queued up to see a shopping-mall Santa, they snaked 
in lines throughout the expansive store, up and down stairwells, as 
Wolfe scribbled his autograph from a thronelike stage. By the time 
he finished at 11:45 p.m., more than two hours later than scheduled, 
the 68-year-old Wolfe had signed about 2,000 books. Wolfe, a Virginia 
native who lives in New York, takes note in ``A Man in Full'' of Atlanta's 
sensitivity to image, with one character asserting that Atlantans 
cannot stand ``the idea that somebody in New York might be calling 
them Southern hicks.'' While here this week, he seemed eager to make 
amends for any slight, praising the city's ambition and optimism and 
telling his audiences that Atlanta just might become the next great 
international city. He also praised the city's manners and unfailing 
generosity, saying he was treated graciously in the dozen trips he 
made here to research the book. ``I've always loved courtesy in the 
South, even when it takes the form of hypocrisy,'' he told the crowd 
at breakfast Thursday. ``I can stand insults, so long as they're couched 
in courteous terms.'' Perhaps after Wolfe's visit, Atlanta may discover 
that it feels the same way about him. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>