<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981120.0504 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Iraq threw up a new roadblock to the work of U.N. arms inspectors 
Friday, less than a week after agreeing to cooperate. In the latest 
twist in the dispute between the United Nations and Iraq over the 
prohibited arms, Iraq balked at handing over documents on chemical 
and biological weapons and missile systems. U.S. and British officials 
have warned that air strikes remain an immediate option if the government 
of Saddam Hussein does not honor its pledge last Saturday to renew 
cooperation with inspectors. The State Department spokesman, James 
Rubin, warned Iraq on Friday evening that it must meet its pledge. 
``Iraq must provide further disclosure,'' he said. ``The Iraqis must 
respond quickly to the requests for information.'' But the initial 
Western reaction was muted. U.S. and British forces are standing by 
within striking distance of Iraq and could be sent into combat in 
hours, U.S. officials have said. The forces include warships, dozens 
of F-14 and F-18 fighters and more than 20,000 soldiers, sailors, 
aviators and marines. Statements by Iraq indicate that it believes 
it can balk on major issues pending a comprehensive review of its 
relations with the United Nations. But that review, the Security Council 
decided on Oct. 30, cannot take place until there is full cooperation 
with inspectors. Iraq appears to be defiant on several fronts, including 
in its crucial biological-weapons program, potentially the most immediately 
dangerous. With the right components _ and Iraq is suspected of hiding 
a large quantity of them _ biological weapons can be produced in days. 
The confrontation, which has come sooner than expected, raises questions 
about Saddam's understanding of the seriousness of the threat he faces 
and the limited diplomatic help he can expect _ if any _ from former 
supporters like Russia, China and France. Experts had assumed it would 
take the appearance of a spot-inspection team to provoke Iraq. These 
teams are only beginning to be assembled, however, as routine monitoring 
systems are restored after a week-long break. At the heart of the 
renewed confrontation are Iraqi documents that Richard Butler, the 
chief inspector, has said are critical to a full accounting of what 
prohibited weapons Iraq possessed before the 1991 war in the Persian 
Gulf. Without those records, it is all but impossible to determine 
what arms remain or have not been accounted for. Among the disputed 
documents is at least one that President Clinton confidently predicted 
on Sunday would be turned over, to the surprise of some diplomats: 
an Iraqi air force account of what kind of ammunition was loaded and 
used _ or destroyed _ in the 1980-1988 Iran-Iraq war. U.N. inspectors 
say they believe that the missing document _ literally snatched away 
from inspectors who discovered it in July _ indicates that Iraq may 
have been left with more chemical and biological munitions than it 
has declared when the war with Iran ended. In a letter Friday night 
to Butler, Iraq's deputy foreign minister, Riyadh al-Qaisi, said the 
request for the document had overstepped the bounds. ``The request 
you made seems to be provocative rather than professional,'' he said. 
The letter is interesting for several reasons. It emphasized Iraq's 
hope that it can undercut Butler by portraying his requests as out 
of line. But the Security Council has already rejected demands that 
Butler be dismissed or that his commission be reorganized. Moreover, 
the council ordered the Iraqis to turn over the document several months 
ago. Also, the prominence of al-Qaisi reinforces rumors that he is 
to be sent next month to represent Iraq at the United Nations, replacing 
Nizar Hamdoon. The Iraqi move may also wipe out whatever sympathy 
Saddam may have found with Secretary-General Kofi Annan, who has seen 
his February agreement with Saddam violated repeatedly. In general, 
al-Qaisi argued, the documents Butler wanted either do not exist or 
were already accounted for earlier. As a possible concession, the 
Iraqis said the contested air force document might be examined in 
the presence of the secretary-general's special envoy, Prakash Shah. 
Diplomats dismissed this as another Iraqi ploy to circumvent the special 
commission, which is known as UNSCOM, and the Security Council. Butler 
fired back in a letter to Peter Burleigh, the U.S. representative 
at the United Nations and this month's Security Council president, 
detailing the most recent exchanges with Iraq. He had written to Iraq 
this week outlining what information he needed. ``We agree with Chairman 
Butler's assessment that this response ((by Iraq)) is not sufficient,'' 
said Crowley, the spokesman for the National Security Council. ``It 
is our understanding that UNSCOM has responded to the Iraqi letter, 
seeking further clarification. Iraq still needs to provide further 
disclosure.'' Butler said Friday that Iraq ``declines to furnish the 
commission with any information on its biological weapons program,'' 
preferring to wait for a review. But that was never likely. He also 
told Burleigh that Iraq appears to be denying access to archives in 
the Ministry of Defense, the Military Industrialization Corp. and 
other departments. ``Access by UNSCOM to the archives, to be provided, 
as I hope, through cooperation by Iraq, would be the most effective 
and least controversial way of the commission obtaining the necessary 
evidence for the accounting of Iraq's prohibited weapons programs,'' 
Butler wrote. ``It would avoid seeking out such documents through 
intrusive inspection which, as council members are aware, has sometimes 
been the source of tension and blockage.'' Iraq has furthermore refused 
to answer questions about the extent of its production of the nerve 
agent VX, which can kill within hours, and about whether it has been 
loaded into warheads. Questions on missiles and inexplicable quantities 
of missile fuel are also being ignored. Iraq is also apparently trying 
to conceal important diaries and memoirs of Iraqi military officers 
with knowledge of the extent of Iraqi weapons programs, calling them 
``state secrets.'' 
</TEXT>
</DOC>