<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981120.0062 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Across a long day and well into the night, Kenneth Starr fought off 
Democratic assaults on the conduct of his office Thursday and repeatedly 
sought to return attention to what he described as President Clinton's 
pattern of obstruction of justice. In a 12-hour day that opened the 
House impeachment hearings, the independent counsel testified in a 
mostly dispassionate monotone about his four-year investigation that 
began with Whitewater and ended with the Lewinsky matter. The Democrats 
challenged Starr's tactics and his judgment, and the motives and fairness 
of the Republicans who control the committee. But for all that, they 
seldom actually defended Clinton directly. Republicans, for their 
part, praised Starr often and extravagantly. Only when he was cross-examined 
by Clinton's lawyer, David Kendall, did Starr show signs of irritation 
or anger. He heatedly rebuffed Kendall's accusations that Starr's 
office had leaked grand jury information about Clinton. Several times 
during those exchanges, Starr interjected: ``That's unfair.'' After 
10 p.m. on Thursday night, the last questioner, David Schippers, the 
Republicans' chief investigative counsel, tried to apply balm to any 
wounds. ``You have been pilloried and excoriated,'' he told Starr. 
He drew snorts and laughter from the Democrats when he praised the 
independent counsel's treatment of Monica Lewinsky. ``I hear laughter 
from the left,'' Schippers said, referring to committee Democrats. 
``But I often hear laughter from the left.'' Starr left the hearing 
room in the Rayburn Building at 10:20 p.m. The committee then met 
in executive session until nearly 1 a.m. debating subpoenas for other 
witnesses. No hearings were set for Friday. In party-line votes, the 
committee agreed to take closed-door depositions from Robert Bennett, 
Clinton's lawyer in Paula Jones' sexual-harassment lawsuit; Daniel 
Gecker, the lawyer for Kathleen Willey, who testified that Clinton 
groped her; and Nathan Landow, a developer and Democratic fund-raiser 
who counseled Mrs. Willey. The panel also agreed to summon Bruce Lindsey, 
the deputy White House counsel. The depositions will probably not 
take place until next month. Starr's appearance marked the beginning 
of the public phase of the nation's third impeachment inquiry into 
a president, one for which the public has shown little support in 
polls. The committee is working on a tight schedule. Saying he is 
mindful of public exhaustion with the Lewinsky case, Rep. Henry Hyde, 
the committee chairman, has repeatedly vowed that he will end the 
inquiry by the end of the year. And the incoming House speaker, Bob 
Livingston, has also indicated that he would like impeachment proceedings 
to be concluded before the new Congress takes office in January. If 
the committee votes to recommend articles of impeachment against Clinton, 
the matter then goes to the full House for an impeachment vote. From 
the very first moments that the committee went into session, the party 
divide was evident. The Republican-controlled committee rejected an 
effort by Democrats to give the president's lawyers two hours to question 
Starr, who had been granted two hours to deliver his opening statement. 
The conflicting strategies of the two parties _ reflected time and 
again during the day _ were underscored almost immediately. ``Do we 
still have a government of laws and not of men?'' asked Hyde as he 
opened the hearing. ``Does the law apply to some people with force 
and ferocity while the powerful are immune? Do we have one set of 
laws for the officer and another for the enlisted?'' Rep. John Conyers 
Jr., the ranking Democrat, sought to put Starr on trial, accusing 
him of crossing the ``line into obsession'' in his investigation of 
Clinton. ``The idea of a federally paid sex policeman spending millions 
of dollars to trap an unfaithful spouse, or to police civil litigation, 
would have been unthinkable prior to the Starr investigation,'' the 
Michigan Democrat said. ``Let there be no mistake; it is now acceptable 
in America to investigate a person's private sexual activity.'' The 
White House said Starr had not shed any new light on his investigation 
after the morning session. ``He offered no new evidence, no new information, 
and no new explanations for his tactics,'' said Gregory Craig, a White 
House special counsel who sat at a separate table in the hearing room. 
Clinton and his wife were out of the country as the Judiciary Committee 
held the first impeachment hearing against a president since the Watergate 
inquiry of Richard M. Nixon 24 years ago. Republicans hoped that Starr 
would refocus the public on the charges against Clinton and forcefully 
make the case for impeachment, and Schippers helped Starr recap those 
points at the hearing's end. But for much of the day, Democrats turned 
the session into a trial of the prosecutor, not of the president. 
Starr described himself as a fervent believer in the law and said 
his legal team only wanted to ``do our duties as honorable prosecutors.'' 
He spoke for hours in a patient voice that had rarely been heard in 
public, replying at length to questions ranging from details of the 
Lewinsky matter to how the investigation had changed his personal 
life. He said he would ``stand behind each word'' of his report to 
the House charging Clinton with 11 possibly impeachable offenses. 
``I am not a man of politics,'' Starr told the 37 members of the House 
Judiciary Committee. Instead, he described himself as a man with ``unyielding 
faith in our court system _ our system of judicial review, the independence 
of our judges, our jury system, the integrity of the oath and the 
sanctity, yes, the sanctity of the judicial process.'' Starr sought 
to dispel the argument that his case against Clinton concerned the 
president's relationship with Ms. Lewinsky and not whether he lied 
under oath in the sexual harassment case brought by Paula Corbin Jones 
and then before a grand jury. ``Sexual harassment cases are often 
he said-she said disputes,'' Starr said. ``Evidence reflecting the 
behavior of both parties can be critical _ including the defendant's 
relationships with other employees in the workplace. ``Such questions 
can be uncomfortable, but they occur every day in courts and law offices 
across the country. Individuals in these cases take an oath to tell 
the truth, the whole truth and nothing but the truth. And no one is 
entitled to lie under oath simply because he or she does not like 
the questions or because he believes the case is frivolous or that 
it is financially motivated or that it is politically motivated.'' 
Starr also noted that it was not his office, but the House, that decided 
to make public his report with all its lurid details. Once Starr faced 
his questioners, the tone changed and the subjects shifted so that 
he was soon defending the conduct of his office. Abbe Lowell, the 
Democrats' senior investigative counsel, questioned Starr about his 
ties to lawyers associated with Mrs. Jones and about his office's 
early contacts with both Ms. Lewinsky and with Linda Tripp, the woman 
who set off the investigation by bringing prosecutors tape-recordings 
of her conversations with Ms. Lewinsky. Lowell contrasted Starr's 
detailed report with that of the Watergate prosecutor, Leon Jaworski, 
who had presented Congress with facts but no conclusions. Starr replied 
that he was the first to submit a presidential impeachment report 
under the independent counsel statute, and he believed the statute 
required him to make judgments. ``This is a tool,'' he said of his 
report. ``This is only a tool for you to use as you see fit. But I 
don't think it's fair to criticize my office for not following a pattern 
that was not governed by a statute.'' One of the most spirited exchanges 
with Lowell came over the efforts by Starr's deputies the January 
day when they first confronted Ms. Lewinsky to keep her from contacting 
a lawyer. Using Starr's own words for describing the president's evasions, 
Lowell asked whether Starr had presented a ``distorted picture of 
the facts'' in a press release from his office saying Ms. Lewinsky 
consented to a meeting with FBI agents last January. Citing Ms. Lewinsky's 
testimony, Lowell said the statement did not note that the young woman 
was scared and crying and that when she asked to see her lawyer she 
was told, ``she would not be able to help herself with her attorney 
there.'' She was, he said, ``threatened with going to jail for, quote, 
27 years.'' And when she asked to call her mother, Jackie Bennett, 
a Starr deputy said, ``You're 24. You're smart. You're old enough. 
You don't need to call your mommy.'' ``That wasn't in your statement 
to the press that day, was it?'' asked Lowell. Drawing laughter, Starr 
said ``No, it wasn't, Mr. Lowell, and let me explain what press statements 
are designed to do.'' At another point he said, ``Surely you don't 
think that a witness is going to say, `Thank you, law enforcement, 
for finding out that I'm in the middle of committing a felony.''' 
Starr said his attorneys were leery of having Ms. Lewinsky reach out 
to her lawyer, Francis Carter, because they thought he had assisted 
her in drafting a false affidavit. Starr's investigators offered to 
help her seek a Legal Aid attorney, he said. Later in the evening, 
under withering questioning from Democrats, Starr seemed more defensive 
about allegations that his investigators had threatened one witness, 
Julie Hiatt Steele _ who has contested Kathleen Willey's account of 
a sexual advance from the president _ and said they would examine 
the legality of her daughter's adoption. At one point, he said he 
would answer a written question. At another point he said that if 
Ms. Steele had a complaint it could be resolved in court. Starr also 
called it a ``misjudgment'' that one of his investigators in Arkansas 
had gone to a high school to subpoena the 16-year-old son of a Whitewater 
defendant. Throughout the long day, Republicans rose to the defense 
of Starr. ``What we are seeing here is a desperate attempt to get 
away from the facts of the case against the president,'' said Rep. 
Charles Canaday, R-Fla. ``Now I understand that because I find that 
the facts are particularly compelling.'' Several voiced their sympathy 
for Starr. ``I commend you for standing up to the nonsense,'' said 
Rep. Bob Barr of Georgia. Democrats showed no such sympathy. Rep. 
Barney Frank of Massachusetts asked the independent counsel why he 
had not told the public before the November election that he had found 
no evidence of impeachable offenses in his other inquiries, which 
ranged from the dismissal of White House Travel Office employees to 
the Whitewater real estate deal in Arkansas. Starr said his legal 
mandate was only to report on evidence of potentially impeachable 
offenses. ``In other words, you don't have anything to say unless 
you have something bad to say,'' Frank retorted. Rep. Robert Inglis, 
R-S.C., gave Starr the opportunity to emphasize that he considered 
perjury an impeachable offense, no matter what the underlying matter. 
``It doesn't matter what the underlying subject matter is,'' said 
Starr. ``Once you're in court, under oath, you tell the truth. That's 
the way judges look at the world, and perhaps that's why no judge 
being subjected to impeachment for perjury, has dared suggest 'Don't 
worry about it. It's not an impeachable offense.' It is.'' Starr also 
said that Clinton could be prosecuted for perjury once he left office. 
Very few members of the committee asked Starr about any of the actual 
facts of his case or dwelt on the contradictory witness accounts. 
Rep. Charles Schumer, D-N.Y., questioned Starr's charges of obstruction 
of Justice. He noted that the White House had been trying to help 
Ms. Lewinsky find a job for more than a year _ not just after she 
was called to appear in the Jones case. But Starr said his office 
had concluded that there had been a ``stepping up of the efforts to 
get her a job, especially once the witness list was issued.'' Only 
once did Starr seem weary of his role, when Rep. Mary Bono, R-Calif., 
asked him sympathetically about the toll his job was taking. ``I would 
love to be back in private life,'' he said. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>