<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981120.0469 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
With a chance to make some genuine progress toward salvaging the season, 
National Basketball Association players and owners seized the opportunity 
and apparently have made at least modest compromises on their respective 
proposals during a marathon bargaining session that began Friday morning 
and continued into the night. The talks, which were continuing at 
8:30 p.m. ET, represented the first full negotiating session in more 
than three weeks for both sides, and seemed to strike a chord of optimism 
unseen in the NBA's labor dispute since late last month. Whether the 
progress will eventually amount to the league ending the lockout, 
now in its 143rd day, remains to be seen. But any softening of stances 
on either side was seen as productive toward bridging the vast economic 
chasm. Officials on both sides said they planned to meet late into 
the night, the first time that had happened since Oct. 28. It was 
unclear whether they had begun to close a 10 percent gap in total 
revenue distribution - the owners currently want a 50-50 split, while 
the players said they would install mechanisms to pay the owners back 
once their take reaches 60 percent. But one participant in the meeting, 
speaking on condition of anonymity, said minor alterations to a proposed 
escrow plan were being discussed. Implementing the escrow arrangement 
is considered one of the biggest stumbling blocks in negotiations, 
along with limiting high-end salaries. The escrow plan would take 
effect in the second or third year of the proposed deal and would 
entail the players putting aside a set amount of their salaries at 
the beginning of the season. Once a percentage of salaries paid out 
to players had been exceeded _ somewhere between 50 percent and 60 
percent of the league's $2 billion annual revenue _ the money would 
be used to pay the owners back. The players have previously proposed 
putting 10 percent aside, while the owners want the figure to be enough 
to cover the difference. The two sides began talking around 10:30 
a.m. Friday after they filed into a midtown Manhattan hotel. They 
talked for about two hours. One team official, who had spoke with 
a participant in the meeting late Friday, said that the owners were 
prepared to call a halt to the talks before lunch when the players 
made a minor compromise in their proposal. The official did not say 
what the compromise was, but it apparently sparked the owners to alter 
their proposal soon after. They returned from lunch and worked for 
another four hours before taking another break and were said to be 
interested in negotiating late into the night. By Friday night, the 
mood had changed dramatically from earlier in the day. When the two 
parties filed in, an aura of pessimism abounded. Both sides had said 
they had no interest in moving off their numbers, and the idea to 
bring almost 20 players into town to talk with seven of the owner's 
nine-member labor relations committee seemed a gamble at best. With 
no substantial progress since a marathon session on Oct. 28 _ a meeting 
that broke at 1 a.m. _ several observers predicted a quick halt to 
the talks followed by another week to two weeks of silence and the 
requisite gauging of when the season would be canceled. Without a 
deal Friday night, a seventh week would be stricken from the schedule 
and the earliest the season could probably start would be Dec. 22. 
``I don't really have any reason to think we'll make any progress,'' 
NBA deputy commissioner Russ Granik said as he entered the hotel. 
``We certainly want to, but I don't have my hopes up right now.'' 
Said the Seattle center Jim McIlvaine a member of the union's negotiating 
committee, ``There's a sense that nothing's going to be done right 
now.'' After talking to players from more than 25 of the league's 
29 teams on conference calls for the past two weeks, union officials 
said their orders were to withhold any more concessions until the 
owners showed an inclination to compromise. Hunter, in fact, this 
week sent a letter to every owner, team president and general manager 
outlining the proposals. He wrote that it would be ``an enormous miscalculation 
to further test the players' resolve.'' Though they are about to top 
$300 million in salaries lost and withstood their first dissenting 
words this week _ Wizards guard Tim Legler vented frustration at the 
superstars and urged players to sign a deal in a Washington Post article 
on Wednesday _ the union has remained steadfast. Perhaps as a testament 
to their resolve, the players installed Legler on their negotiating 
team Friday. ``I guess the issue is discussing the proposals that 
were on the table and seeing whether or not there's any possible movement,'' 
said Billy Hunter, the union's executive director, Friday morning. 
``As I've said before, if they are inclined to move off their position, 
then we are prepared to discuss whether we're ready to move.'' Whether 
or not the players gave in first did not seem to matter. For the first 
time in almost a month, progress was made. Indicative of either the 
urgency or frustration on both sides, union president Patrick Ewing 
mingled with a league official during lunch outside the meeting room. 
He implored the official to keep negotiating. ``Let's go back at it,'' 
Ewing said, smiling. ``I want to play.'' 
</TEXT>
</DOC>