<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981120.0360 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
As the driving spirit behind the Labor Party, a fledgling left-of-center 
group that hopes someday to be a political heavyweight, Anthony Mazzocchi 
presided over its constitutional convention last weekend in Pittsburgh. 
Mazzocchi, the party's national organizer, helped develop its political 
platform, full of proposals certain to irk corporate America: mandatory 
four-week vacations, a single-payer universal health care system like 
Canada's, rollbacks of free-trade agreements, and a constitutional 
amendment guaranteeing every American a job that pays a living wage. 
Like many of the union stalwarts in the party, Mazzocchi, an official 
with the Oil, Chemical and Atomic Workers Union, freely uses class-tinged 
language that seems a throwback to the 1930s. Q. (italics)How would 
you describe the Labor Party and its goals?(end italics) A. I remember 
a period when the labor movement helped shape the nation's debate. 
I would like to see where the labor movement is once again the driving 
force for the future direction of the nation. The Labor Party is a 
working-class party. I don't think we have to be afraid of class. 
Our interests diverge from those of the corporations. This is a corporate 
economy and we're not going to change that overnight. Our vision is 
that of a social democratic party similar to the ones in Europe. Q. 
(italics)You and other Labor Party members spend a lot of your time 
denouncing corporations. Are you anti-corporate?(end italics) A. Yes, 
that's fair to say. Our attitude is anti-corporate, although we're 
not calling for the elimination of corporations. We're saying corporations 
have had their way at the expense of the average person. I think of 
how far the wealth of the nation has shifted to a small percentage 
of the populations. Corporations can't change. A corporation has to 
act in its own self-interest. It has nothing to do with evil intentions 
or good intentions. Its own self-interest dictates it has to be exploitative. 
It has no loyalty to its workers. It has to maximize its return. We're 
saying corporate behavior has to be regulated with a political force 
that says, ``This is what you can do; this is what you can't do.'' 
We're saying, if you want to lay off people, those people have to 
have a guaranteed income. If you want to move your plant to Mexico 
and lay off your workers, you have to pay for those you leave behind. 
Q. (italics)Your platform often demands things that seem politically 
or economically impossible. For instance, is it really possible to 
have full employment that guarantees every American a job with a living 
wage?(end italics) A. I grew up in the Depression. On Dec. 7, 1941, 
my sister was getting married, and that evening there was a war. And, 
lo and behold! A country without much capital available mobilized 
capital, and it was the most incredible organizational feat in the 
history of the world. I come out of a generation that saw you can 
have full employment. We know it's possible in this society. We're 
opposed to welfare; everyone should be able to work. Q. (italics)What 
does Jesse Ventura's election as a third-party candidate for Minnesota 
governor mean for the Labor Party?(end italics) A. We're convinced 
there's going to be an alternative political party _ it's either going 
to come from us or from the right. There are a lot of right-wing populists 
who say things that resonate with working people. It could get very 
ugly. We thought we ought to be able to create an alternative. Q. 
(italics)The AFL-CIO is trying hard to work with the Democratic Party 
and has had some success with issues like raising the minimum wage 
and preventing new free-trade agreements. What do you have against 
the Democratic Party?(end italics) A. If there was a Republican president, 
the Democrats never would have allowed NAFTA to pass. But a Democratic 
Party that has the presidency has delivered GATT, NAFTA, welfare reform 
_ it's the first time since the New Deal that we've dismantled the 
notion that we should provide income for those who are helpless. It's 
total abdication. The Democratic Party has not initiated any pro-worker 
legislation over the past 25 years. Democratic governors have dumped 
public employees, cut budgets, privatized, attacked public workers. 
Hundreds of thousands are out of work as a result. I think the perception 
is there's very little difference between the two major parties. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>