<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981120.0442 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
The New York Times said in an editorial for Saturday, Nov. 21: When 
Gov. John Rowland ran for re-election, he promised to make the rejuvenation 
of Connecticut's cities a top priority for his second administration. 
Now the state has learned that Rowland was secretly negotiating to 
bring the New England Patriots to Hartford as the centerpiece of his 
urban development. This week the governor and the Patriots' owner, 
Robert Kraft, stunned both Massachusetts and Connecticut by announcing 
a deal to move the football team into a new $350 million, publicly 
financed stadium. This is a story in which almost every position deserves 
to be regarded with both sympathy and a degree of skepticism. Kraft 
agreed to move his team to Hartford after long and drawn-out negotiations 
to keep the Patriots in the Boston area fell through. It is impossible 
to feel much concern for Kraft, who was prospering in Massachusetts. 
But as team owners go, he did not seem to have been asking for very 
much to keep the team in its present location in Foxboro. Massachusetts 
House Speaker Thomas Finneran, who calls Kraft a ``whiney millionaire,'' 
vetoed a deal that would have required the state to make about $70 
million in infrastructure improvements in order to keep a team that 
generates $10 million a year in tax revenue. The Boston area, which 
is booming, and which has three other sports teams closer to residents' 
hearts, does not really need the Patriots as a symbol of local solidarity 
and prestige. But Hartford has been mired in severe problems for years, 
including a disastrous school system, a half-deserted downtown and 
an image as a dangerous place that suburban residents prefer to shun. 
It is hard to accept the idea that a football team ought to be a top 
priority for a city with so many needs. But the psychological jolt 
of grabbing big-league status might help to ignite a rebirth of the 
commercial district. The big question is whether Rowland is right 
in believing that a football team that plays only 10 regular and preseason 
games a year at home could be the catalyst that turns Hartford's fortunes 
around. The stadium is supposed to be the center of a larger urban 
development project along the Connecticut River, and Kraft has agreed 
to build a hotel there, as well as make other gestures toward encouraging 
downtown development. But in return, the state is going to be responsible 
for the debt payment on $350 million in bonds. Rowland says the money 
will come from a tax on stadium revenues, but the estimate of how 
much money that tax will bring in seems optimistic. The Connecticut 
state Legislature must meet before the end of the year to approve 
the deal. Right now, most lawmakers seem caught up in the euphoria 
of the moment. But that should not keep them from making hard-headed 
decisions about whether a state that already has a very high debt 
burden should be taking on this additional responsibility. It was 
good to see Hartford's politicians and business leaders looking optimistic 
for a change this week. But a $350 million investment has to buy something 
more than good feeling. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>