<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981120.0428 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
The largest legal and financial threat to the tobacco industry ended 
Friday when 46 states accepted a $206 billion plan to settle state 
lawsuits filed against cigarette makers to recover Medicaid money 
spent treating diseases related to smoking. The agreement, which the 
tobacco industry said it would sign on Monday, brings to an apparent 
close one of the most dramatic chapters in the history of the nation's 
war on smoking, one that began in 1994 when the first states filed 
damage suits against cigarette makers and accelerated when four of 
those states reached multi-billion-dollar settlements. Those states 
_ Florida, Minnesota, Mississippi and Texas _ settled their suits 
for a total of $40 billion paid over 25 years. In those cases the 
tobacco corporations found themselves in the crosshairs of public 
attention as thousands of secret industry documents spilled into view, 
revealing how the companies had suppressed research on the health 
hazards of smoking and had sought to attract teen-agers as ``replacement'' 
smokers for those who had died. In June 1997, in an effort to protect 
itself from potentially bankrupting state and class-action lawsuits, 
the tobacco industry reached a $368.5 billion accord with attorneys 
general from 40 states. When Congress took up legislation required 
for ratifying that agreement this spring, the bill was raised to $516 
billion and cigarette makers were denied the legal immunity they had 
sought in return. That resulted in the legislation's defeat and eventually 
this week's settlement without the participation by the federal government, 
ending anti-smoking groups' hopes for a broader agreement that would 
combat teen-age smoking and bring the industry under federal regulation. 
Many anti-smoking advocates, like Dr. C. Everett Koop, the former 
surgeon general, declared the new pact weak and called on state officials 
to reject it. But over the past five days, the period when officials 
had to decide whether to join the plan or to pursue their lawsuits, 
state after state signed up, including those that had initially expressed 
strong reservations with the accord, like Wisconsin, Massachusetts 
and Maryland. On Friday afternoon, Christine Gregoire, the Washington 
state attorney general, announced that 46 states and five U.S. territories 
that had not already made individual settlements with the industry 
or filed a smoking-related lawsuit had signed on. Ms. Gregoire, chief 
state negotiator in the talks, said she believed the accord was the 
best deal that could be reached and said that further delays would 
do little to prevent more young people from smoking. ``To those who 
say it is not enough, I say we simply couldn't afford to come away 
with nothing,'' she said. The cigarette producers participating in 
the plan are Philip Morris Cos.; R.J. Reynolds Tobacco, a subsidiary 
of RJR Nabisco Holdings Corp.; Lorillard Tobacco, a subsidiary of 
Loews Corp., and Brown &AMP; Williamson Tobacco, a subsidiary of BAT 
Industries PLC. ``We intend to sign the settlement on Monday, Nov. 
23, as planned,'' the companies said Friday in a joint statement. 
The nation's fifth-largest cigarette maker, Liggett &AMP; Myers, a 
subsidiary of the Brooke Group, also agreed Friday to join the plan, 
Ms. Gregoire said. She added that all states except Massachusetts 
had also agreed to resolve their claims against the nation's largest 
producer of smokeless tobacco, U.S. Tobacco, a subsidiary of UST Inc. 
Separately, Mike Easley, the North Carolina attorney general, said 
the four major cigarette makers were close to reaching an agreement 
under which they would pay $5 billion to help affected farmers in 
tobacco-growing states. Companies will likely pass the settlement's 
cost on to smokers who may see prices rise from 35 cents to 40 cents 
a package. Gary Black, a tobacco industry analyst with Sanford C. 
Bernstein in New York, said major price boosts might come as early 
as next week. Under the settlement plan, cigarette makers will, among 
other things, make marketing changes like taking down billboards, 
finance educational campaigns intended to stop young people from starting 
to smoke, and pay for research intended to help smokers quit. But 
the agreement does not prevent cigarette makers from continuing a 
number of practices that would have been restricted under last year's 
plan, like advertising in stores and in magazines. They will also 
be permitted to continue to sponsor sports events, though on a limited 
basis. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>