<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981120.0474 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
If ever an academic department was hot, it was the English department 
at Duke University in the late 1980s and early 1990s, when it was 
famously reinventing itself. Recruiting star professors, it bounded 
up the national rankings and became for a time the capital of cutting-edge 
literary studies as well as many a conservative's favorite example 
of academic excess. The department's biggest names included Stanley 
Fish, its flamboyant chairman; Frank Lentricchia, whom The Village 
Voice once called ``the Dirty Harry of contemporary critical theory;'' 
Eve Kosovsky Sedgwick, co-founder of the growing academic field of 
``queer theory,'' and, fleetingly, Henry Louis Gates Jr., now the 
ubiquitous chairman of Afro-American studies at Harvard. But over 
the past year, the department has appeared to be self-destructing. 
Professors have been at war with each other. Many of the best-known 
have left. When an external review team paid a routine two-day visit 
last spring, it reported having found the department ``without anything 
we would be disposed to describe as an undergraduate or graduate curriculum.'' 
Now the university has placed the department in something resembling 
receivership, overseen by an executive committee (headed by a dean 
from the botany department who is an authority on plant respiration). 
The committee is overseeing the search for a new department chairman 
and the first of perhaps a half-dozen new professors to replace the 
ones who have left. ``If the department can come up with three to 
six excellent hires, that will signal to the rest of the academic 
community that this enterprise is still in business and at the same 
high level,'' said Fish, now white-haired and 60, who is preparing 
to leave Duke next month to become a dean at the University of Illinois 
in Chicago. ``If we blow it _ and I don't know why we would, but if 
we were to blow it _ then after about a year or two another word will 
settle in. And this will be the word that, `Well, that was nice while 
it lasted but it's over.''' It is too early to say whether the discord 
in the department will have any effect on enrollment. The upheaval 
at Duke offers a glimpse into the arcane world of an academic department, 
one in which a complex mixture of ideological, generational and personality 
differences among its 40 members led to explosive skirmishes over 
hiring and tenure, graduate-student admissions and the distribution 
of departmental tasks and perks. As some professors see it, the story 
is a cautionary tale for universities hoping to emulate Duke's success 
in building a national reputation by strategically hiring star scholars; 
they say the department's problems stem in part from resentments that 
took root after celebrated outsiders never became fully integrated 
into departmental life. But Duke's difficulties also reflect tensions 
in English departments nationwide at a time when many havebeen struggling 
to redefine their mission. Where most once agreed that their primary 
role was the passing down of an agreed upon heritage of classic literary 
texts, that rationale has been challenged in recent decades. ``In 
the postmodern world, some of those working within literature are 
using literature as an instrument to try to affect social change,'' 
said James Applewhite, a 63-year-old poet and English professor at 
Duke. ``I think the problem of our department was, in the new era, 
once literature becomes politics, then politics is a matter of contention 
rather than consensus.'' Now, five full professors, including Fish 
and Ms. Sedgwick, are leaving or have left Duke. In addition, Lentricchia 
has switched departments; another English professor has become a vice 
provost. Their reasons for defecting vary, but they include the dissension 
within the department, unhappiness with its leadership and opportunities 
elsewhere. ``I found the department quite an unpleasant place by the 
time I left,'' said Ms. Sedgwick, who said she had moved to New York 
City in part to be nearer her husband after learning that she was 
experiencing a recurrence of an old cancer. ``I would say two-thirds 
of the decision had to do with my loss of respect for the department 
I was in.'' In the midst of the announcements, the review team arrived 
for the department's five-year check-up. Four English professors from 
other major research universities spent several days meeting with 
members of the department who, said Cathy Davidson, a Duke English 
professor, used the occasion ``almost as a confessional and went in 
and just sort of evacuated.'' In late May, the team delivered its 
findings in a confidential report (leaked posthaste to a student newspaper). 
The department was ``in a seriously weakened condition,'' the group 
wrote. Morale was ``desperately low.'' Dislike for the chairman, Marianna 
Torgovnick, a protege of Fish, was pervasive; some professors wanted 
her term cut short ``at whatever emotional and professional cost.'' 
``This is not to say that the department lacks excellent faculty,'' 
the report said. ``But the current department, except by virtue of 
its afterglow, cannot reasonably be considered top-ranked.'' Back 
in the early 1980s, the Duke department was a traditional sort of 
place. Its members were mostly men, mostly white, mostly getting on 
in years: interpreters of literary figures, writers on esthetic themes, 
relatively untouched by the intellectual trends transforming their 
field. The department seemed in danger of becoming an old boys' club. 
Hoping to raise Duke's profile, the university administration decided 
to build up the English department. In 1984, it lured Lentricchia 
away from Rice University. At his suggestion, it recruited Fish from 
Johns Hopkins to head the English department and Fredric Jameson, 
the Marxist critic and literary theorist, to run the program in literature. 
They in turn recruited more stars: Barbara Herrnstein Smith, who was 
about to become president of the Modern Language Association; Janice 
Radway, who had recently studied the romance-novel genre; then Ms. 
Davidson, Ms. Sedgwick and Gates, along with Lee Patterson and his 
wife, Annabel Patterson, both now at Yale. Ms. Sedgwick is a pioneer 
in ``queer theory,'' an approach to literature that goes into the 
study of sexuality and refuses to divide the world neatly into homosexual 
and heterosexual. Suddenly, the department was seen as a hotbed of 
literary theory. In the area of gender and literature, U.S. News and 
World Report would eventually rank the graduate program first in the 
country. Graduate student applications increased four-fold between 
1985 and 1991. The department vaulted upward in the National Research 
Council rankings, from 27th in the country to 5th. (And certain attributes 
of Fish found their way into the work of his friend, David Lodge, 
the author of several novels satirizing academic life.) In 1992, an 
external review team reported with admiration: ``We were struck by 
the chorus of testimony we heard from faculty outside the department 
that English has become a kind of engine or life-pump for the humanities 
at Duke, a supplier of intellectual energy and stimulation for the 
university at large. It is not easy to produce changes of this sort.'' 
Credit is widely given to Fish. In six years as chairman, Fish kept 
the university's resources focused on the department, acquired for 
it prime office space in the Gothic building that houses the president's 
office, and presided over what one administrator called ``a high-maintenance 
bunch of people, let me tell you'' with such apparent impartiality 
that even potential enemies came to believe he had the department's 
best interests at heart. His style was not, however, notably democratic. 
He is said to have abolished the department's bylaws. (As he tells 
it, there were no bylaws when he arrived; he simply swept away rules 
that were making people unhappy.) His preferred leadership method 
was working the halls. Asked when he was going to hold a meeting, 
he answered, ``When there are no more issues.'' There were always 
more issues. ``It was in some ways a classical pitched field of postmodern 
versus more traditional types of scholars and critics,'' said Reynolds 
Price, the novelist and a member of the department since 1958. ``The 
general good will that Stanley inspired made those differences seem 
a good deal less important than they turned out to be when Stanley 
wasn't there.'' The strain became increasingly apparent in the years 
after Fish stepped down as chairman in 1992. Camps and cliques took 
shape. The various factions were shifting and difficult to define, 
but many believe they were determined, at least in part, by degrees 
of enthusiasm, or lack of it, for such areas of study as gender and 
sexuality, African-American studies and theory. To some, like Lentricchia, 
the department had become dominated by ideologues who measured the 
quality of one's scholarship by whether it was ideologically correct. 
To others, there appeared to be, as Ms. Sedgwick put it, ``a whole 
group of faculty who really felt that the department was too theoretical, 
too queer, too African-American.'' Open warfare broke out over such 
things as hiring, promotions, graduate student admissions and issues 
like which faculty members had money to bring in outside speakers. 
There were also longer-term resentments about teaching-load disparities 
and a perception that some stars bore little of the administrative 
burden. The antagonisms became especially bitter after Ms. Torgovnick 
took over in 1996 and, her critics say, adopted Fish's authoritarian 
style without his charm. They accuse her of having favored her friends, 
manipulated meetings, even doctored minutes _ all charges she denies. 
People in every camp ended up feeling like members of an embattled 
minority. ``I don't think that all the problems are solely the result 
of her mismanagement,'' said Michael Valdez Moses, a 41-year-old associate 
professor who describes his field of specialization as Anglophone 
post-colonial literatures. ``But it's certainly the case that she 
made what would be by any stretch of the imagination a difficult situation 
into an impossible, particularly ugly one.'' What kind of department 
will emerge is unclear. The curriculum may become somewhat more structured 
than in the past. But many in the department are skeptical that the 
curriculum is really a problem, since the Duke department is more 
successful than most in landing graduate students in scarce academic 
jobs. Many are equally dubious about the review committee's complaint 
that they lack an ``overarching departmental mission,'' a vision of 
what the department wants to achieve. `If there is an English, French 
or literature department in the country that has found the new sense 
of mission and given it a good formulation, it has a very marketable 
product because lots of other departments would want to buy the kit,'' 
Fish said. ``But I don't myself know of any. So the lack of clear 
mission is a feature, I believe, now of the profession and not just 
this department.'' 
</TEXT>
</DOC>