<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981120.0472 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
The New York Times said in an editorial for Saturday, Nov. 21: Four 
glorious days a week, New York City's largest Greenmarket converts 
a stretch of tarmac into a grand agricultural oasis at Union Square. 
Mounds of sweet yellow peppers, tubs of newly cut roses, crusty black 
bread, fish, eggs, honey, mushrooms _ such delicacies entice discerning 
buyers, schoolchildren, even tourists to inspect some of the best 
and most photogenic produce in the city. These same four days a week, 
the market also serves as my neighborhood grocery. It is our outdoor 
community center, and ever since a cow appeared one day at the milk 
stand, I think of the Greenmarket as our answer to a weekend place 
in the country. So on a recent Saturday when the man selling potatoes 
implied that the city was about to bulldoze our Greenmarket, I became 
instantly indignant. Like 18,000 others, I signed a petition to save 
the market. Now, after seeing the city's plans, I want my signature 
back. The Parks Department would spend $2.6 million to build a little 
parkette: a cluster of trees around a shallow fountain and the resident 
statue of Gandhi. This new green area would be at the very tip of 
the Greenmarket, not anywhere near the main section around the north 
end of the park that includes up to 70 separate vendors. The plan 
would also turn an underused area into a place to muse, sketch, smooch, 
smoke or merely rest on several very public benches. Yes, the 25 new 
trees will squeeze a few stalls together on Saturdays in late summer, 
and, yes, it might take the trucks a little longer to move in and 
out. But given the fact that the impact on the market is extremely 
modest and the rest of us will have a place to read on days when the 
farmers are elsewhere, it looks like a good deal. So why the rumpus? 
Union Square has protest in its very dust. Unions once rallied there. 
Emma Goldman shouted above the police whistles for women's rights. 
The old Communist Party building still exists, now a Toys ``R'' Us 
store. When this proud old trouper of a park turned to drugs in the 
1970s, the community struggled to reclaim the square by encouraging 
farmers to sell their wares at big-city prices. The first brave Greenmarket 
farmers set up stalls in 1976. Thus, when a few concerned citizens 
raised a cry that the mayor was planning to revive an old, unpopular 
renovation that would remove 20 or more farmers, the neighborhood 
went on full alert. That plan, however, has no money and little support. 
Instead the proposal now proceeding noisily through community boards 
has been reworked to reflect the demands of Greenmarket managers, 
local residents and customers. With a few layers of approval to go, 
the entire process has provided hard lessons. At the city, it's a 
reminder that the Greenmarket rests on hallowed ground. For me, it's 
a warning to keep a good grip on myself when buying potatoes. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>