<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981120.0471 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
There was a method to their madness. Martina Hingis, without a title 
since May and without the No. 1 ranking she had owned for 80 weeks, 
needed to avenge last year's loss in the Chase Championships to Mary 
Pierce if she had any hope of ending 1998 on an upbeat note. That 
is why the second-seeded Hingis kept her composure from start to finish 
in the course of a 7-6 (7-4), 6-4 victory over the sixth-seeded Pierce, 
last year's runner-up. Lindsay Davenport, now the world's No. 1 player, 
longed for a rematch with Steffi Graf, who had the temerity to perform 
like a No. 1 player when she upended Davenport last Sunday in the 
Philadelphia final. But to get a second crack at Graf, who is lurking 
ahead in the semifinal round of this year-ending tournament, Davenport 
needed to make a stepping-stone out of Natalie Tauziat on Friday night 
in the quarterfinals, and that is exactly what she did at Madison 
Square Garden. With a viciously effective blend of power and economy, 
Davenport needed just 54 minutes to crash her way past eighth-seeded 
Nathalie Tauziat, 6-0, 6-3. Once Hingis grew accustomed to the sonic 
pace of the Pierce forehand, she began to coax mistakes from it, and 
once Pierce got nervous about relying on her forehand, the remainder 
of her weapons suffered a breakdown, too. A backhand return beyond 
bounds gave Hingis the first set. A lethal crosscourt backhand into 
Pierce's forehand corner gave Hingis the match. ``I kind of wanted 
revenge for what she did to me last year,'' Hingis said. The victory 
by Davenport brought her 1998 record against Tauziat to 5-2. Of their 
14 career meetings, the French woman had managed to claim only three, 
but Friday night's collision was hopelessly one-sided. ``I entered 
the match pretty late,'' Tauziat, this year's Wimbledon runner-up, 
said about her invisibility in the 19-minute opening set, ``and she 
played pretty good. Didn't make a lot of mistakes tonight, that's 
for sure.'' Revenge might not be the most noble motive for laying 
it on the line out on the court, but at this late date in the interminable 
tennis season, sometimes it becomes a player's best reason for lacing 
up her sneakers, and on Friday night it earned the revenge she needed 
and brought Davenport the rematch she craved. ``I mean, she's obviously 
playing the best tennis right now, and you always kind of want to 
go up against the best,'' Davenport said about the resurgence by the 
29-year-old German, who has compiled a 12-match undefeated streak 
and has collected two consecutive titles, at Leipzig, Germany, and 
Philadelphia, since making her comeback from wrist surgery in September. 
During that rampage, Graf became the only player to defeat the world's 
top three players in a four-match span by ousting Martina Hingis and 
Davenport in Philadelphia and dethroning third-seeded Jana Novotna, 
this event's defending champion, in the first round. The unseeded 
Graf's elimination of Novotna brought the 30-year-old Czech veteran 
the unwanted distinction of becoming the first defending champion 
in the history of this event to have her title defense snuffed in 
the first round. Davenport, whose best result here came in 1994 when 
she was runner-up to Gabriela Sabatini, admitted she felt relieved 
not to have to face the Graf juggernaut any earlier than the semifinals. 
That is how convinced she is that Graf's latest two titles (all told, 
she owns 106) have only served to escalate her appetite for more. 
After all, Davenport, with a tour-leading six titles to her credit 
this year, feels much the same. ``I'd really like to cap off a great 
year by winning this tournament; hopefully if I can raise my game 
a little bit more and I can come away with the title,'' said Davenport 
who, while she trails her career rivalry with Graf by 7-3, would love 
to be able stake bragging rights to her 1998 rivalry with the German. 
``I think we're 2-2 for the year,'' said Davenport, who has lost their 
last two confrontations. ``Maybe I'll go up 3-2 before the year is 
out.'' 
</TEXT>
</DOC>