<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981120.0414 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Leaders of the pilots union at Federal Express crumbled under intense 
pressure from the company Friday and withdrew their threat to strike 
during the peak holiday season. The surprising decision by the union's 
board of directors amounted to near-complete capitulation to Fedex 
in what was fast turning into a bitter conflict. It insures that the 
delivery of millions of packages will not be disrupted in December, 
when Fedex volumes are 25 percent to 30 percent higher than normal. 
``We can guarantee all customers that their products for this holiday 
peak season will be delivered on time and we stand ready to meet the 
peak season demands,'' Byron Cobb, the union's vice president, said 
in a statement. The pilots' virtual surrender is a remarkable victory 
for Fedex, which for years has successfully fought union representation 
for its 140,000 employees. It is also the second time in the last 
three years that the company has beaten back a threat by its pilots 
to disrupt holiday deliveries. In comparison, United Parcel Service, 
Fedex's main rival, suffered a crippling 15-day strike last year when 
185,000 drivers and other workers represented by the International 
Brotherhood of Teamsters walked out. Afterward, when UPS pilots also 
threatened to strike, the company mollified them with the richest 
contract in the industry. The 3,500 Fedex pilots were holding out 
for nearly as good a deal, dismissing several offers from the company 
as below industry standards. Fedex finally broke off negotiations 
on Oct. 30 after the pilots rejected its final offer of a 17 percent 
pay increase over five years. The union was also seeking stronger 
protections against what it called grueling schedules that have pilots 
flying at night with little rest. Fedex vowed to continue serving 
customers even if there was a strike. Many of the pilots thought the 
company was bluffing, but in recent days Fedex firmed up its contingency 
plans by leasing outside airplanes and trucks, leading them to conclude 
that their jobs were in danger. ``The crew force was beginning to 
shake under Smith's threats,'' said Bob Clement, a union spokesman, 
referring to Frederick Smith, the founder of Federal Express, who 
is now chairman and chief executive of FDX Corp., its Memphis-based 
holding company. In a letter distributed to the pilots Tuesday, Smith 
scolded them for ``tarnishing'' Fedex's image and warned that the 
company would move forward with or without them. After an extraordinary 
meeting Thursday evening during which many senior pilots urged the 
union's leadership to settle with the company, the union agreed to 
declare a moratorium on all job actions for 60 days and to delay tallying 
a strike-authorization vote, the results of which were scheduled to 
be announced on Dec. 3. The pilots will immediately begin flying overtime, 
which they had been refusing to do since Nov. 9. In return, Fedex 
said it will resume contract talks on Monday. The company also pledged 
not to lease any more outside trucks and airplanes, though it said 
that it would honor the commitments it had already made. ``We welcome 
the Fedex Pilots Association decision to eliminate any job actions 
during the holiday season,'' said William Margaritis, a company spokesman. 
``We are happy to confirm that service to customers will continue 
uninterrupted.'' Investors appeared to welcome the standdown and bid 
FDX shares up $1.875 or 3.2 percent to $60.6875, the highest since 
a $61.375 close on Aug. 6. The pilots could still conceivably strike 
early next year if negotiations with the company once again fell apart. 
But the likelihood is small because it seems clear that a majority 
of them do not have the stomach for it. In addition, a walkout in 
February _ a time when package volumes are low and many outside airplanes 
are available for lease _ represents far less of a threat to the company 
than one in December. Indeed, the union's leadership now appears prepared 
to accept a contract that offers less than what their negotiators 
rejected on Oct. 30. Margaritis said the company has made it clear 
to the pilots that the cost of the contingency plans has now made 
the company's previous offer too expensive. The only solace for militant 
supporters of the union is that it now appears that Fedex will sign 
a contract with its pilots, a feat in itself at the anti-union company. 
But for Fedex it will end five years of up-and-down negotiations, 
in which the divided pilots were represented by two unions and voted 
down two tentative contract agreements. ``I think you will see the 
negotiations resolved in a short order,'' said Clement of the union. 
``You might see a Ford Taurus rather than a Cadillac. But you will 
have a contract.'' 
</TEXT>
</DOC>