<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981120.0518 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Coming from the Rev. John Croneberger to his congregants at the Church 
of the Atonement in Tenafly one Sunday morning, the question seemed 
deceptively simple: What did they think was the most important book 
in his life? ``They bit,'' he said, a wry smile inching across his 
face. ``They said the Bible.'' But the sermon was about ``the use 
and abuse of time,'' and to illustrate the point he held up not the 
Good Book but his date book. For Croneberger, who will be consecrated 
on Saturday as the next bishop of the Episcopal Diocese of Newark, 
both his date book and his sense of humor will be even more indispensable 
as he prepares to succeed John Spong, the bishop in Newark since 1979 
and one of the most controversial figures in the modern Episcopal 
Church. In another place, Croneberger, 59, might have been considered 
a radical choice because of his history as a liberal crusader. In 
the early 1970s, he was arrested for celebrating a ``Eucharist for 
peace'' outside the Pentagon to protest the Vietnam war. More recently, 
he led the defense of Walter Righter, a bishop who was accused of 
heresy for ordaining a noncelibate gay man as a deacon in Croneberger's 
church. Righter was absolved by an ecclesiastical court in 1996. But 
in the shadow of Spong, a maverick who has questioned some of the 
church's most fundamental tenets and has written books suggesting 
that Mary was a sexually violated teen-ager and that St. Paul was 
a self-loathing and repressed gay man, the election of Croneberger 
in June was actually a step toward moderation, reflecting what some 
academics and church leaders see as a nationwide trend among the 2.4 
million American Episcopalians in seeking common ground. Spong is 
known as someone who is as comfortable on ``Oprah Winfrey'' or ``Larry 
King Live'' as he is in church. He is widely regarded as a leading 
spokesman of a branch of the Episcopal Church known as the ``Broad 
Church movement'' or ``Anglican modernism,'' which seeks to incorporate 
insights of science and modern thought into the church. A champion 
of fully integrating blacks, women and homosexuals into the church, 
Spong has written 14 books, has often crisscrossed the country to 
promote them, and has lectured frequently at universities around the 
world. He has also attacked the Roman Catholic position against artificial 
birth control as ``an act of immorality'' and the Vatican's treatment 
of women as ``so insulting, so retrograde,'' that women should abandon 
the church ``for their own humanity.'' Croneberger is seen as adhering 
more reverentially to the church's fundamentals: Scripture, creed, 
sacraments and the episcopate, or the role of bishops. ``In a way, 
his election is reflective of a longing in the Episcopal Church, of 
moving back to the middle from the extremes of left and right,'' said 
William Franklin, the dean of the Berkeley Divinity School at Yale 
University. Franklin said that Croneberger makes his views known in 
a more measured way. ``The way he positions himself and in the nature 
of his arguments is back toward centrist Anglicanism _ which I think 
is the tendency of the Episcopal church at the moment _ without rejecting 
good aspects of questions that Bishop Spong raised,'' Franklin said. 
And though he is perhaps more discreet, Croneberger does not in any 
way represent a retreat from liberalism. His views on issues of social 
justice and his own record as a fearless champion of causes he believes 
in reaffirm the core liberal values, embodied by Spong, that are now 
the hallmark of the Newark diocese. The differences come in Croneberger's 
understated manner and more pastoral outlook. ``I think the clergy 
of the diocese are looking for a pastor, are looking for a shepherd 
who will be present, who will be available,'' Croneberger said in 
an interview shortly after he was elected, conveying a message that 
he had repeated throughout the selection process. ``I will be less 
of a national and international figure.'' The diocese appears to be 
counting on that. ``The prophet clears the forest, and that requires 
a bit of burning,'' said Louie Crew, a Rutgers University English 
professor who is active in the diocese and served on the nominating 
committee. ``But when the forest is clear, it doesn't make sense to 
have the burning. You plant in the grassy area that's been made available 
to you.'' On Saturday morning, Croneberger will be consecrated as 
bishop coadjutor during a service that will be led by Arthur Williams, 
suffragan bishop of the Diocese of Ohio, who is vice president of 
the national House of Bishops. Croneberger will become the diocesan 
bishop in February 2000 when Spong retires to join the faculty of 
the Harvard Divinity School. (MORE) nn The Newark diocese is one of 
the largest in the United States, with 124 congregations and about 
40,000 worshipers. By electing someone from within the diocese, church 
and lay leaders sent a clear message that they had grown tired of 
the public glare. Croneberger had been rector of the Church of the 
Atonement for 18 years and was known throughout the Newark diocese 
for helping to create a sort of peer counseling group for his fellow 
priests. In choosing Croneberger, the diocese did not take the opportunity 
to elect the first openly gay bishop. One of the candidates on the 
final ballot was the Rev. Gene Robinson, an assistant to Bishop Douglas 
Theuner of the Diocese of New Hampshire. Robinson, who was once married 
and has two daughters, now lives with a man. Croneberger grew up in 
Schuylkill Haven, a town in the coal region of Pennsylvania. His father, 
who worked as an insurance agent, was a licensed lay reader. He would 
take his son Jack with him to churches throughout the coal region, 
where he led morning prayer services. Jack Croneberger headed straight 
for the priesthood, and today still wears his father's silver cross. 
After graduating from Lehigh University in Bethlehem, Pa., he attended 
Virginia Seminary and was ordained at the age of 24. He returned to 
Pennsylvania, where he was assigned to a church near Scranton. In 
1965, he met his wife, Marilyn, who was then a young widow with three 
daughters. She was a member of a neighboring congregation, and a mutual 
acquaintance took her to Croneberger's church to meet him. They married, 
he adopted her daughters and they had a son and another daughter. 
For a long time, Croneberger supported equal rights for all parishioners 
but did not support ordination of gay priests. Then his son announced 
that he was gay. ``It wasn't until I was faced with my own family 
situation,'' he said, ``that I went back to look at that issue again.'' 
Croneberger now supports the ordination of gay priests. He and his 
wife have been active for several years in a group of parents with 
gay children. Both their son and their youngest daughter, who is a 
lesbian, are in committed relationships. ``Putting it all together, 
I came to a better place,'' Croneberger said. ``I can claim to be 
a person of faith. The Bible has some misunderstandings about homosexuality.'' 
</TEXT>
</DOC>