<DOC>
<DOCNO> PRI19981120.2000.1184 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
It's Friday, the day that we ask foreign journalists in the United 
States how they are covering the news for their readers back home. 
Well, today we turn to Natalie Matayem of Belgium's Le Soir newspaper 
and Rich McCanda, the Washington bureau chief for the independent 
newspapers in South Africa. Three voices, as you probably know, stood 
out in this week's news and let's take a listen to them now. And the 
first time I ever looked into his eyes close up and was with him alone, 
I saw somebody totally different than I had expected to see. The President 
again took an oath to tell the truth, the whole truth and nothing 
but the truth. The evidence demonstrates that the president failed 
to adhere to that oath. Big doings today in Mickey's Toon Town. Well, 
from Monica to Mickey, the three voices and the characters behind 
them are on our agenda for today and we will save the mouse for later. 
But let's start off first, who showed up most prominently in the headlines 
this week. I would say probably today it is Ken Starr with our headline 
being in French La dena selve to Ken Starr which means basically the 
last salvo of Ken Starr. And Rich. Yes indeed it is the beginning 
of the impeachment hearings and three of my news people actually led 
with the story, Americans go Starr gazing. And this all of course 
concerns the fact that history was made this week. Yesterday, as the 
special prosecutor Kenneth Starr testified before the Judiciary Committee 
which is a crucial phase obviously of the impeachment inquiry. Rich, 
you were there in the room with Judge Starr so you had a first hand 
look at the proceedings. How have you described for your readers what 
transpired yesterday? What aspects are they most interested in? Yesterday 
it was quite clear, just the way the Democrats started to actually 
shift the whole focus into the fact that this is sex and sex and nothing 
else and the way the Republicans began to say, well, this is very 
serious. I mean it's a confirmation of what we've been hearing during 
the week. Nothing new but the most important thing was that at least 
we had the special prosecutor defending his case. And Natalie, I wonder 
about for you. We have heard as this whole issue has unfolded, how 
much Europeans basically did not care what was happening. I wondering 
if what's happened this week changed the amount of interest among 
your readers in Belgium. Well, you may have noted that our headline 
had sort of a tone of wishful thinking there, hoping this would be 
the last we'd hear of it. But with this last effort on the hill, I 
guess you know, it was a last chance to try and go past maybe to somewhat 
tempting judgmental calls we've been making about those silly Americans 
and their impeachment over sex and try to explain one last time how 
people can't possibly in this country see it as a normal legal proceeding. 
But I'm afraid our readers are pretty much fed up with it. Well then 
I wonder how much interest there was for both of you and your readers 
in terms of Monica Lewinsky and the fact that Monica talks as we heard 
this week. We heard her voice for the first time in private phone 
conversations that were played as you know, on television, radio and 
on the Internet. How did you describe Miss Lewinsky's voice for your 
readers and how did you portray her? Natalie. We figured it could 
not be in the paper. It had to be somehow, somewhere in the paper, 
but we didn't think it deserved a lot of space and a lot of serious 
consideration. So we did a sort of a lighter piece saying, Monica, 
the voice of the scandal. She actually talks. She doesn't sound that 
silly and she's actually parlayed her troubled into a nice book deal, 
wonderful interview probably with Barbara Walters who's you know, 
sort of the confessional to the stars and contrast that with Paula 
Jones, who's going to be talking to Rosanne and doesn't seem like 
she's going to get that hot a book deal. I must say about Monica. 
South Africans are surprised like I think all other countries are 
about the amount of money and energy that is spent on investigating 
this kind of thing. So for entertainment sake yes. Some South Africans 
would like to hear about it, but many are saying this is just a waste 
of money and time, particularly South Africans who are struggling 
to make ends meet. But the bottom line is the same. Leave the guy 
alone. Everyone does it. Let him govern the country. America is the 
role model of the world. The best trading partner now with South Africa. 
So they still support it. Someone once said as you probably know that 
more people know the name of Mickey Mouse than know who the president 
of the United States is or was when they asked the question. And I 
wonder if you were among those international reporters who were interested 
in the fact that the Disney symbol of American culture turned 70 years 
old this week. We've got to say how well Mickey ages in fact. What 
does Mickey say about America to people abroad, in Europe or in Africa? 
I think it's more fun and the lighter is part of America and the fact 
that there is time for politics and Monica and Clinton and then to 
look at the other side of America. So I would say yes, Mickey had 
this already sort of a nostalgic value about him. At this point, he 
is certainly not the most crass thing we get from American culture 
in Europe. He's actually refreshing as opposed to some of the other 
stuff we get. I also come from Belgium which is a culture of comic 
strip. It's a big deal in Belgium. So Mickey has a good start right 
there. So I think at this point it is the aspect of American culture 
that people would find less offensive and the whole Disney thing actually 
is huge. I mean the current stuff is still, as big with the kids as 
it was 10 or 20 years ago. So. Well, we'd probably say happy birthday 
to Mickey Mouse from the World. Natalie Mayadem of Belgium's Le Soir 
newspaper. Rich McCanda of the independent newspapers in South Africa. 
Thanks again. We appreciate it. Thank you. Thank you Well cheerio. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>