<DOC>
<DOCNO> PRI19981120.2000.0867 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
The world moved closer to an international space station today when 
the first module was launched from the Bicanor space base in Kazakstan. 
Quite a change from the old days when the site housed Soviet missiles 
targeted at the United States. Today's Russian built and U.S. funded 
rocket was hailed as a symbol of new age of cooperation. The World's 
Clark Boyd has our story. In both Russian and English it was all systems 
go today at the launch site in Kazakstan, where representatives from 
16 participating nations watched the first piece of the international 
space station fly into orbit. The blast off of the Zaria control module 
is the first of 45 scheduled launches that will be needed to complete 
the international space station, a projected six-year, $40 billion 
project. When the space station is completed in 2004, it will encompass 
an area equal to two football fields and will house modules, labs 
and living quarters for seven astronauts, all humming along 220 miles 
above the earth. NASA program manager David Brinkley said today's 
launch marks a new beginning in international cooperation. With the 
launch of Zaria, we've began a new millennium, a new century, a new 
opportunity for human space exploration. Brinkley's vision of a new 
future was shared by Russian counterpart Maxim Terashenko of the Moscow 
Institute of Physics and Technology. People from many countries will 
live and work together and it will be a prototype of what science 
fiction writers dreamed about for decades. First international city 
in space. That talk of an orbiting global village is, politically 
speaking, a far cry from the space race rhetoric of the '60s and '70s. 
But Cold War animosity hasn't completely thawed. Russian cosmonaut 
and Mir space station veteran Pavel Vinagratov today questioned the 
decision to allow an American to be the station's first commander 
in the year 2000 instead of a more experienced Russian. It's nonsense 
that the commander of a passenger airline crew is someone who has 
10 times less flying time than his crew mates. Unfortunately, politicians 
often use pilot and cosmonautics for purposes which have nothing to 
do with cosmonautics. There is no doubt that politics will continue 
to play a role in space exploration. But University of Maryland physics 
professor Bob Parks questions whether the station will give enough 
scientific bang for the buck. It is certainly not a scientific project. 
The science that will be done on the space station, certainly there 
is some, but it doesn't begin to justify the kind of expenditure that's 
involved. But some say that the international space station should 
be considered only a first step and well worth the money. Charles 
Vick is with the Federation of American Scientists. There has been 
a suggested deadline of I think 2019 for starting a lunar base. In 
fact there's very serious discussion both in Europe, Japan and the 
United States of, after a space station is once running, where do 
we go from there. And I think once you've demonstrated a couple of 
years of operation without failure of systems, you're really ready 
to move onto that next leg. And the next leg says Vick will include 
even more countries. For example, China and India will want to be 
included in the funding, design and building of future stations. And 
if all this is beginning to sound a bit like Star Trek with all nations 
on earth coming together to explore space like one big happy family, 
Vick says, that's fine. But there are more earthly benefits to this 
venture. The more mundane down to reality thing is the fact that we 
are employing people, especially in Russia. The fact that we're employing 
those in Russia means that they're not in North Korea or Iran or Iraq, 
producing missiles and helping them build strategic weapons that could 
be of danger to everybody. The United States is determined to make 
the international space station a reality. In fact, the U.S. is footing 
more than half of the project's cost. But with 44 more launches to 
go, not to mention over 1000 hours of space walks needed to actually 
build the station, you can expect the price to rise faster than a 
speeding rocket. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>