<DOC>
<DOCNO> PRI19981120.2000.0375 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
U.S. Secretary of State Madelaine Albright today expressed approval 
of the way the Wye River peace accord between Israel and the Palestinians 
is being carried out. The reaction on the west bank was less restrained. 
Palestinians held raucous celebrations as Israel pulled back from 
occupied land for the first time since January of 1997. It was a major 
step in the Wye accord, which commits Israel to cede 13 percent of 
the west bank in return for a Palestinian crackdown on anti-Israeli 
violence. In a moment, one of the architects of the Oslo peace process 
explains the significance of today's pull back. But first we go to 
the scene for this report from the World's Richard Myron. It was a 
striking image after more than a year and a half of political stalemate. 
Israeli soldiers and Palestinian policemen pouring over a map, discussing 
the final details of the Israeli withdrawal from the stretch of territory 
in the west bank. After the map was made to correspond with the reality 
on the ground, control of 28 towns and villages along with surrounding 
countryside was handed over to the Palestinian authority. After more 
than 30 years of Israeli rule, Palestinians celebrated noisily, waving 
flags, displaying pictures of their leader Yassar Arafat and shooting 
into the air. In the Palestinian village of Silet al afer, the mayor 
welcomed the beginning of a new era. I am very, very happy because 
when I feel I am liber, I am independent now. I am very, very happy. 
This is the step and the first step. But the day wasn't joyful for 
all Palestinians. An elderly woman cried hysterically as she discovered 
that her son wasn't among the Palestinian prisoners released from 
Israeli jails as part of the Wye agreement. Most were criminals and 
not as expected political detainees. Sayeb Araket, the chief Palestinian 
negotiator, said that it marred what would otherwise had been a happy 
day. We had thought that 250 political prisoners would be released 
today. Unfortunately, the Israeli government in a way spoiled this 
day for us and too many families. I think the road ahead of us is 
a difficult one. Next week we'll resume the negotiations. And the 
major issues of Jewish settlements, borders, refugees and how the 
Israeli government will decide to give the peace process a chance 
and would refrain from unilateral acts like settlements and and confiscation 
of lands. Children played boisterously in their kindergarten in the 
Jewish settlement of Ganim. The settlement now sits almost surrounded 
by Palestinian controlled territory. 150 Israelis live in this hilltop 
community and many are now considering whether they should stay in 
Ganim or leave. There's some people that are afraid and want to leave. 
It causes a lot of stress and a lot of fear. There's others of us 
that don't want to leave. I don't want to leave at all. Most Israeli's 
welcome today's withdrawal. Few wish to control the lives of the more 
than 1 1/2 million Palestinians on the west bank. But within Israel's 
Cabinet, only seven out of 17 Cabinet ministers back the withdrawal. 
Adelstein voted against it. It's a very difficult day for most of 
the Israelis, never mind what their political views are. It would 
have been easier for me to live through a day like that, if I would 
be more sure that the Wye agreement and the steps we're taking as 
now, really are bringing us closer to peace. I think that the dangerous 
potential is that if some smallest details are left unattended in 
the agreement, then instead of bringing us closer to peace, these 
steps could, God forbid, bring us to, closer to a disaster. Today's 
withdrawal sets in motion a process that if all goes as planned will 
end with the Palestinian authority controlling 40 percent of the west 
bank. Then again, all rarely goes as planned here. For the World, 
this is Richard Myron, in the west bank. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>