<DOC>
<DOCNO> PRI19981120.2000.0621 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
In 1990, Norwegian diplomat Mona Ule and her husband were visiting 
the Gaza Strip when they found themselves in the middle of an Intafada 
skirmish. Instead of being overwhelmed by the animosity that kept 
the two sides apart, they decided to use their neutrality and their 
talents to bring the two sides together and they did. Their efforts 
led directly to the Oslo peace process which they continue to assist. 
Mona Ule, thank you very much first of all for joining us. From your 
own perspective, how significant do you see today's Israeli hand over 
of the territory in the west bank? I think it's very significant, 
especially because there is another government in Israel that the 
one that made the deal in '93 and we are very happy about the fact 
that also the current Israeli government now has sort of applied to 
the main and the most important aspect of the Oslo process, namely 
the further redeployment from the west bank. And in terms of that, 
Benjamin Netanyahu who you just mentioned was not in power in '93. 
How do you actually go about bringing two seemingly intractable enemies 
such as Netanyahu and Ararat together. What kind of approach do you 
take that might be different than what you took at Oslo? We are still 
faced with the same sort of problem that initially the two sides had 
a lot of prejudice, a lot of sort of enemy picture of each other and 
we have experienced from the very beginning that the minute they get 
together that they sit down and talk, they realize that they have 
a lot also to, common interest and common ground. They have to sort 
of to try and to see if there are ways of bridging gaps by starting 
with, not with the most difficult things, not to start with the political 
differences, but maybe to come together and just talk about their 
lives, their families. I mean we are all human being and there are 
common grounds in every man and woman. They have to experience from 
themselves and it's really puzzling to come to a region where people 
live so closely together at the same time they so seldom meet and 
they have so many many wrong pictures of each other. And let me push 
you a little bit personally on this. I wonder how it came to you have 
such a long period of animosity between these two sides, how it came 
to you that you in part could contribute to the solution to it. Of 
course we, I mean we don't mind, I mean getting credit for what we 
have been doing, but I certainly, I thought that that time and I still 
think of course the main credit rests with the parties themselves 
and if they are not willing, I don't think anybody can push them to 
do anything. I want to just finish up with one other question for 
you that's a personal one. I understand that your own involvement 
in this peace process has had a personal cost to you. Yeah, it's of 
course, it has been strainful in the sense that we have sort of been 
living with the process for many years and as long as you get so much 
involved. I mean, you get very strong emotional attachments to both 
sides and to the people involved on both sides and of course then 
when things happen, just to mention, I mean, the murder of Itzak Rabin, 
the horrible wave of terrorist attacks that happened leading up to 
the election in Israel. I mean it really gets at you also on an emotional 
basis, I mean being so much involved. But I think we have managed 
to deep down to keep the conviction that this is the only way to move 
forward, although it sometimes, it has been very difficult, I must 
admit. Ms. Ule, thank you very much for speaking with us. We appreciate 
it. Not at all. Mona Ule is middle east coordinator for the Norwegian 
foreign ministry. She is also one of the architects of the Oslo peace 
process from 1993. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>