<DOC>
<DOCNO> VOA19981120.0500.2271 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
UN weapons inspectors are back in Iraq after the threat of U.S. military 
action forced Baghdad to back down averting another crisis. The inspectors 
so far have reported no problems Thursday after a series of visits 
to sites around Baghdad. VOA's Andre Deneshner spoke with the chief 
UN inspector, Richard Butler about the current situation. Andre Deneshner 
files this report. Richard Butler says the first order of business 
is for inspectors to check all the monitoring systems they left behind 
when they were ordered out of Iraq more than a week ago. When we are 
out of the country, of course, all that remained was some remote sensing 
instruments. They have to go out to the large number of sites we monitor 
and see what happened while they were away and make sure the equipment 
is working and commence the business of human visits. Visits by inspectors 
to those sites. The chief UN weapons inspector believes the actual 
inspection of sites suspected to contain illicit weapons and their 
components could begin in a week or two. Mr. Butler says the United 
Nations' special commission known as ONSCOM, wants Iraq to address 
a series of still unresolved issues. These include an accounting of 
missing warheads and what they contained, as well as the extent of 
Iraq's chemical weapons program. But Mr. Butler says the biggest unresolved 
issue is the one dealing with Iraq's suspected biological weapons 
arsenal. He says he has just written to Iraqi Deputy Prime Minister, 
Tariq Aziz, seeking a new updated declaration replacing the current 
one. Because, you see, that declaration has been reviewed four times 
now by international experts in the last 18 months and on each occasion, 
those experts said unanimously that Iraq's declaration is not credible 
and it is the most difficult area for us. We need a lot more truth 
with respect to their biological weapons program. The Iraqi government 
avoided a U.S. military strike after agreeing to cooperate fully with 
UN inspectors. In other words, allowing them unhindered access anywhere 
they want to go. This is not the first time Iraq has said it would 
cooperate with UN inspectors but Mr. Butler hopes, this time it is 
genuine. I would like to think that Iraq does now recognize the seriousness 
of the circumstances in which it found itself at the end of last week 
and over the weekend and therefore, did not make this promise to cooperate 
lightly. The senior UN weapons inspector says Iraq has a great incentive 
to cooperate with his monitors. Oh, it has an enormous incentive, 
I think, if Saddam would see it that way. Namely, the lifting of sanctions 
because, you see, the sanctions are tied to disarmament. The moment 
that I can report to the council that we have a full account of their 
prohibited weapons, then the sanctions would be lifted if the council 
is satisfied. And that is what the law says, so I would like to think 
that the incentive they have is the welfare of their people. Senior 
UN weapons inspector, Richard Butler says he realizes his inspectors 
are working under a lot of pressure. He says the world wants the Iraqi 
problems solved without having to confront a new crisis every few 
months. Mr. Butler says if Iraq abides by its promise to cooperate 
fully, then the whole issue of Baghdad's weapons of mass destruction 
can be dealt with effectively and quickly. Andre Deneshner of VOA 
News, Washington. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>