<DOC>
<DOCNO> VOA19981120.0500.1368 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
And it is 10 hours, 23 Universal time. More than 3,500 prison inmates 
in the United States are awaiting execution for their crimes. Nearly 
500 people have been executed in the last 22 years in this country. 
Recently, in Chicago, death penalty opponents brought together people 
who say they were wrongfully convicted and sentenced to death to have 
their sentences overturned before execution. Opponents say this proves 
the death penalty should be repealed. More from VOA's Michael Leeland. 
To the sound of a drum beat 30 of the former death row inmates walked 
on stage at Northwestern University in Chicago to briefly tell their 
stories. My name is Freddie Bitz. The state of Florida sought to kill 
me for a murder that I did not commit. I was sentenced to death in 
1963 and was released in 1975. If the state of Florida had gotten 
its way, I would be dead today. The National conference on wrongful 
convictions and the death penalty drew more than a thousand lawyers, 
law students, professors, and death penalty opponents. Northwestern 
University law professor and conference organizer, Lawrence Marshall, 
says death penalty laws in the United States need reforming to be 
sure no innocent person will be executed. He believes that 75 inmates 
freed from death row since 1976 are just a small portion of the number 
who should be. My belief is that there are hundreds and hundreds of 
people on death row today who did not commit the crimes for which 
they were convicted and sentenced to death. I have no doubt about 
it. The vice president of Justice for All, a victim's rights group 
based in Texas, says there is no proof that an innocent person has 
been executed in the United States this century. And Dudley Sharp 
says he is happy to see the wrongfully accused walk free. All of us, 
probably more so the pro-death penalty-people than anyone, are extremely 
happy that these people who were innocent have been released. Because 
the worst thing that could happen for anybody be they anti-death penalty, 
pro-death penalty, or neutral on the subject, which is hard to find. 
No one wants an innocent person number one to be sentenced to death 
and God forbid nobody wants them to be executed. The 75 inmates were 
freed from death row primarily because of evidence of their innocence 
or doubts about the cases against them. Mr. Sharp doubts all of them 
were innocent, but even if they are. He says the fact that they are 
no long on death row proves the justice system works. That proves 
that over 26 years, to 1973, nearly 99 percent of all of the convictions 
have been good convictions of guilty people and the one percent who 
turned out to be wrongfully convicted. All of those people were released. 
But Lawrence Marshall of Northwestern University says being released 
from death row is often a matter of luck. These people are not alive 
because the system works. They are alive because they were the lucky 
few who survived long enough to still be alive to not yet have been 
executed when the evidence of their innocence happened to emerge through 
sheer luck. That is the story of these cases. Nationwide polls suggest 
there is no softening of support for the death penalty in the United 
States. The death penalty is on the law books in 38 U.S. states and 
lawmakers at the state and federal levels in recent years have taken 
steps to speed up the appeal process. Shortening the amount to time 
between a death sentence and execution. Death penalty opponents fear 
this could increase the likelihood of an innocent person being put 
to death but Dudley sharp of Justice for All says a far greater problem 
in the United States is what he says are the thousands of innocent 
citizens killed each year by inmates on probation or parole. If the 
basis for getting rid for the death penalty is the probability of 
someone and innocent being executed, one might ask why was not this 
conference about the wrongfully released? Mr. Marshall of Northwestern 
University says he hopes too open a national dialogue on reforming 
the death penalty, but Mr. Sharp says the message of the conference 
appears to be just another in a series of arguments opponents use 
to call for the abolition of capital punishment. Michael Leeland, 
VOA News, Chicago. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>