<DOC>
<DOCNO> VOA19981120.1600.1355 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
The U.S. State of Texas is known for its wide open spaces. In West 
Texas, the land is poor, dry, sandy and full of scrub trees. It is 
not that good for much, except for raising cattle. So Texans raise 
millions of them. And to make sure the ownership of each animal is 
clear, they brand calves much as they did a century ago. VOA's Ted 
Lanfare was on Hand for the branding ritual on a Texas Ranch. Perhaps 
you have heard this theme for an American television show. A western 
from the 1960s. Clint Eastwood played cowhand, Rowdy Yeates, in the 
program Rawhide, which glamorized the life of the cowboy. But the 
rope, throw and brand 'em part of a cowboy's responsibility is hardly 
glamorous, as I found out when I stopped by the Ratliff Cattle Ranch 
outside the City of San Marcos in West Texas. It happened to be one 
of the two days each year that the cowhands rope, throw and brand 
about 250 very unhappy calves. What you are hearing are mostly older 
cows hollering because the cowboys have separated them from their 
calves which have been herded together into a pen. Now that is frightening 
enough for these young animals. But, what is in store will make for 
one of the worst days in their short lives. I say short, because about 
a year and a half from now, when they are fat and sassy, 450 kilos 
or so, just about all the males and some of the females, too, will 
be sides of beef hanging in a processing plant. A few males and most 
of the females will live on as breeding stock for future generations 
of beef on the hoof. But back to this branding. The first job is getting 
the branding iron hot. Not in a crackling fire, but by heating the 
iron with a butane torch. It is cleaner and easier. Remember, there 
is not much wood to waste on fires in West Texas. When the iron is 
ready, a cowboy opens the gate into a big ring and a single calf is 
driven out. No sooner does he think he is off for a romp in the open, 
then a skilled roper flicks out his lasso and somehow, do not ask 
me how, catches one or both of the calf's hind feet. Now that brings 
him to an abrupt halt and puts the first glint of terror into his 
eyes. Then two other cowboys rush up and toss the unfortunate calf 
onto his side onto the ground while a third ties a second rope around 
his front hooves. Before the calf knows it, he is being dragged on 
his side to the cowboy with the branding iron, strung between two 
ropes so he cannot kick anyone. Jack Turner is one of the cowhands 
at the Ratliff Ranch. He says the reason for branding is simple. Used 
to people would steal them and they still do sometimes. MX is the 
brand of this Ratliff Ranch. So that would be recognizable anywhere 
in the country. You could trace it. Yes, sir. That is right. Now the 
idea of burning the identifying mark of an owner like the Ratliff's 
MX brand into the hide of cattle is an ancient one. Egyptians were 
branding oxen on the rump as early as 2,000 BC. Slaughter houses carefully 
check brands, but a clever thief can alter one to look like something 
else. A one for example, can be made to look like a seven. Let us 
go back to the branding ring and our miserable calf. One person flanks 
him and the other one holds his head down and do all the branding 
and the process goes on. Why do you need so many cowboys? Well it 
takes one to brand, one to vaccinate, one to clip the ears and mark 
them and castrate them. All in less than a minute. The ears are clipped 
as one more way to mark the calves as your property. The males are 
castrated so that they will grow up gentler with their minds on getting 
fat and tasty. The last procedure is a huge injection of vitamins 
and antibiotics. By the way, the branding iron is not red hot the 
way you see in movies. It has to be hot enough to leave a permanent 
mark on the calves' tough hide, but if it is too hot, it can leave 
an open sore that will get infected. All in all, this is a very bad 
day on a calf's calendar and not a great day for the squeamish visitor. 
For the cowhand it is just another day on the job. A day to rope, 
row, and brand them. I am Ted Lanfare. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>