<DOC>
<DOCNO> VOA19981120.0500.1988 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
The judiciary committee of the U.S. House of Representatives has completed 
its first day of impeachment hearings. The opening session featured 
just one witness, independent counsel, Kenneth Starr. VOA's Paula 
Wolfson reports Mr. Starr defended his investigation of President 
Clinton. It was a long and historic day in the judiciary committee 
room. And the most dramatic moments came at the end. Long after the 
evening news on television, after most Americans had tuned out the 
hearings, the president's lawyer finally got a chance to question 
Kenneth Starr. David Kendall turned the hearing room into courtroom. 
Attacking the work of the independent counsel. Nothing in this overkill 
of investigation amounts to a justification or the impeachment of 
the President of the United States. Kenneth Starr looked tired and 
frustrated after more than 10 hours at the witness table. Under questioning, 
he admitted he was never present when Monica Lewinski testified in 
the case. I have not had occasion to meet or otherwise to look her 
in the eye myself. Earlier, Mr. Starr accused the president of lying 
under oath. And obstructing the legal process in an effort to conceal 
his affair with Ms. Lewinski. He offered a strong defense of the report 
he submitted to congress in September and the work of his investigative 
team. This reflects just so the committee knows the views of some 
of the most experienced prosecutors in the country. I stand behind 
it because it is mine. I stand behind each word of it. Republicans 
like Florida's Bill McCollum, stood behind Kenneth Starr. I heard 
you describe this morning a compelling picture of President Clinton. 
A compelling picture of him acting in a cold, calculated, methodical, 
well thought out, method or scheme, if you will, to lie under oath 
to commit perjury, if you will, with regard to his involvement with 
Ms. Lewinski. Democrats on the Committee, in a prelude to David Kendall. 
Focus not on Mr. Starr's findings, but his methods. New Jersey's, 
Steve Rothman said important information was left out of the independent 
counsel's report. You dismissed and did not even quote Monica Lewinski's 
statement to the grand jury when she said, "no one ever asked me to 
lie, and I was never promised a job for my silence." The day was a 
mix of loci rhetoric, political bickering, and plenty of legal jargon. 
It was dramatic, but just a bit surreal. Few people believe Congress 
will ever vote to remove the president from office. As one committee 
member put it, you cannot impeach a president without public outrage. 
And that outrage just is not there. Paula Wolfson, VOA News, Capital 
Hill. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>