<DOC>
<DOCNO> VOA19981120.1600.2147 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
And I am Victor Morales along with Erin Brummet, bringing you this 
half-hour of VOA News Now. Doctors in the United States have noticed 
a growing trend among their patients to seek out so-called alternative 
or nonwestern medical treatments. Sometimes the reason is the high 
cost of traditional medicine here in the U.S. But increasingly, patients 
are turning to nontraditional remedies when modern medicine fails 
to help. Old remedies are new again is the subject of today's Dateline. 
Here is Pamela Taylor. The prestigious Journal of the American Medical 
Association reports that last year, four out of ten Americans made 
use of such non standard treatments as acupuncture, homeopathy, herbal 
medicine, spiritual healing and relaxation therapy. In a seven year 
period ending in 1997, the report found visits by Americans to alternative 
treatment practitioners up by nearly 50 percent. Such methods are 
most frequently used for back and neck pain, anxiety, arthritis, and 
headaches. Conditions that are often resistant to standard drug therapy. 
But the door to alternative medicines was also opened by Americans 
suffering from Cancer or other chronic disorders that traditional 
Western medicine did not help in every case. According to the author 
of the study, David Eisenberg, of Boston's Beth Israel Decanes Medical 
Center, another reason is generational. This is the so-called baby 
boom generation. Where one in two in this group, age 30-49 or actually, 
to expand the data, about 30-50, using alternative therapy now. Higher 
income, higher education predicting higher use of alternative therapy. 
David Eisenberg estimates that last year, Americans paid more than 
$21 billion for alternative medical services. Most of which, was not 
covered by insurance. Many so-called new alternative remedies have 
been used for centuries by other cultures in Asia, Africa, and Europe 
and are not considered alternative there. And until the beginning 
of this century, such treatments were also standard practice in the 
United States. But U.S. medical circles soon adopted the view that 
technology, pharmacology, and surgery were the wave of the future. 
And homeopathic and herbal remedies quickly fell out of favor. Since 
then, Americans have tended to ignore developments in other countries, 
says James Gordon, a clinical professor of psychiatry at Georgetown 
University in Washington. Other cultures have developed very kind 
of wonderful ways of looking at the world and of understanding the 
world and of treating illness. And we have kind of dismissed them 
as simply as folk beliefs. And it has really only been in the last 
25 years when we have begun to see that our treatments, although immensely 
powerful, for example, surgical interventions, or treatment of overwhelming 
infection, or treatment of some congenital problems like, when there 
are holes in the hearts of babies. We are brilliant at doing those 
things, but in the last 25 years, it has become clear that we not 
so good at treating chronic illnesses. So we begun to open ourselves 
up. James Gordon founded the Center for Body and Mind Medicine in 
Washington 7 years ago. At the Center, medical professionals study 
how to include in their traditional practice such methods as relaxation, 
meditation, nutritional and herbal supplements. One indication alternative 
medicine is gaining in acceptance in the United States is that the 
National Institutes of Health in Bethesda, Maryland now sponsors research 
in acupuncture, Chinese herbal medicine, macrobiotic diet, yoga and 
massage therapy. Nevertheless, such alternatives continue to be frowned 
upon by mainstream U.S. medicine. The powerful American Medical Association 
has warned that the use of alternative medication is unregulated. 
And raises the possibility of dangerous interactions in patients using 
both drugs and herbal remedies. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>