<DOC>
<DOCNO> VOA19981120.1600.0358 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
When President Clinton said this week that Saddam Hussein should be 
removed from office, triggering rebukes from Baghdad, British Prime 
Minister Tony Blair, agreed. On Monday, Mr. Blair will take another 
step toward that goal when Britain's Foreign Office hosts a meeting 
of Iraqi opposition groups to lend British support the struggle to 
change the Baghdad government. We have more from Lauri Casman in London. 
A spokesman for the Foreign Office says 15 groups have been invited 
to send representatives to the meeting, which will take place Monday 
in London. Britain has held similar meetings during the past two years. 
But Nebia Masawi of the Iraqi National Congress, says this one takes 
on added importance in the wake of Saddam Hussein's latest confrontation 
with the United Nations. Mr. Musawi is representing the INC at the 
meeting. This one is different, basically in light of the statement 
made by the British Prime Minister Mr. Tony Blair and parliament regarding 
British intention of helping, as he called it, the forces of democratic 
change in Iraq. And ways, to discuss ways, in which the British government 
can help the Iraqi opposition to advance its cause. Plus, the fact 
that the United States government has already stated its position 
that it intends to fully support the Iraqi National Congress, politically 
to carry out the change inside Iraq. Mr. Masawi says the high level 
U.S. and British statements are the clearest signs of support for 
efforts to oust Saddam Hussein, since the end of the Gulf War. He 
points to the U.S. congressional approval for nearly $100 million 
in aid and he hopes for pledges of more practical assistance from 
Britain, too. We are not talking about the allies getting in a military 
engagement with the Iraqi regime. This is our duty as Iraqis to get 
rid of Saddam Hussein. We need the support from behind. We need the 
gentle push in the sense that diplomatic support, we need to, the 
support of Britain and the United States to de-legitimize the regime 
of Saddam Hussein and to help the opposition gain credibility internationally 
and to gain strength to work inside Iraq. Mr. Masawi dismisses criticism 
of the opposition as a fractured movement that lacks coordination, 
organization, and clear aims. The Iraqi opposition is definitely united 
and its ultimate aim, which is to get rid of Saddam Hussein and his 
regime, to establish a democratic regime in Iraq, to hold elections 
to ease the suffering of the Iraqi people. As far as differences in 
ideology is concerned, it has always existed between Iraqi political 
parties and the opposition just like it exists between the democrats 
and the republicans in the United States and labor and conservatives 
in Britain. The Iraqi dissident says the different Kurdish, Shiite, 
and Sunni Muslim opposition movements will be represented at the meeting 
on Monday. Lauri Cassman, VOA News, London. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>