<DOC>
<DOCNO> VOA19981120.0500.0348 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
I am Charlene Porter along with Paul Westfieling. You are tuned to 
VOA News Now from Washington. The first section of the long planned 
international space station has been successfully placed in orbit, 
after lift-off from the Russian launch site in Kazakstan. The Russian 
space station module Zadia, which means sunrise, was launched atop 
a Russian booster rocket early today. Ten minutes later, ground control 
announced the capsule had separated from the rocket and was in orbit. 
VOA science editor, David MacElary, says the module will form the 
core of the space station to be completed by the year 2004. It is 
the anchor for the rest of the station. Think about it. It is sort 
of the foundation, the cornerstone upon which the station will be 
built. It is going to have initial control and power supply for the 
next modules that come up. As I mentioned earlier, the next module 
is the unity module, which goes up in early December just a few weeks 
from now, Paul. And then next July, if all goes well, and the Russian 
funding continues. And they get it built, then the second Russian 
module called the service module will go up and that will sort of 
take over command and control from the Zadia. And that will be also 
the habitation module for the first space station crew in the year 
2000. How long will it take for this entire international space station 
to be built or is there any time table at this point? Well, they are 
planning for five years to get it all complete and then it should 
be up at least ten years after that for in orbit research. Once the 
service module is in orbit. That is the habitation module. That is 
going to be home for the space stations crews for a while. Until the 
thing gets bigger and they have other modules and laboratories to 
work in. If that goes up in July '99 as scheduled, then you will see 
human habitation early in 2000. This is an ambitious project. This 
is the dawn of a new era in space exploration. Well, yes, it is ambitious. 
It is said to be the biggest engineering project ever. Certainly the 
biggest international engineering project. Nothing like this has ever 
happened. We had space stations before. The Mir space station of the 
Russian Space Agency is still in orbit. We have, and of course, there 
have been several Russian and Soviet cellular space stations before 
that. We had a space station in the mid 70s called Skylab. But this 
is, this pales everything that has gone before. This is a much bigger- 
This is an enormous project. It is about the, it will be about the 
size of a soccer field in length. About 35 meters long, it will weigh 
450 tons, so it is a mega-project. VOA science correspondent, David 
MacElary. The American space shuttle, Endeavor, will rendezvous with 
Zadia in two weeks' time to deliver a connecting module, the second 
of 100 distinct elements to make up the space station. The two parts 
will be attached during three space walks using a Canadian-made robot 
arm. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>