<DOC>
<DOCNO> VOA19981120.1600.2382 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Another medical phenomenon scientists are studying is the healing 
effect of placebos. Those harmless sugar pills doctors give in blind 
test studies. But in a wider meaning, placebos can also be defined 
as any response to the act of being treated which does not involve 
the use of active drugs. VOA Medical Correspondent, Jessica Burman, 
has more on what is being called the placebo effect. It is an experience 
New York dentist, John Dodes, has had dozens of times in the course 
of his 27 year practice in the burrow of Queens. Over the years, so 
many people have come into my office and as a dentist, we do see a 
lot of people who have toothaches and they routinely say to me, Dr. 
Dodes, I feel better just being here. And that is the truth. They 
actually do feel better. It may be the relaxation of knowing someone 
is going to take care of you. It may be the laying on of hands. The 
fact that there is a human contact. There can be a lot of different 
factors, but certainly, the placebo effect comes into play. Dr. Dodes' 
interest in the placebo effect stems from his work to uncover bogus 
medical practices. He is founder of the National Council Against Health 
Fraud and says dentistry has its share of specialist who make misleading 
or fantastic treatment claims. To illustrate the power of the placebo 
effect, Dr. Dodes points to a recent study published in a theme issue 
of the journal of the American Medical Association on alternative 
medicine. The study involved participants with a type of painful nerve 
damage in their arms and legs known as peripheral neuropathy. The 
condition was caused by infection with a virus that causes Aids. The 
participants were divided into four groups, one group was given a 
mild dose of an antidepressant, amitriptolene, to ease their pain. 
While another group received a placebo sugar pill that they thought 
was real medicine. A third group underwent acupuncture for pain relief 
and the fourth group had sham acupuncture treatments performed on 
them. Only he acupuncturists knew the treatments they gave were bogus. 
Which group got the most pain relief? Again, dentist John Dodes. The 
groups all came out the same. So acupuncture had no effect beyond 
the placebo effect and amatriptolene had no effect beyond the placebo 
effect. So that may change the way we treat chronic pain as well. 
With this drug which is very common. The way ineffective and also 
unsafe drugs and procedures are weeded out is through a process of 
human testing known as clinical trials. In clinical trials, the effectiveness 
of a particular treatment is compared to a placebo. In general, a 
certain number of individuals receiving placebo treatments report 
feeling better. It is not uncommon for 20 percent or more of individuals 
to report improvement. If the percentage of those in the treatment 
group reporting a positive effect is greater than the placebo group, 
investigators conclude the treatment is more effective than placebo. 
Phil Fontannarosa is senior editor of the Journal of the American 
Medical Association. He concedes there is something to the placebo 
effect. It would sure be nice to be able to give people substances 
that we know absolutely have no adverse effects and no cause for harm 
and it can benefit their symptoms and improve their conditions. Unfortunately, 
that is not always the case. In pre-antibiotic days, dentist, John 
Dodes notes healers doled out powders and potions that they knew had 
no medicinal value. Yet the belief by many patients that they were 
being cured actually helped them to become well on their own. Some 
even survived bouts of grave illnesses such as Bubonic Plague and 
Scarlet Fever. To this day, Dr. Dodes says the mind body mechanism 
that underlies the placebo effect remains a mystery. And there is 
research going on on that and the question is can we harness that? 
And even if we do harness it. Is the placebo effect strong enough 
to be of medical consequence? This we just do not know. Dr. Dodes 
believes physicians ought to use the most effective treatments available 
to them, even if those therapies involve nothing more than the laying 
on of hands. But in general, he says, he opposes treating with placebos 
alone. Because if they do not work, it could sour the doctor/patient 
relationship. VOA Medical Correspondent, Jessica Burman. Old Remedies 
are New Again was the subject examined on today's edition of Dateline. 
I am Pamela Taylor. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>