<DOC>
<DOCNO> VOA19981120.1600.0563 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
After an entire generation of living in exile, Ethiopian refugees 
are now leaving their camps in Northern Kenya and returning home. 
Scott Sterns is on the Kenya/Ethiopia border. When Abdihagene Muhammad 
left home more than 20 years ago, it was war. The Ogedan War between 
Ethiopia and Somalia, a Cold War conflict on the horn of Africa. In 
July of 1977, Somali troops crossed the border, capturing the ethnic 
Samali region of Ogedan in, what they said, was a liberation war against 
Ethiopian colonizers. Ethiopia drove back the attack with the help 
of the Soviet Union. Many ethnic Samali left Ethiopia, withdrawing 
alongside the retreating troops back into Somalia. Abdihagene Muhammad 
says he lost everything in the Ogedan War. He and his wife first fled 
to Somalia, then ran again in 1991 along with more than 50,000 Ethiopian 
refugees escaping the fall of dictator Muhammad Seatbari. They ended 
up in camps in northern Kenya. Now, Mr. Muhammad is taking his children 
home to a country they have never seen. For the last seven years, 
we have done nothing in Kenya, Mr. Muhammad says. It is better that 
we go home and make our own lives and stop waiting for people to feed 
us. Mr. Muhammad says he still has three brothers in Ethiopia where 
he will help run the family farm. The first thing is to buy some goats, 
he says. Made easier by the $60 he is getting as part of a United 
Nations repatriation program. Mr. Muhammad and his family are among 
more than 5,000 Ethiopians expected to return home over the next few 
months. Each person gets cash and nine months of food including cereal 
and cooking oil. Abdullah See Casalah says she has come back to Ethiopia 
in search of a better life for ten month-old baby Amar. Ms. Casalah 
says there will be better health and education here. I can start a 
small business. It is a better life to be home, she says. A place 
where there is more peace. Unlike the violence they fled 20 years 
ago, the Ogedan region has been pretty calm lately, in part, because 
of the collapse of central authority in Somalia. Ethiopia is taking 
advantage by using rival Samali factions to check Ogedani nationalists 
and the paramilitary group, Elitehad Alislamia. Collin Asari is the 
head of the UN refugee office in Dedob, he says people are leaving 
now, chiefly because it is safer in Ethiopia. We believe that it is 
because the refugees have a perception that there is more security 
and peace in the home area now than before. They have news from back 
home that everything is all right and so they are convinced that they 
can go back potentially to the Samali areas of Ethiopia. Ethiopian 
refugees fly from Dedob to the border town of Moyali, where they cross 
into Ethiopia and for most people on to relatives in the South. Muhammad 
Ishmael works for the UN Refugee Agency in Moyali. He says the readjustment 
process has been smooth so far. Sometimes we go to the villages and 
see them how they are doing. And so far, not a problem. Relief officials 
expect to have the first group of over 2,000 people home to areas 
around Moyali by mid-December. A second group of more than 2,500 refugees 
will be returned to the Ethiopian areas of Godane and Jujiya early 
next year. Scott Sterns, VOA News, Moyali. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>