<DOC>
<DOCNO> VOA19981120.0500.3215 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
American singer and actress, Cher, has been familiar to fans around 
the world since the mid 1960s with her former partner, the late Sony 
Bono. She had several hit songs and a popular television program. 
On her own, Cher has produced million selling albums as well as an 
academy award winning film career. Now, as VOA's Bernie Bernard reports, 
Cher is still an awful busy lady with new music and film projects 
and a new book about special moments in her life. After more than 
three decades as an entertainer, Cher is still unpredictable. Her 
new album, Believe, shows her prowess and experience as a dance music 
diva. And she has written a book entitled The First Time, a collection 
of vignettes about her personal first time experiences. She will also 
be featured in two upcoming films, Tea with Mussolini and Breakers. 
Cher says her professional life has been filled with sudden bursts 
of activity. If you look at my career, I am always having these like 
big spaces and then, all of the sudden, things start to back up on 
each other. I did not plan it like this. I was trying to do one thing 
at a time, but then everything kind of just fell on top of each other 
like dominoes. Fans and Europe have already been raving about Cher's 
latest CD, Believe. Which has topped the charts in England. While 
she was resistant to the idea at first, Cher tells how it took shape 
as a dance-oriented album. I did not really want to do it in the beginning, 
but the head of my record company is so smart and he is so sneaky, 
he said. Let me just send some songs and in the songs were these two 
songs that I fell madly in love with. He said just start with these 
two songs and you will, you know. And then I just kept getting great 
songs and it ended up to be a dance album. Cher's earlier days in 
television are still on cable in reruns of the 1970s Sony and Cher 
show. And now people in their teens and 20s are dancing to Cher's 
latest album at clubs and discos. At age 52, Cher is pleased that 
her musical appeal extends to a new generation. It is weird, it is 
like the Sony and Cher show, and the Cher show. It has a huge young 
following. It has basically the same following that we had when we 
were on which was like it goes from little tiny kids to old grandmothers. 
The release of Cher's album, Believe, coincides with her new book, 
The First Time. Her firm Tea with Mussolini will be released in early 
1999 with Breakers debuting in theaters a few months later. In what 
could be exciting news for her fans, also considering a return to 
the concert state. I am Bernie Bernard. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>