<DOC>
<DOCNO> VOA19981120.1600.0790 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
In the U.S. Congress, the House Judiciary Committee opened its impeachment 
hearings on Thursday with just one witness, independent counsel, Kenneth 
Starr. For months Mr. Starr and his deputies were the ones asking 
the questions in the sex and perjury investigation of President Clinton. 
But on Thursday, it was Mr. Starr's turn to answer the questions. 
National correspondent, Jim Malone, looks at what was a very long 
day for Mr. Starr and his questioners. Lying under oath is at the 
heart of Kenneth Starr's case against the president and, in a twist 
of irony, Mr. Starr's first order of business before the judiciary 
committee was taking an oath administered by chairman Henry Hyde. 
Mr. Starr, do you swear that the testimony you are about to give before 
this committee will be the truth the whole truth and nothing but the 
truth, so help you God. i do. For the next several hours, the independent 
counsel became the star witness for the prosecution. Carefully laying 
out his perjury and obstruction of justice case against the president 
and defending his investigative methods in the process. In short, 
the evidence suggests that the president repeatedly used the machinery 
of government and the powers of his high office to conceal his relationship, 
to conceal the relationship from the American people, from the judicial 
process in the Jones case, and from the Grand Jury. Democrats did 
their best to verbally rough him up. But for the most part, Mr. Starr 
patiently answered their questions and deflected their criticisms. 
Among other things, democrats wanted to know how Mr. Starr's probe 
shifted from the White Water land deal in Arkansas to Monica Lewinski. 
And whether Mr. Starr's office improperly pressured the former White 
House intern into cooperating in the sex and perjury investigation 
of the President. There were a few heated exchanges including this 
one between Mr. Starr and Democratic Congressman Robert Wexler of 
South Caroline. Did your agents or did they not threaten Ms. Lewinski 
with 27 years in Prison? It is either yes or no. Not the legality. 
I do not-I know what Ms. Lewinski has said. I would have to conduct 
an interview with my agents to know what the position of the office 
is. Republicans were quick to jump to Mr. Starr's defense, showering 
him with praise and drawing him out on details of his investigation, 
which support his main contentions that the president lied under oath. 
And misused the office of the president by trying to cover up his 
affair with Monica Lewinski. North Caroline republican Howard Coble 
was among those who spoke out in Mr. Starr's defense. Judge Starr, 
if one-half of the unfavorable comments leveled at you are true, you 
probably should be keelhauled. I am inclined to dismiss most of them, 
as evidenced by your demeanor today. I think most of that trashing 
was probably just that. Trashing. But over the months that trashing, 
in the words of congressman Coble, has taken a toll on Kenneth Starr's 
image. Public opinion polls continue to indicate that most Americans 
take a dim view of him personally and of his investigation. Mr. Starr 
seemed to have that in mind as he closed out his prepared testimony 
before the Judiciary Committee. My experience is in the law and in 
the courts. I am not a man of politics, of public relations, or of 
polls, which I suppose is patently obvious by now. Mr. Chairman, members, 
I revere the law. I am proud of what we have accomplished. We were 
assigned a difficult job, we have done it to the best of our abilities. 
We have tried to be both fair and thorough. Whether Mr. Starr has 
been fair will be for history to judge. What is clear now is that 
Kenneth Starr did all he could Thursday to help his case against the 
President and in doing so, attempted to improve his own standing with 
the American public as well. Jim Malone, VOA News Washington. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>