<DOC>
<DOCNO> VOA19981120.1600.3038 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Temporary placement agencies offer companies the chance to hire workers 
for short periods without having to pay extra benefits or commit to 
long term employment. Those jobs used to low level clerical jobs, 
but now temporary agencies have began concentrating on the upper end 
of the employment scale as well. Linda Cashton reports. Executive 
Interim Management places temporary workers only at the very top of 
the corporate hierarchy. The company loans out retired corporate chief 
executive officers for brief periods of time to companies undergoing 
transitions that require managerial expertise. Executive Interim's 
director, Ed Ryan, says the firm places people who like going from 
challenge to another and are skilled in dealing with certain corporate 
issues. The issues would be things like, a company feels like one 
of their divisions is not performing up to expectations, so they need 
a general business improvement. And they will take one of the folks 
out of our cadre who has done this before, has significant experience 
can come in, assess the situation, and then implement the necessary 
changes to get the company pointed in the right direction again. When 
it comes to management skills, Mr. Ryan says, the industry's retired 
executives worked in are less important than the issues they confronted. 
Mr. Ryan says the retired executives he places enjoy the stimulation 
of occasional work. And the companies feel they are getting a bargain. 
Expertise at affordable prices. Although the executives command top 
salaries, about $1,500 a day, their assignments are short in duration 
and include no fringe benefits. Mr. Ryan says his is a business that 
seems to thrive in good times as well as bad. Because both cause managerial 
transitions. If we are in boom times, companies may open up another 
division here or we might make an acquisition here. And conversely, 
during leaner times, companies downsize some people and they find 
that they love the idea of being able to find a very experienced senior 
manager who will come in and work on a fixed term assignment basis 
and then leave. So their investment is minimal, but the value added 
is significant. In today's world, most large businesses are international 
in scope and many managerial transitions occur when companies open 
new offices in distant countries. As a result, Mr. Ryan says, Executive 
Interim Management has offices around the world ready to place local 
retired executives on temporary assignment with multinational companies 
opening branch offices. Linda Cashton, VOA News, Washington. And that 
is business for this hour. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>