<DOC>
<DOCNO> VOA19981120.0500.0533 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Here in Washington, independent counsel, Kenneth Starr, spent all 
of the day Thursday and then some before the House Judiciary Committee 
explaining his findings that President Clinton has committed impeachable 
offenses. This is only the third time a U.S. president has faced formal 
proceedings that could lead to his removal from office. Correspondent, 
Paula Wolfson, followed the more than 12 hours of testimony. She talked 
earlier to News Now's Ray Kubiel and Meredith Buel. Well, we are not 
quite sure how the hearings are going, Ray, you know, they have got 
a long way to go here. They are going to be taking some depositions, 
interviews behind closed doors from witnesses next week. The committee 
intends to meet in early December, but it is unclear if there will 
be any more public witnesses beyond Kenneth Starr. Committee chairman, 
Henry Hyde, says he wants to wrap this up by the end of the year, 
but there are some people on Capital Hill who have doubts they will 
make that timetable. Paula, what were the highlights of today's 12 
hours or more worth of testimony and the most important things that 
came out during this questions and answer sessions. Well, Ken Starr 
had no new revelations, in his more than two hours of testimony to 
the committee. He defended his investigation, he defended his methods. 
The democrats tried with very little success to pin him down on those 
methods. They criticize the way he ran the investigation, the way 
he treated Monica Lewinski or his investigators treated Monica Lewinski. 
But, they really did not seem to pierce his legal armor. Then along 
came David Kendall, the president's lawyer, he was, I think a bit 
more effective. It was actually quite interesting to watch the two 
of them go at it in the committee room. They really turned it from 
a hearing room into a courtroom, if you will. It was quite a thing 
to watch. The two have been adversaries, legal adversaries, for many 
years and Mr. Kendall had a bit more luck pinning down Judge Starr. 
Well, for the first time in public, Judge Starr moved beyond the Lewinski 
scandal to address some of the other charges against the president. 
Can you give us some of those? Well, he talked about he scandal, if 
you will, that started it all, which is the White Water Affair. That 
is the real estate deal that President Clinton got into years ago 
back in the days when he was governor of the state of Arkansas. That 
was the original reason for this investigation and it has branched 
out if you can tell, quite a bit over the years. He talked about that, 
he talked about the case of Web Hubbell, the former assistant attorney 
general and friend of the president who was later indicted on bilking 
his law clients and other charges. Several other things, but he also 
said and it is important to note he also said he could find no evidence 
to charge the president in any of these matters. That he brought them 
up merely to put the charges related to Monica Lewinski in the sex 
and perjury scandal into context. Paula, is there a consensus on Capital 
Hill as to where this will lead and whether or not it would lead to 
the impeachment of the president? Well, if you talk to people away, 
you know, from microphones and television cameras. If you get them 
outside, I do not think there is a single congressman here who really, 
really believes they will impeach the president, that they will remove 
him from office. At the moment, there is some doubt that even with 
a republican majority in the house in January, when they come back, 
that they will have the votes to vote out Articles of Impeachment. 
That is the formal process of charging the president with the crime. 
The trial of course, would then be held in the senate, if one happened 
at all, and there is very, very little sentiment in the Senate for 
that. That is correspondent, Paula Wolfson, and she was speaking to 
News Now's Ray Kubiel and Meredith Buel. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>