<DOC>
<DOCNO> ABC19981213.1830.0066 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> CAPTION </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Good evening. Congressional representatives who are still hoping to 
hear president clinton admit that he lied were disappointed again 
today. The president insisted once more that he did not commit perjury 
and that he will not resign. The president is in Israel, but as ABC's 
Sam Donaldson reports, the political story at home dominated the day. 
At a news conference today with Israeli prime minister Netanyahu, 
President Clinton insisted again he has not committed perjury, but 
he sounded like a man almost resigned to losing the house floor vote 
this week on impeachment. Mr. president -- The very first question 
was from an Israeli reporter. What about the Judiciary committee vote 
and might he now resign? My reaction to the committee vote is that 
I wasn't surprised. I think it's been obvious to anyone who is following 
it for weeks that that vote was foreordained. And now it is up to 
the members of the House of Representatives to vote their conscience 
on the constitution and the law, which I believe are clear. And I 
have no intention of resigning. It's never crossed my mind. The president 
said he will not personally reach out to undecided house members, 
but if they call him, he'll talk to them. But he will not do what 
some want him to do. He will not admit he has committed perjury. No, 
I can't do that, because I did not commit perjury. Now, was the testimony 
in the deposition difficult and ambiguous and unhelpful? Yes, it was. 
That's exactly what I said in the grand jury testimony myself. As 
for Judiciary committee Hyde and the republican leadership refusing 
to allow a floor vote on censure -- I think you ought to ask them 
whether they're opposed to it because they think that it might pass, 
since apparently somewhere around three-quarters of the American people 
think that's the right thing to do. One of the undeclared house republicans, 
New York's Rick Lazio, who is along on this trip, was unmoved. What 
the president needs to do is say two simple words to the American 
public, "I lied," to begin to get this past him. Here in Jerusalem 
today, the president visited the grave site of assassinated prime 
minister Rabin. He laid a stone from the wye river plantation. He 
watched a child light a hanukkah candle. He addressed the Israeli 
people, one of whom wore a Monica look-alike beret, as Israeli television 
kept showing. And he dined with prime minister Netanyahu, who is continuing 
to make the case for the release of the American who spied for Israel. 
Jonathan pollard did something bad and inexcusable. We think that 
he should have served his time and he did, he served for close to 
13 years. And all that I appealed to President Clinton for is merely 
a humanitarian appeal. Tomorrow, the president goes to Gaza -- the 
first U.S. president to do that -- to watch as the Palestinian assembly 
completes the process of eliminating from its charter clauses that 
call for the destruction of israel. That's the real reason why he's 
here, to help in the peace process. Important enough, his aides say, 
to prevent Mr. Clinton from spending full time this week on trying 
to keep his job back there. Sam Donaldson, ABC News, Jerusalem. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>