<DOC>
<DOCNO> APW19981213.0742 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Greece is suffering through a bad case of clogged arteries. Striking 
workers and other demonstrators have staged nearly daily roadblocks, 
turning any journey into a potential gridlock grind. Even motorists 
accustomed to Athens' epic traffic problems are showing signs of frustration 
at the staggering tie-ups during the traditional pre-holiday wave 
of protests. One taxi driver said he bought a cassette of nature sounds 
to calm his nerves during the interminable waits during the traffic 
jams. This year's road rage is amplified by an usual array of demonstrators 
taking to the streets _ from angry soccer fans to students upset about 
education reforms. The government's austerity measures to meet European 
Union standards have also launched dozens of protest rallies. The 
ability to cause major traffic disruptions has become a major weapon 
of the protesters. And there is little chance of being forcibly removed 
by Greek police, which generally take a laissez faire attitude with 
peaceful protests. On occasion, no more that a few dozen protesters 
have blocked Greece's main highway, leading from Athens to the northern 
port of Salonica. The highway could soon be the scene for more blockades 
by farmers seeking concessions such as easing some crop limits. In 
1997, farmers used their tractors and field equipment to close the 
highway for more than a month, stranding thousands of trucks and causing 
a loss of more than dlrs 150 million in international and domestic 
trade. High school students also have gotten into the road block fever. 
Students, who are occupying about 1,500 schools around Greece, have 
begun daily blockades of busy roads of Athens and other towns. Motorists 
who dared complain to kids at roadblock in Salonica Friday were pelted 
with eggs. The students oppose changes that would drop the single 
university entrance exam and place greater weight on course work and 
a series of tests to determine admission. ``It's always us who pay 
for anything going on. They (demonstrators) want to get noticed, but 
why should we have to be put through this? I've been stuck here for 
two hours,'' an elderly woman in Athens told television reporters 
from her driver seat, near a school roadblock. Motorists were recently 
put through additional strain when a customs workers strike dried 
up gasoline supplies for days. Then torrential rain last month washed 
away a bridge on the Athens-Salonica highway. In Salonica, furious 
soccer supporters staged a giant demonstration in the city center 
after a local soccer team was punished for crowd violence. Claiming 
the penalty was aimed at helping Athens teams, they also briefly blocked 
the highway to Athens and set fire in the street to television converter 
boxes of the pay channel that shows Greek soccer games. Many of the 
other protests are against a string of government reforms introduced 
this fall. These include pension and health fund mergers, changes 
to school and university systems and efforts to streamline public 
transport. Unions have called a general strike for Tuesday, expected 
to stop all public services for a day. Choking traffic in a city like 
Athens is not difficult. It is now home to more than 4 million of 
Greece population of 10.2 million. A study conducted by the company 
building a new subway for the city predicted that by 2020, cars in 
greater Athens will almost double from their current number of about 
1.5 million. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>