<DOC>
<DOCNO> APW19981213.0234 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
World sprint silver medalist Susantika Jayasinghe, under investigation 
on a drugs charge, said she pulled a muscle in qualifying Sunday and 
was in doubt for the final of the Asian Games 100-meter event. ``I 
pulled a hamstring in the race and I'm having a severe headache,'' 
Jayasinghe said before charging away from reporters. ``I'm going to 
see a doctor and I'm hoping for the best.'' There were no obvious 
signs of something as serious as a hamstring injury as Jayasinghe, 
the 200 silver medalist at last year's Athens world championships, 
crossed the line in 11.30 seconds. She had been expected to win the 
sprint double comfortably here and the 100 final is Monday evening. 
Meanwhile, Japan's Koji Ito went into raptures when he smashed the 
Asian record in the semifinals of the men's 100, clocking 10.00. He 
leaped around, threw his arms in the air and puffed out his chest 
as if he had already won the gold medal. Ito's Japanese colleague 
Kenji Takao was just as excited after winning the 10,000-meter race 
by outsprinting Qatar's Ahmed Hashim down the last 50 meters. The 
23-year-old from Kyoto won the last of five track and field finals 
decided Sunday. Jayasinghe tested positive for a steroid in March 
and is competing while the International Amateur Athletic Federation 
waits to hold an arbitration meeting to decide her fate. The Sri Lankan 
federation dismissed the charge after she maintained she took the 
drug, Nandralone-19, to control her menstrual cycle. If the IAAF rules 
against her, Jayasinghe would lose any medals won here. Ito, who held 
the 100 record jointly with fellow Japanese Noburharu Asahara at 10.08, 
got a break when the wind dropped slightly and gave him a tailwind 
just under the maximum allowable limit. Earlier he clocked 10.03 in 
the heats, only to have a record denied because of the strong winds 
at the main stadium. ``I didn't think I would run these times today 
but I felt very relaxed,'' Ito said. Ito's teammate Koji Murofushi 
proved he was forged from the same stuff as the ``Iron Man of Asia'' 
when he joined famous father Shigenobu as an Asian Games hammer champion. 
But Koji has to win four more titles over the next 16 years to match 
Shigenobu, who earned his ``Iron Man'' nickname by winning the event 
from Bangkok in 1970 to Seoul in 1986. Koji broke his own national 
record Sunday with 78.57 meters to beat Uzbekistan's Andrey Abduvaliev, 
who was well off his best with 77.14 and fouled on his final three 
attempts. ``What I did today was more than I had expected. I didn't 
imagine the competition would turn out this way,'' said Koji, who 
led the whole way and improved his record for the fifth time this 
year. Abduvaliev has a best distance of 82.66 meters and Murofushi 
apologized to him after the event. ``I said `I'm sorry that I won,' 
and he replied `Well done,''' Koji said. Japan's Yoko Ota claimed 
the gold medal in the women's high jump while her compatriot Miki 
Imai, the Asian champion, lagged in fourth. In a tight competition, 
Ota jumped 1.88 meters to beat China's Jin Ling on a countback. Imai 
was one of four, including bronze medalist Anna Chertrova of Kyrgyzstan, 
to end at 1.84. Yu Guohui claimed China's first track and field gold 
medal at these games with a comfortable victory in the men's 20-kilometer 
walk. Yu took more than two minutes off his previous best time in 
recording 1 hour, 20 minutes, 25 seconds, a games record. Luan Zhili 
added a gold for China in the women's discus. Her best throw of 63.43 
put the world championship finalist well clear of compatriot Liu Fengyin 
(59.34) and India's Neelam J. Singh (55.09). India's veteran sprinter 
P.T. Usha, making her swan song at the Asian Games, scrambled through 
to the women's 400-meter final. Usha, 33, retired for eight years 
before her surprise return at the Asian championships in July, where 
she grabbed a bronze medal. In 1984, she became India's best performer 
at an Olympic track meet, missing out on the 400 bronze by just .01 
seconds. Asian champion Damayanthi Darsha of Sri Lanka won Usha's 
semifinal comfortably, finishing in 52.48 seconds. Usha, tucked in 
Lane 1, struggled in blustery conditions and was fourth in 54.63 but 
qualified seventh fastest into Monday's final. Second fastest was 
Kazakstan's Svetlana Bodritskaya. ``I could have done better but it's 
a fast track and I don't like running on fast tracks,'' said Usha, 
who had suffered a hamstring injury last month. Usha said she would 
contest the 200 as well as the 400 here. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>