<DOC>
<DOCNO> APW19981213.0415 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Palestinian officials said Sunday there would be a show of hands to 
affirm the abrogation of PLO charter clauses seeking Israel's destruction, 
a move that could help solve the key dispute overshadowing U.S. President 
Bill Clinton's visit. Israeli Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu has 
said he would not withdraw troops in the West Bank unless the Palestine 
National Council votes to annul the offending charter clauses. Clinton 
is to address the PNC session in Gaza City on Monday, along with Palestinian 
leader Yasser Arafat. In the West Bank, new violence erupted despite 
efforts by the Palestinian Authority to calm the situation during 
the Clinton visit. Palestinians threw stones at Israeli troops in 
several West Bank towns, including Ram north of Jerusalem. A 15-year-old 
Palestinian girl protesting the Clinton visit wounded an Israeli teen-ager 
near the Shavei Shomron settlement in a stabbing attack. Two U.S. 
flags were burned at a rally attended by 2,000 followers of a radical 
PLO faction, the Popular Front for the Liberation of Palestine that 
opposes the peace accords. Monday's PNC session is the most sensitive 
stop of Clinton's three-day trip and could lead to a showdown if Clinton 
and Netanyahu disagree over whether the PNC has completed its task. 
The Palestinians have insisted that a vote is not required by the 
Wye River peace agreement Clinton helped negotiate. The accord says 
the PNC must ``reaffirm'' a letter to Clinton in which Arafat lists 
the charter clauses considered revoked. However, on Sunday, the Palestinians 
appeared to be softening their position. Palestinian negotiator Hassan 
Asfour said Arafat will ask the delegates at the end of his speech 
whether they support the peace process and the letter to Clinton. 
``Then we will raise our hands and stand up and applaud,'' Asfour 
said. Despite the show of hands, this should not be considered a formal 
vote, Asfour said. Israeli government spokesman Moshe Fogel was evasive 
when asked whether such a show of hands would satisfy Israel. ``We're 
demanding a vote, but we're not going to discuss the technicalities 
in the media,'' he said. The Israeli Cabinet will meet Thursday or 
Friday to decide whether Israel would carry out the next troop withdrawal, 
said Israeli Foreign Minister Ariel Sharon. ``As it looks now, I think 
it will be very hard for the government to approve it,'' he said. 
Even if the PNC votes to Israel's satisfaction, Netanyahu says the 
Palestinians will have to meet several other conditions before he 
will redeploy troops. Netanyahu wants Arafat to withdraw publicly 
from intentions to unilaterally declare a state in May and to accept 
Israel's terms for the release of Palestinian prisoners, a dispute 
that has triggered daily clashes in the West Bank. Under the Wye agreement, 
Israel promised to release 750 prisoners by the end of January. Last 
month, Israel freed 250, but most of them were criminals. The Palestinians 
said they were given to understand that those released would be prisoners 
held for anti-Israeli activities, but Israel has denied making such 
a promise. In a nod to Clinton, Palestinian prisoners will suspend 
their weeklong hunger strike to lower tensions, said Hisham Abdel 
Razek, a Palestinian Cabinet minister for prisoner affairs. The Palestinian 
Authority has already canceled a commercial strike in the West Bank 
and Gaza planned for Monday. Instead of the strike, church bells will 
ring in the biblical town of Bethlehem, one of the stops on Clinton's 
itinerary. Abdel Razek said he would meet with Clinton on Monday, 
along with children of prisoners, to hand over a petition with more 
than 1 million signatures demanding the release of the prisoners. 
In a letter to Clinton, the Palestinian Prisoners' Association wrote: 
``Mr. President, five years have passed since the signing of the peace 
agreement and we are still in Israeli jails ... This is against the 
spirit of a just peace.'' U.S. officials have said Israel has not 
broken promises concerning the prisoners, but Palestinian negotiators 
said Clinton promised to intercede and try to resolve the dispute. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>