<DOC>
<DOCNO> APW19981213.0992 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Growing up as a Russian Old Believer, Kalin Ayhan learned that preserving 
his religion came above all. The centuries-old Christian orthodox 
rituals and other aspects of their way of life transported from pre-Communist 
Russia to Turkey to the United States were sovereign. It often meant 
working on a farm or in furniture factories. It meant socializing 
and marrying within the Old Believer community. It meant men didn't 
shave. It certainly didn't mean becoming a police officer. But 41/2 
years ago, Ayhan became the first Old Believer on the force. Today, 
the 29-year-old patrols the streets of Woodburn, an ideological world 
away from where he grew up. The simple choice of shaving his beard 
has made him something of an outcast. He cannot be an active member 
of his church because of it. And only because his supervisors gave 
him permission to temporarily grow his beard, he was able to marry 
in his church. ``Some people just hate the idea that one of their 
own is policing,'' Ayhan said. From a community that started settling 
here in the 1960s and remains largely closed to retain its identity, 
Ayhan chose a job that put him in the thick of one of Oregon's most 
diverse communities. The town is part agricultural, part retirement 
community and part growing freeway interchange with strong Latino 
and Russian influences. There are longtime Pentecostal Russians and 
newer Soviet Russians as well. They have a language in common but 
differ in their religious beliefs and on whether to ``Americanize.'' 
In January, Ayhan will receive one of six Woodburn Human Rights Commission's 
annual awards for people who bridge cultures in the community. Ayhan 
was born here but spoke little English when he showed up for first 
grade in 1976. He and the other Russian-speaking children were grouped 
in a classroom with a bilingual teacher. At home, he was admonished 
not to speak English by parents worried he would forget his language. 
Ayhan's father unknowingly first sparked his interest in police work. 
``My dad had a lot of respect for the police and whenever we would 
travel, my dad would point out that the police are good people and 
they're there to help,'' Ayhan said. As a teen-ager, Ayhan landed 
a job pumping gasoline at a convenience store owned by former Marion 
County Sheriff Robert Prinslow, who was running for office. He encouraged 
the teen to pursue his interest in police work. At 18, Ayhan enlisted 
in the U.S. Army with a plan: He would be a military policeman. A 
recruiter picked him up at his house. His parents cried. Ayhan hugged 
his mom and rode away. That night, for the first time, he shaved. 
There wasn't much to shave, some peach fuzz and a little mustache. 
After four years in the military, traveling to 25 countries, Ayhan 
returned to Oregon. He put himself through community college while 
working as a bank security guard the applied to the Woodburn Police 
Department. ``As hard as it is to be a police officer, it's probably 
twice as hard in Woodburn because of cultural and language barriers,'' 
he said. The department loves him and figures it will be hard to keep 
him because of his bilingual and bicultural background. He figures 
his parents are proud, although ``they would more likely to be more 
happy with me in a career that would allow me to practice the religion.'' 
Once he returned to Woodburn, he renewed an acquaintance with Mary 
Lisoff, an Old Believer. When they decided to marry, she wanted a 
wedding within the culture. That required Ayhan to be an active member 
of the church. That required a beard. The department, which bans beards 
so they cannot be grabbed by suspects, let him grow one, and the day 
before the October 1995 wedding, he was let back into the church. 
About four months later, he shaved it again. ``That was the hardest 
time for me,'' he said. ``My parents were really, really disappointed. 
It started all over again, as far as getting away from the religion 
and such.'' Mary Ayhan, a former volunteer firefighter, decided she 
wanted a career. Now, she's a parole-probation officer with the Marion 
County Juvenile Department. Kalin Ayhan long ago abandoned traditional 
Russian dress. His Russian accent is barely detectable. He still loves 
his culture. But what he hopes to pass along to his children will 
be the language and what he knows about his family's struggle to preserve 
a religious way of life. ``I'm not accepted in the church because 
of my appearance,'' he said. ``Appearance seems to be more important 
than conduct.'' 
</TEXT>
</DOC>