<DOC>
<DOCNO> APW19981213.0406 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
President Bill Clinton on Sunday promised a prompt decision on whether 
to free a former U.S. navy intelligence analyst convicted of spying 
for Israel after a review is complete in January. Clinton noted he 
had promised Israeli Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu that he would 
look into his request for leniency for Jonathan Pollard, who was sentenced 
to life for handing over thousands of top secret documents to Israel 
in the mid-1980s. ``I have instituted the review that I pledged to 
the prime minister, and we've never done this on a case before, but 
I told him I would do it, and we did it,'' Clinton said. The U.S. 
president, speaking at a joint news conference with Netanyahu, said 
he had instructed White House counsel Charles F.C. Ruff to sound out 
all the relevant intelligence and security agencies for their opinion. 
Clinton said he would also weigh the opinions of Pollard's supporters, 
``and I will make a decision in a prompt way.'' ``We are giving everyone 
time to present their comments, and I will get comments on both sides 
of the issue, evaluate it, and make a decision,'' he added. The review 
is expected to be complete in mid-January. Netanyahu told a joint 
news conference that he was not excusing Pollard's behavior but felt 
that releasing him was in order since the Israeli spy had been in 
what amounted to solitary confinement for 13 years. ``It's a very 
very heavy sentence, and since he was sent by us on a mission ... 
we hope that on a purely humanitarian appeal a way will be found to 
release him,'' said Netanyahu. He added the appeal was not political 
or designed to exonerate Pollard but ``merely to end a very, very 
sorry case that has afflicted him and the people of Israel.'' Pollard's 
supporters, including a Cabinet minister and four legislators, claim 
the U.S. intelligence community is exacting revenge on Pollard and 
that other spies have been released after serving shorter terms. They 
planned to stage a protest calling for Pollard's release during Clinton's 
visit. Successive U.S. administrations have turned down Israeli requests 
for Pollard's release. After Israel had claimed for years that Pollard 
was part of a rogue operation run without the knowledge of the government, 
Netanyahu's government recognized him as an Israeli agent and granted 
him citizenship. He has since been visited by a number of top officials. 
In October, the Pollard case led to a crisis in the Wye River Mideast 
summit. On the last day of the summit, Netanyahu demanded Pollard's 
release as a condition for release of Palestinian prisoners from Israeli 
jails. He had hoped to fly home with Pollard on his plane, a move 
that would have helped him sell the Wye accord with his right-wing 
coalition partners. However, the proposal met stiff opposition from 
U.S. intelligence officials, past and present, and CIA Director George 
Tenet reportedly threatened to resign if Pollard went free. A U.S. 
official confirmed last week that information Pollard handed over 
included a top secret 10-volume manual used by the National Security 
Agency to tap foreign communications and protect U.S. communications 
from intercept. CBS reported Pollard's information told the Israelis 
the disposition of U.S. Navy ships in the Mediterranean so that Israel 
could strike PLO headquarters in Tunisia without being detected. The 
1985 raid was carried out with satellite photos Pollard had given 
to the Israelis, the network reported. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>