<DOC>
<DOCNO> CNN19981213.1000.0198 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> CAPTION </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
The impeachment hearings are generating more headlines than worries 
overseas. Tom Mintier reports, Britons seem more concerned with Christmas 
prices, than political crisis. The American impeachment process has 
its roots in the British legal system. My lords and members of the 
house of commons -- In England, ordinary people could be impeached, 
not just politicians, and the severest penalty was not losing your 
job, but your life. The last political impeachment in Britain was 
in the 17th century but there have been plenty of political scandals 
that involved sex here. John profumo was minister of war in the 1960s. 
His real crime was to have been involved with a prostitute who was 
also the mistress of the Soviet military attache, which was thought 
to be politically inept as well at the height of the cold war. The 
cold war may be over, but there's still plenty to worry about in the 
world. If President Clinton survives the impeachment process, how 
will he be viewed? What world leaders know in the back of their minds 
is that even if he survives this impeachment process, he's going to 
be the lamest of ducks that have ever sat in the oval office. For 
now, most Christmas-shopping londoners are more concerned with British 
prices, not an American presidential crisis. Still many have strong 
feelings about the Clinton scandal. What he did is in his private 
life has nothing to do with political thing. I think he should get 
out. He's, he can't lie to your country, and that's what he's done. 
In France, it's accepted, and if you're in England, it's not saechled 
I'm not sure what the American people think, but I'm sure they'll 
make their mind up soon. They're more concerned about economic integration, 
not investigation. Europe looks to Alan Greenspan as a much more key 
person as far as U.S. asset markets are concerned. British newspapers 
have covered the story with a vengeance, always hungry for scandal. 
But what worries Kim Fletcher more these days are time zones and missing 
the story. It's a terrible thing for a Sunday newspaper, because you 
put the paper to bed and be very proud of it and then wake up in the 
morning and find the world has changed while you've been printing. 
For many Europeans the fast track of the impeachment hearings may 
have caught them off guard, some had thought the issue over after 
the november elections. Now with impeachment articles on the way to 
the full house, Europeans are reminded they have a hard time predicting 
events in Washington. Tom Mintier, CNN, London. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>