<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981213.0051 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
In opposing a censure of President Clinton, many Republicans argued 
that the Constitution contains no words allowing Congress to take 
that step. Perhaps not, but that has not stopped lawmakers of yesteryear. 
The best known censure of a president was that of Andrew Jackson by 
the Senate in 1834, in a policy dispute involving the nation's finances. 
But any researcher who shines a flashlight into the dustbin of history 
will uncover other presidential reproofs, some with rich subplots. 
First, Jackson. Old Hickory was Old Hostile when it came to banks; 
he hated them. He also mistrusted central authority, and so vetoed 
the rechartering of the Second Bank of the United States in 1832, 
ordering government funds withdrawn. In the long political struggle 
that followed, a depression worsened and Jackson's enemies blamed 
him, not just for being obstinate but, in the words of former President 
and then-Congressman John Quincy Adams, ``a tone of insolence and 
insult'' in his dealings with Congress. On March 28, 1834, the Senate 
voted its disapproval, 28 to 18, of the president's actions, which 
it said were beyond his powers. The resolution did not contain the 
word ``censure,'' but most historians consider the measure a censure. 
No matter: three years later, Jackson's allies took control of the 
Senate and revoked the resolution. The earliest legislative attempt 
to censure a president occurred in 1800, when the House of Representatives 
debated three resolutions disapproving of John Adams' supposed interference 
with the judiciary. The resolutions were defeated. (As for his attitude 
toward the judiciary, Adams must have been doing something right: 
he appointed the great Chief Justice of the United States John Marshall.) 
The most recent attempts to censure a president were aimed at Richard 
Nixon in 1973 and 1974, according to the Congressional Research Service 
of the Library of Congress. One condemned Nixon for the ``Saturday 
Night Massacre'' of October 1973, the other for actions beyond his 
authority in 1974. Both censure attempts, of course, were related 
to the Watergate scandal and were referred to committees. The president's 
resignation made them moot, and they are now all but forgotten. Two 
other resolutions enacted against presidents involved men who served 
almost two decades apart, but whose fates and standings in history 
are linked, in a way: John Tyler and William Buchanan. John Tyler 
became the first vice president to succeed to the presidency, when 
William Henry Harrison died on April 6, 1841, after only a month in 
office. In 1842, Tyler vetoed two tariff bills favored by his Whig 
Party. His Cabinet resigned, his own party expelled him and a resolution 
was introduced in the House to investigate him for purposes of possible 
impeachment. That measure, the first impeachment proceedings ever 
introduced in Congress, was defeated in January 1843. But Tyler was 
so weakened that he could not even gain renomination in 1844. He retired 
but _ as will be seen shortly _ his political career was not quite 
over. Flash forward to William Buchanan, the bachelor from Pennsylvania, 
who served from 1857 to 1861. Buchanan did not think the Southern 
states had a right to leave the Union, but he didn't think the federal 
government had the power to do anything about it either. By the time 
he yielded the White House to Abraham Lincoln, who had rather different 
ideas about secession and preserving the Union, seven states had seceded 
and civil war was inevitable. In 1862, the Senate debated a measure 
of ``condemnation and censure'' against Buchanan for his failure to 
prevent secession. The measure was tabled. ``History will vindicate 
me,'' Buchanan said just before his death in 1868. Wrong. As for John 
Tyler, after he left the White House he was an outspoken advocate 
of Southern interests as he dwelled in his Virginia estate. In November 
1861, he was elected to the new Confederate Congress, but he died 
in a Richmond hotel room on Jan. 18, 1862, just before he could take 
his seat. Thus was U.S. history spared the unhappy chapter of a former 
president's becoming a high official in a new country at war with 
the nation whose Constitution Tyler had taken a solemn oath to defend. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>