<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981213.0166 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Imagine you are a singer preparing to belt your best tune and staring 
you down is Whitney Houston. Imagine you are primed for the talk-show 
circuit and in your opposing slot is Oprah Winfrey. You are a designer 
and the competition is Tommy Hilfiger. You have a nice car and what 
rolls up and parks alongside is a Rolls-Royce. You are Jim Fassel. 
In the house is Mike Shanahan. That was the scene at Giants Stadium 
Sunday afternoon. Sure, it was the Broncos versus the Giants, the 
players on the field making it happen. But it was also Fassel and 
his staff versus Shanahan and his staff. All week long, all season 
long, Fassel and his staff had heard about the greatness of Shanahan 
&AMP; Company. The mastermind. The genius. Ahead of the curve. Whipping 
opposing coaches in preparation and in game-day decision-making. And 
so much of it was true. The Denver Broncos entered with 13 victories 
and no defeats and were on the road to history, to a perfect 16-0 
regular season. They had been good, but they had also been cunning. 
Clever. Deceptive. If you are the opponent, no matter how much respect 
you have for the other guys, it is enough to make you sick. You tire 
of it. And this was Fassel Sunday. This was his staff, especially 
the defensive coordinator, John Fox. ``Any time you are matched against 
greatness, you cannot help but want to compete and be at your best,'' 
Fox said. ``With what Denver was trying to achieve, this was one of 
those rare chances in life. This was why we do this as a living.'' 
A 5-8 team battling a 13-0 team. A coaching staff losing its luster, 
questioned and even berated now, against a superstar bunch. ``This 
was a test for Coach Fassel and our staff and it was a crucial test,'' 
said Jessie Armstead, the Giants' rumbling linebacker, seldom one 
to mince words. ``His back was against the wall. Nobody was saying 
it, but him and all of our coaches, like us, were wounded and hurt 
over the way this season has gone. This game of football is all about 
testing your will and your pride. It is all about matchups.'' Matchups 
of the players. Matchups of the coaches. Players have gut checks. 
Coaches do, too. Well, Jim Fassel passed his. So did his staff. Their 
20-16 victory over the Broncos placed a big bandage over some open, 
gushing wounds. It stopped the bleeding. It made the Giants the talk 
of the National Football League. They stopped a team that was streaking 
like a missile toward a perfect mark. They made it the way it was, 
for them, last season. Last season the Giants won the National Football 
Conference East, and Fassel was coach of the year. They were a 10-5-1 
team and defense was their cornerstone. Fassel entered this season 
saying he knew the Giants must change. He said that the offense had 
to do more. Make more big plays. Throw the ball downfield more. Be 
more daring, more productive. Jason Sehorn was supposed to help the 
offense. The star cornerback would return kickoffs and give the offense 
better field position. But Sehorn was injured in the preseason. Other 
injuries hurt both the offense and the defense. And then Fassel ignited 
flames within his team. He would not use Tyrone Wheatley as his running 
back. Receiver Amani Toomer remained a role player. The quarterback 
position became unsettled. And Fassel struggled in his play-calling 
along with his team. There appeared little cohesion, and the Giants 
kept stumbling, all the way to a 5-8 record. Who understands the Wheatley 
deal? No one, not even Fassel's own players. And the talented Toomer 
being used consistently as a role player? Even among the Giants, there 
has been the feeling, the notion, that Fassel has not been playing 
the best players with enough frequency. That he has played his favorites 
even though they have not produced. That, in turn, he has not given 
his team the best chance to win. Players have their views. Coaches 
have theirs. I remember asking a current NFL coach, if he had a star 
running back who was by far the best player on the team and that back 
did not practice well or prepare well but would still score three 
touchdowns a game, would he play him? He said no. He said the back 
might win a few games but in the end the coach would lose his team. 
Well, a coach in that situation might lose it, anyway, if he makes 
that decision and the team does not know why. How much, if any, is 
the case with Wheatley? Why have we not seen more of Toomer, such 
a playmaker, on a Giants offense that is strapping for big plays? 
``I've been ready for that ball for a long time,'' Toomer said of 
his game-winning catch, the 37-yard touchdown grab with 48 seconds 
left. ``I've been waiting a long time to do more.'' Of course, Kent 
Graham, the quarterback, threw it. But it is up to Fassel, the coach, 
to keep Toomer in the game. It is up to Fassel to call the play during 
practice all week and to demand that Graham understand that there 
is where the ball should go. Just as it did. As it did with the tricky 
21-yard scoring pass from Graham to running back Tiki Barber just 
before halftime, giving the Giants a 10-6 lead. ``On my touchdown,'' 
Barber said, ``it is a play that has been in our playbook forever. 
We have rarely called it. It took advantage of how they like to crowd 
their linebackers and pass rush into the middle. I got outside and 
there was no one there. They said our receiver picked their linebacker. 
There was maybe some small contact, but that's football. The Broncos 
do that in their offense all of the time.'' But this time, Fassel 
did it to Denver. His third-down calls and the play of the Giants' 
offensive line all day, but especially there, made the difference 
in this game. The Giants were 9 of 15 (60 percent) on converting third-down 
plays. The Giants entered the game having converted a league-worst 
25 percent on third downs. Fassel settled for a field goal late and 
Denver took the lead, but Fassel and the Giants produced the two-minute 
drill that won the game. And that is all that matters. Shanahan even 
admitted that the Giants won the guessing game on third down on both 
sides of the ball, especially since the Denver offense was limited 
to 6 of 14 (43 percent) on third-down conversions. ``Our defense was 
not used to our offense keeping possession like that,'' Armstead said. 
``And then Coach Fox mixed it up on their offense and helped us make 
them punt a lot. We were using the Far Dog, blitzing away from the 
running back. And then when they expected that, we would use the Double 
Dog and blitz right at the running back. Things like that kept their 
offense off stride.'' And for most of the day, out of the end zone. 
What a joy for Fassel and his staff, what a moment! They will be remembered 
as the team that derailed Denver's grasp for glory, especially if 
Denver finishes the regular season at 15-1. ``When Coach Fassel came 
into the locker room after the game, the thrill in his eyes and the 
look on his face _ I had not seen that since we won the NFC East last 
year,'' Barber said. Fassel said he would not look back. What could 
have been this year is gone. Mistakes have been made. The wrong guess, 
the wrong turn by his staff, by his players too many times along the 
way have made them a 6-8 team. Injuries hurt. They underachieved. 
Sometimes they were simply not good enough. A lack of cohesion. All 
of it now makes the playoffs for the Giants a possibility that is 
more like a fantasy. But Fassel said it best: This Giants team, this 
Giants season, will be remembered for this game. And so will his staff. 
And so will he. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>