<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981213.0231 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
For Chayie Sieger, the sense of powerlessness came when she learned 
that 100 Orthodox rabbis she had never met had granted her husband 
of 26 years a Jewish divorce without her knowledge. For Chani Lightman, 
the sense of shock came when she confided in two rabbis about marital 
problems and then discovered they had revealed those secrets to her 
husband and others in their tight-knit religious community. Stunned 
by what they saw as betrayals and seeking to restore reputations they 
say were virtually destroyed, the two women have taken an unheard-of 
step: they are suing rabbis in civil courts of law, their complaints 
based on the way they were treated by religious courts. What makes 
these cases remarkable is that Mrs. Sieger, 45, from Borough Park, 
Brooklyn, and Mrs. Lightman, 38, from Cedarhurst, on Long Island, 
remain devoted to their religion, even as the communities around them 
openly question their bold and, some say, heretical challenges. ``I 
am religious and feel very strongly about Judaism,'' Mrs. Lightman 
said. ``But I don't feel this is a representation of what Judaism 
or religion is. This is simply an abuse of power by some men.'' While 
Orthodox Jews who want a divorce in civil law still have to observe 
the same procedures as any other Americans, obtaining a Jewish get, 
or divorce, is necessary to remarry within Orthodoxy. Women have long 
complained that Jewish courts, which act like binding arbitration 
panels, have favored men, particularly on matrimonial issues. In many 
instances, men have refused to grant their wives a get, leaving the 
women unable to remarry. Men, conversely, face no such consequences. 
But as both Mrs. Sieger and Mrs. Lightman learned, men sometimes obtain 
a get without their wives' consent or knowledge. The two women seem 
unlikely candidates to challenge rabbis in court. Both were born into 
strictly observant Orthodox families, Mrs. Lightman in the modern 
Orthodox wing of Jewry, Mrs. Sieger in the Bobover Hasidic sect, where, 
in many ways, women are subject to the command of men. Mrs. Lightman, 
a nurse and the mother of four daughters, won a first-round victory 
on Nov. 18 when Justice David Goldstein of State Supreme Court in 
Queens handed down a summary judgment against a Long Island rabbi, 
David Weinberger of Temple Shaaray Tefila in Lawrence. Mrs. Lightman 
had gone to Rabbi Weinberger for marital counseling, and complains 
in her suit that he violated clerical confidentiality by revealing 
secrets to her husband, Dr. Hylton Lightman, and his lawyer, information 
that then showed up in papers filed in a custody dispute. As a result, 
she said, unfounded rumors began to circulate, including a rumor that 
she was failing to live by Jewish law and ``seeing a man in a social 
situation,'' stories that shook her community. Now, she said, she 
is largely ostracized there and attributes the loss of temporary custody 
of her daughters, ages 6 to 12, to the suspicions planted about her. 
``I am portrayed as an irreligious woman not eligible to be the custodial 
parent to my children,'' she said. Mrs. Lightman would not say how 
much she was seeking in monetary damages, only that it was ``in the 
millions.'' Justice Goldstein sharply condemned Rabbi Weinberger's 
revelations, which included the fact that Mrs. Lightman had stopped 
going to the mikvah, or ritual purification bath, so that her husband 
would refrain from having sex with her. ``In my view, this was not 
only improper, it was outrageous and offensive, especially considering 
the status and stature of these defendants within the community,'' 
he wrote in his opinion. A second rabbi in whom Mrs. Lightman confided, 
Tzvi Flaum of Congregation Kneseth Israel in Far Rockaway, Queens, 
may face the same claim, depending on the results of a hearing on 
Jan. 6. Franklin H. Snitow, the lawyer for Rabbi Weinberger and Rabbi 
Flaum as well as for Dr. Lightman in the couple's civil divorce case, 
said he planned to appeal the judgment. ``Rabbi Weinberger was basically 
providing information to both sides, and there was no expectation 
of confidentiality.'' Snitow said. As for government jurisdiction 
over religious matters, he said: ``The clergy is not licensed by the 
state, and the law does not deal with their activities within the 
community; therefore, we believe there is interference with their 
discharging their religious obligations.'' The Sieger case involves 
different legal and religious issues. Mrs. Sieger, who is a nursing 
home administrator, filed suit last month in Supreme Court in Manhattan 
against the Union of Orthodox Rabbis of the United States and Canada; 
the Bet Din Zedek of America, a rabbinical court, and five individual 
rabbis for libel and slander. She is seeking $13 million in damages. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>