<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981213.0053 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
'Tis once again that time of year when many people trim their Christmas 
trees and put up decorations. Inventors have been hard at work trying 
to add their own distinctive touches to holiday displays. Consider 
never again having to untangle a string of Christmas tree lights, 
or search for the solitary burned-out bulb. High technology met Oh 
Tannenbaum several times in 1998, with three different patents for 
fiber-optic Christmas trees that are themselves made of light. David 
Gutshall, of Johnstown, Pa., owns one of those patents. Gutshall designed 
a housing shaped like a tree trunk and base. The trunk is covered 
with holes. Fiber-optic cables run from the base of the ``tree'' up 
through the trunk and out the holes. The cables that emerge from the 
holes near the top of the tree are longest; the cables get shorter 
the closer they are to the base of the trunk. That way, after the 
cables are threaded through the holes, they can be pulled taut to 
form a conical shape that reaches the ground. A lamp in the base shines 
light on the root of each fiber-optic cable, making the cords glow 
in the shape of a Christmas tree. Gutshall won patent 5,829,863. Heavy-Duty 
Trees Tired of the same old hanging ornaments? Want to decorate your 
tree with something heavier? Then you might need Steven Wilson's Christmas 
tree shelving. Wilson patented a system of horizontal shelf brackets 
that are mounted on the tree's trunk. Display shelves can be attached 
to the brackets and extended out among the branches of the tree to 
hold nontraditional Christmas decorations. Wilson received patent 
5,735,415. Ornaments With Surprises Inside There's no reason why Christmas 
tree ornaments cannot function like fortune cookies, right? That seems 
to be what Tammy Ampomah, from Columbus, Ohio, had in mind when she 
designed an ornament made with two pieces of paper or cardboard pressed 
together. The flat exterior is decorated, and the ornament comes with 
a hook or string for hanging. Inside, however, are strips of paper 
with ``words of wisdom, well wishes, a catch phrase or a fortune if 
you will,'' Ms. Ampomah writes in her patent. ``Other articles such 
as festive confetti and a penny for good luck are also contained inside 
ornament to serve as gifts and amusement for the new year,'' she adds. 
``Ornament is placed on tree at Christmas as decoration and taken 
from tree on New Year's Eve or New Year's Day and given as gift. When 
ornament is torn open, contents may be read, and exchanged, and confetti 
may be thrown in celebration by a party or group.'' Ms. Ampomah received 
patent 5,603,993. As the Tree Turns Many people ignore the back of 
a Christmas tree if it is standing against a wall or in a corner. 
Hugh Sofy's rotating tree stand, however, makes decorating the whole 
tree a possibility. The stand is made up of a base with a spindle 
that is driven by a gear-chain motor. A clutch can automatically shut 
down the motor, and an alarm sounds if the tree's revolutions are 
obstructed. Sofy, from Troy, Mich., received patent 5,647,569. Alarming 
Ornament Now you can hang your smoke detector right on the Christmas 
tree. David Solak, from Seven Hills, Ohio, has patented an ornamental 
hazard detector. A round decoration that looks like a traditional 
tree ornament is actually divided into upper and lower chambers by 
a fire-resistant barrier. The upper houses a transmitter, while a 
sensor resides in the lower one. If the sensor detects smoke or heat 
seeping into the lower chamber, it triggers the transmitter to send 
a signal to a remote receiver. The receiver sets off an alarm. Solak 
owns patent 5,821,865. Permalights Tired of hanging and then taking 
down colored outdoor lights every year? Robert Shaffer in Lacey, Wash., 
was. So he invented a construction system for the permanent installation 
of outdoor Christmas lights. He designed a box-like channel with a 
screen cover along the bottom edge of its front wall. The channel 
is mounted to the outside of a house, and can be customized to fit 
pitched roofs, eaves or other architectural design elements. Christmas 
lights are inserted into the box and stretched along the channel. 
When the cover screens are in place, the lights are not visible until 
turned on. Once illuminated, the colored lights shine through the 
screen. Shaffer received patent 5,813,751. Hang It For motorists who 
want to decorate their cars for the holiday, how about a greeting 
card with a pocket holding an ornament. The ornament is meant to be 
hung from a rear-view mirror, where it can bounce around on its elastic 
cord. Hong Na, from McLean, Va., recommends that the ornament be made 
of ``intersecting sheets of material having a glittering surface, 
which construction induces rotating and swinging motion of the ornament 
responsive to air currents within the vehicle, in addition to the 
bobbing or oscillations caused by vehicle motion.'' ``These complex 
motions, combined with the colored and glittering appearance, maximize 
the twinkling visual effect of this uncomplicated device while requiring 
no effort on the part of the observer or user,'' he says. And because 
it is for a car, he adds, ``the ornament is impregnated with a pine 
scent in order to further thematically link the ornament to Christmas.'' 
It can also come with a small suction cup so the ornament can be attached 
to a car window. Na holds patent 5,670,219. Patents are available 
by number for $3 from the Patent and Trademark Office, Washington, 
D.C. 20231. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>