<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981213.0176 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
After they thrashed the Oakland Raiders by 44-21 Sunday, a few Buffalo 
Bills looked over their shoulders while walking off the field. They 
saw the big television screen over the end zone showing a live scene 
from the final minute of the game between Tennessee and Jacksonville. 
With the score tied, the Oilers lined up for a field goal. A Tennessee 
loss would have clinched at least a wild-card playoff berth for Buffalo. 
But the Oilers made the field goal and won their game, leaving the 
9-5 Bills still one small step from post-season play. Did this take 
the edge off Buffalo's most convincing victory of the season? Not 
at all, said Doug Flutie, the nimble quarterback, who threw for two 
more touchdowns. ``Our view of that is shooting higher,'' Flutie said 
after completing 17 of 26 passes for 184 yards. After reciting a few 
tie-breaker calculations, Flutie made it clear that he still thinks 
his Bills can finish first in the American Football Conference East 
and gain a bye in the first round of the playoffs. To do that, they 
will need to beat the Jets next Saturday in their rematch here. ``All 
we can take care of is the Jets now,'' Flutie said. The Bills have 
taken care of almost everyone else. Except for a defeat two weeks 
ago at New England, a verdict they felt was stolen from them by officiating 
mistakes, the Bills have not lost since the Jets beat them on Nov. 
8. After opening the season with three losses, the Bills are 9-2 in 
their last 11 games. One of Sunday's primary contributors was Antowain 
Smith, a second-year running back, who scored one touchdown, led the 
team in rushing with 77 yards on 22 carries and crossed the 1,000-yard 
mark for the first time in his career. When asked whether the Bills 
are peaking at the right time, Smith replied: ``Oh, yeah, no doubt. 
We are coming together, heading into the end of the stretch. Our main 
goal is to make the playoffs. Once we make the playoffs, we want to 
continue to keep moving forward.'' The Jets, Smith said, ``beat us 
rather handily'' in the first meeting, by 34-12. ``This time around, 
it's going to be a different game,'' he said. ``We are going to be 
fired up.'' Perhaps they might also get their fans fired up. Sunday's 
crowd of 62,002 was more than 18,000 short of capacity on a sunny 
afternoon with temperatures in the mid-40s and mild winds. As of late 
last week, the Bills had more than 20,000 tickets available for the 
Jets game. Only three of seven games have been on home television 
this season. A recent drive to market luxury seating concluded with 
$11 million in sales and the promise of a $63 million public finance 
package to renovate Rich Stadium. In exchange, owner Ralph Wilson 
promised to keep the Bills here for five more seasons. The public 
here in western New York is not entirely supportive. In a letter to 
The Buffalo News today, one writer suggested sarcastically that politicians 
kick in $50,000 more to pay the fines assessed against Wilson for 
criticizing the officials in the New England game. Another correspondent 
suggested that Wilson's next ultimatum might be to demand that fans 
buy 40,000 hot dogs every game. Some fans at the game saved their 
venom for the officiating crew. A bedsheet banner said, ``Blow the 
whistle, not the call!'' But this one was never close enough for controversial 
decisions. Under Wade Wilson, the third-string quarterback, the Raiders' 
offense gave up two touchdowns to the Bills' defense. One was a 13-yard 
rumble with a fumble by defensive end Phil Hanson after Wilson was 
sacked by Bruce Smith. Another was an interception of a Wilson pass 
by linebacker Gabe Northern, who ran it back 40 yards for a touchdown 
to make the score 44-14 in the fourth period. A few minutes later, 
when Northern was kicked out of the game for kicking a Raider, he 
ran off the field to the happy howls of those fans who were not participating 
in or watching several disruptions in the seats. Oakland lost its 
fourth consecutive game and its fifth in its last six, falling from 
playoff contention. Appropriately for the weekend on which the Heisman 
Trophy was awarded, two Raiders touchdowns were scored by former Heisman 
winners, Desmond Howard and Tim Brown. But the most effective Heisman 
honoree was Flutie, who stands 5 feet 10 inches and 175 pounds, and 
whose critics once joked that he was barely bigger than the statue. 
Smiling, Flutie shrugged off a question about the Pro Bowl voting 
scheduled for Monday. A year ago, he was playing in Canada for the 
Grey Cup. A few weeks ago he began to fill cereal bowls with Flutie 
Flakes, a breakfast food that finances a foundation for autistic children. 
For Flutie, any other honor or bowl this season would be just super. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>