<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981213.0199 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
The angry backlash to Kevin Brown's record-setting $105 million contract 
took only 24 hours to manifest itself. The Houston Astros, one of 
a handful of teams considering a trade for the star pitcher Roger 
Clemens, loudly withdrew from the negotiations Sunday, with an Astros 
executive saying he was ``stunned and outraged'' by Clemens' contract 
demands. Clemens' agents have asked that a one-year, $27.4 million 
extension be added to the two years remaining on his contract with 
the Toronto Blue Jays, according to officials with two teams. Clemens 
is to be paid $8 million for 1999 and $8.1 million for 2000, and the 
proposed extension would increase the value of his deal to $43.5 million 
over three years, an average of $14.5 million, almost equal to Brown's 
average yearly salary. Clemens' agents _ who could not be reached 
for comment _ are also said to be asking for a list of perquisites, 
including a private box. Gerry Hunsicker, Houston's general manager, 
did not mask his disgust; rather, he called a news conference to declare 
it. ``Quite frankly, we were absolutely stunned and really outraged 
by the demands,'' Hunsicker said. ``It was mind-boggling.'' The Texas 
Rangers and the Colorado Rockies now appear to be the front-runners 
to complete a deal for Clemens, with the New York Yankees, the New 
York Mets and the Cleveland Indians all on the periphery, not really 
in or out of the negotiations. Hunsicker's pointed remarks had other 
baseball officials chortling. Teams usually pull out of trade talks 
quietly, with private words delivered directly from one executive 
to another. In announcing his intentions publicly, Hunsicker may have 
seriously damaged Toronto's leverage in its trade talks. Teams that 
are serious about acquiring Clemens, like Texas and Colorado, know 
the competition is reduced; teams with lukewarm interest, like the 
Yankees and the Indians, can fall in line behind Houston's outrage. 
``We certainly like the player,'' said Brian Cashman, the Yankees' 
general manager. ``But the price on the player and our payroll would 
be very high. If the price tag goes down, maybe we can do business.'' 
Clemens, a five-time Cy Young award winner, is available after exercising 
a contract option and has asked the Blue Jays to trade him. Clemens 
also has the right to veto any trade, meaning that unless he receives 
an acceptable renegotiated contract, he can reject any deal. Hunsicker's 
frustration stems from the fact that the Astros would not only have 
to trade four quality players for Clemens, but they would also have 
to pay him like a free agent. Hunsicker believes Clemens' agents, 
Randy and Alan Hendricks, have complete control of the trade talks 
because of their agreement with the Blue Jays. Hunsicker was also 
upset that during more than a week of trade talks with the Toronto 
officials, the Blue Jays' executives had not told them how much money 
Clemens would demand and how much the agents would control the discussions. 
``I can't imagine there would be a precedent here where people would 
want to put themselves in the same situation as the Blue Jays did,'' 
Hunsicker said. At the outset of trade talks, Toronto General Manager 
Gord Ash said Clemens' two priorities were to play for a winner and 
to play for a team close to his home, which is near Houston. But privately, 
other executives believed Clemens' primary concern was to renegotiate 
his contract in the current climate of escalating salaries. Now that 
Clemens' chances of playing for Houston, a team that won a division 
title in 1998 and is within minutes of his home, are all but ended, 
Hunsicker was asked whether money was the priority all along. He raised 
his eyebrows and told reporters to reach their own conclusions. Speaking 
generally about the way agents are negotiating, Hunsicker said: ``They're 
trying to extract the last nickel out of the system, and obviously 
this is not a matter of whether someone has the ability to pay their 
bills from month to month. This has gone way past that _ it's one-upmanship 
is what it is, and certainly we're not in a position to compete with 
some of the madness that has gone on in this industry. ``I'm just 
extremely concerned for the health of the industry, especially with 
corporations getting involved in ownership, that the playing field 
has become unlevel. What we're creating here is a small country-club 
type of situation where a handful of teams can compete for the services 
of the elite players and everyone else takes what is left over. This 
is just another prime example how most of us, including the Houston 
Astros, really can't compete for the services of the elite players.'' 
Told of Hunsicker's comments, Ash said drily: ``Gerry's got a lot 
of opinions about a lot of things. I guess that comes with being executive 
of the year.'' Toronto completed one trade Saturday, swapping pitcher 
Woody Williams, pitcher Carlos Almanzar and the Class A outfielder 
Pete Tucci to San Diego for the right-hander Joey Hamilton. The Yankees 
are courting offers for third baseman Mike Lowell, negotiating at 
length with the Padres Sunday night, and the Padres want to package 
Tucci and another player to trade for Lowell. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>