<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981213.0113 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Spurred by Germany's new Social Democratic government and a huge trans-Atlantic 
merger, Germany's banks and industrial conglomerates are urgently 
trying to devise a broad plan to compensate Holocaust survivors and 
Poles, Russians and other Europeans enslaved by the Nazis. The corporations, 
from Deutsche Bank to Siemens and Daimler-Chrysler, are eager to free 
themselves from a flood of American class-action suits alleging that 
they profited by collaborating with the Nazis. The dispute has echoes 
of the battle between Jewish groups and Swiss banks over the assets 
of Jews who died in the Holocaust. But it is broader and more complex: 
German manufacturers face a battery of lawsuits filed on behalf of 
hundreds of thousands of workers who were forced by the Nazis to work 
as virtual slaves in German factories. Many victims were from eastern 
or central Europe and most were not Jewish, generating battles over 
who can best represent them. Under instructions from Germany's new 
chancellor, Gerhard Schroeder, the government has held three meetings 
with industrialists since the end of October. Although the primary 
goal is to settle the laborers' claims, government officials also 
want to address myriad claims against German banks over looted bank 
accounts. Israel Singer, secretary general of the World Jewish Congress, 
met on Thursday with Schroeder's chief of staff and then with Rolf-Ernst 
Breuer, the chairman of Deutsche Bank. The congress, a leader in this 
summer's $1.25 billion settlement of Jewish claims against Swiss banks, 
has also expressed interest in the forced laborers, but its eventual 
role is unclear because it does not represent non-Jews. Executives 
and government officials say they hope to produce a compensation plan 
within two months. Deutsche Bank, which is seeking American approval 
for its $10.1 billion purchase of Bankers Trust, is holding its own 
talks. Alan Hevesi, New York City's controller, vowed he would seek 
to block the huge takeover if the German bank does not resolve wartime 
claims. ``One should expect a solution,'' predicted Ignatz Bubis, 
chairman of the Central Jewish Council in Germany, who accompanied 
Singer. ``But it is still an open question as to whether you can deal 
with all these areas at the same time.'' On both sides, unity is lacking. 
Rival teams of American lawyers and Jewish advocacy groups are mired 
in maneuvering. German bankers, insurers and manufacturers have no 
common strategy. At a meeting two weeks ago, Daimler-Chrysler executives 
said they did not want to be lumped into a settlement with German 
banks. According to people involved in the discussions, Daimler fears 
the charges against the banks are potentially far more financially 
damaging than those against the company. Schroeder has put his chief 
of staff, Bodo Hombach, in charge of hammering out a plan. Both corporate 
and government leaders favor a new fund to compensate Holocaust victims. 
Schroeder has said the government wants companies to put up all the 
money, but government officials have suggested tax breaks that could 
in some cases effectively halve the cost. Schroeder's role marks a 
big reversal from that of his predecessor, Helmut Kohl, who argued 
that Germany had already paid tens of billions of dollars since the 
end of World War II to Jewish groups, the government of Israel and 
Holocaust victims in Europe. Therkel Straede, a Fulbright scholar 
at Georgetown University and co-author of a book on the wartime activities 
of Volkswagen, says Jews made up about half of the 750,000 concentration 
camp inmates _ the ``slave laborers'' _ employed by German companies 
in 1944. Many workers died. But German industry also used 7 million 
non-Jewish foreign workers, more than half of whom were brought to 
Germany against their will and held in inhuman conditions, Straede 
said. John Kornblum, the American ambassador to Germany, has met with 
German officials, but the Clinton administration has taken a cautious 
approach. This month State Department officials came to Bonn to brief 
Germans on American class-action law, a concept alien to Europeans. 
Hoping to gain leverage, some American lawyers are trying to draw 
both the State Department and the German government into more active 
roles. In October, for example, Michael Hausfeld and Martin Mendelsohn, 
two Washington lawyers active in Holocaust-related lawsuits, went 
to Poland to discuss forced-labor claims with government officials 
and others. Hausfeld said he hopes for an international conference 
that would include business executives and government officials from 
Germany, the United States and the workers' countries of origin. But 
the prospects for the Germans' plan, which is supported by the Simon 
Wiesenthal Center in Los Angeles, are dim. Although Polish officials 
have voiced support, American diplomats remain uncommitted. The German 
government has not expressed support. Since the end of World War II, 
Germany has made only limited reparation payments on the forced-labor 
issue; some companies have made small payments to a group affiliated 
with the World Jewish Congress. Forced laborers in former Communist 
countries have received virtually nothing, Straede said. Until recently, 
the campaign to compensate workers was largely the preserve of a University 
of Bremen lecturer, Klaus von Muenchhausen, who began raising the 
clamor about the obligations of Volkswagen, Siemens and scores of 
other companies. Using several German court decisions that appeared 
to expose companies to lawsuits in Germany, and backed by an anonymous 
philanthropist, von Muenchhausen threatened to sue many manufacturers 
on behalf of 100 former laborers living in Israel. As a result, Volkswagen 
abruptly reversed its long-standing refusal to compensate victims 
and announced its own fund several months ago. von Muenchhausen, who 
stands to gain little from his efforts, criticizes both American lawyers 
and companies like Volkswagen, which he said tried last month to placate 
him by offering a free car and airplane tickets. Volkswagen's chief 
spokesman, Klaus Kocks, said in a letter to von Muenchhausen that 
the company merely wanted to alleviate his costs in pursuing the talks, 
but in an interview, von Muenchhausen dismissed the offer as ``disgusting.'' 
</TEXT>
</DOC>