<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981213.0150 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
By declaring his intentions to fight censure and to vote to impeach 
President Clinton, Rep. Robert Livingston, R-La., has taken his most 
significant step so far as the incoming speaker of the House and has 
perhaps defined himself for the duration of his tenure _ even though 
he has yet to be sworn in. His comments, made after the Judiciary 
Committee voted in favor of the last of four articles of impeachment 
and against censure, mark him as the fierce institutionalist that 
many know him to be. But they also reveal him as a fierce conservative 
and a fierce Republican partisan, which Livingston has been at some 
pains to tamp down as he assumes the mantle of speaker. Livingston, 
a former criminal prosecutor, said in an interview Saturday night 
that he would vote for impeachment when the full House takes up the 
matter on Thursday and expressed an apparently pent-up belief that 
Clinton's behavior was on a par with, if not worse than, President 
Nixon's during Watergate. In fact, he said, ``a pretty concrete case'' 
of perjury had been built against Clinton, a charge not brought against 
Nixon. ``So why was impeachment the remedy for Nixon and not for Clinton?'' 
he asked, reflecting the eye-for-an-eye vengeance that now drives 
much of politics in Washington and that has been an unspoken force 
in the conservative thrust against Clinton. He also said he would 
mount a strong campaign in the House against a Democratic move to 
censure Clinton instead of impeaching him. Such a campaign is technically 
about House rules but is really a party's call to arms. This will 
be Livingston's first test of power, of whether he can control his 
diverse Republican flock on a matter of personal and party loyalty. 
In the interview, Livingston laid down a marker, saying that a move 
for censure in the House would be unconstitutional (although scholars 
disagree on this) and that he would perceive any Republican vote for 
censure as an affront to the speakership and a betrayal of the party. 
``An attack on the rules is an attack on the chair is an attack on 
the majority,'' he said, his clearest expression to date that the 
procedural is political. Over the next few days, he will be making 
that argument to his colleagues, transforming himself virtually overnight 
from a seemingly impartial observer of the impeachment drama to one 
of its central players. It has been easy to forget that Livingston, 
55, holds deeply ingrained conservative views. His home district in 
suburban New Orleans twice rejected Bill Clinton for president, preferring 
Bob Dole in 1996 and George Bush in 1992. Since he publicly declared 
on Nov. 6 that he was going after Newt Gingrich's job and prompted 
Gingrich to resign, Livingston has deliberately projected a low-key 
non-Newtness, preferring to stay in the background, keep his head 
down and tweak the nuts and bolts of his transition machinery rather 
than grab a national platform. Friends have various explanations for 
why he seemed to go underground. They say he was haunted by the picture 
of himself as intemperate and intransigent during the 1995 government 
shutdown, when he thundered on the House floor: ``We will never, never, 
never give in! We will stay here until doomsday!'' They say he did 
not want to begin his speakership _ he is to be sworn in Jan. 6, with 
a slim six-vote majority _ by either disappointing conservatives who 
were calling for Clinton's head or alienating moderates who saw no 
percentage in impeachment. And, they say, as a former committee chairman, 
his natural inclination was to defer to Rep. Henry Hyde, R-Ill., chairman 
of the Judiciary Committee. In an important signal to his party, Livingston 
appointed a conservative and a moderate _ Reps. Ron Packard of California 
and Marge Roukema of New Jersey, respectively _ to chair his transition 
team. And he has picked another conservative-moderate duo, Reps. Steve 
Largent of Oklahoma and Jennifer Dunn of Washington, to deliver the 
Republican response to Clinton's State of the Union message in January. 
But he seemed so conciliatory, and so removed from impeachment, that 
some in his party were getting worried. Rep. Tom DeLay, R-Texas, No. 
3 in the Republican House leadership, was rapidly filling the power 
vacuum. Hyde was getting bloodied. Some were starting to whisper that 
Livingston was not up to the job of speaker. With the Judiciary Committee's 
vote and his public comments, Livingston has now assumed responsibility 
for the direction of impeachment in the House. It was clear that he 
has been coordinating some strategy with Hyde and DeLay, although 
he has refrained from joining their call for Clinton to resign. But 
he shares DeLay's view of impeachment, saying that it is ``merely 
bringing a charge against the president'' and that it is up to the 
Senate to decide what to do about it. Democrats are making clear that 
they perceive Livingston's opposition to censure as a grave mistake 
that could undo the conciliatory gestures he has made so far. In a 
letter to Livingston seeking a vote on censure, Rep. Dick Gephardt, 
D-Mo., the Democratic leader, wrote: ``Your decision regarding these 
proceedings will decide whether or not history will mark our actions 
as a purely political exercise or a high-minded debate.'' Rep. Bill 
Delahunt, D-Mass., a member of the Judiciary Committee, who is also 
pressing for a vote on censure, took issue with Livingston's rather 
passive characterization of his task. ``This isn't simply just sending 
over some charges,'' Delahunt said. ``This is about removing the president. 
This is the first step in launching a nuclear missile.'' 
</TEXT>
</DOC>