<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981213.0162 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
The doctor announced that he couldn't talk about Joe DiMaggio's health 
anymore, couldn't say if DiMaggio's condition had been upgraded from 
critical to serious. But the fact that his mouth had been zippered 
was the most reliable repot we could possibly get that the arrow on 
the daily Joe D. stock exchange was pointing up. ``No more press,'' 
Dr. Earl Barron reported the 84-year-old DiMaggio to have growled 
Sunday from his hospital room in Hollywood, Fla., the best evidence 
that DiMaggio was alert enough to demand the curtain be drawn on what 
had become a sad spinoff of ``The Truman Show.'' If DiMaggio never 
beats the assault on his lungs and makes it out of Memorial Regional 
Hospital, at least he will have recovered sufficiently to reclaim 
his privacy, which to him always represented the measure of his dignity. 
What kind of man DiMaggio really is, where people may want to place 
him in the all-time congeniality rankings, is not what we're talking 
about. The issue here is that DiMaggio decades ago chose to conduct 
his life far away from the eye of the very camera his doctors had 
apparently fallen in love with over the last couple of weeks. Nobody 
had to ask where Joe DiMaggio had gone, or wonder how close he was 
to being gone, because what appeared to be his final hours had become 
just another energy source for the insatiable beast known as the hourly 
news cycle. With DiMaggio rendered unconscious or too weak to know, 
the doctors and even his friend and spokesman, Morris Engelberg, trampled 
on what surely would have been DiMaggio's last wish, to not have the 
details of his endgame disseminated like so many canned post-game 
quotes. Suddenly, there was a clear window into the life of a man 
who for 47 years following his retirement from baseball had chosen 
to keep the shades drawn. Did we really need to have a play-by-play 
on the level of sedation, on the amount of fluid in his lungs, on 
the variety of tubes in his throat? Did we have to be in the middle 
of his family's anguished decision on how long to continue with life 
support? To whose benefit was the constant rating of DiMaggio's chances 
of survival, as if the country were keeping score, on the scale of 
1 to 10? Barry Halper, more than most, knew how DiMaggio would have 
detested the news-flash frenzy, which produced a pitiful cliche of 
a zipper report regarding DiMaggio's health that Halper came upon 
in Times Square the other day. ``Last of the ninth,'' it screamed, 
``two out.'' All that was missing was the free distribution of rally 
caps and a heartfelt request for rhythmic applause. ``Joe, I guess, 
was gravely ill, and he couldn't possibly know what was going on,'' 
Halper said Sunday from his New Jersey home. Known for his collection 
of baseball memorabilia, as well as a minuscule share of Yankees ownership, 
Halper in recent years had served as driver and companion when DiMaggio 
made his infrequent trips to New York. Always, the object was to take 
care of business, stay out of sight. ``We'd go out to dinner, they'd 
put him in a back room where no one would bother him,'' Halper said. 
``Once in a while, a drifter would come over, ask for an autograph. 
But it wasn't as difficult as people think.'' There are times now 
when athletes like Michael Jordan talk about their fame as if it were 
an uncontrollable curse. Can't go here, can't go there. Most of the 
time, it sounds very convincing until the subject of DiMaggio comes 
up, and to the whining stars you just want to pose the following question: 
``Ever heard of the back door?'' Some of these premature DiMaggio 
eulogies, casting him as the last pure American icon, have been a 
bit much. On the scale of relative sports fame, Jordan himself rates 
a global 9.5. But DiMaggio does epitomize the increasingly rare surviving 
celebrity never nourished by the sight of a television camera. He 
has presented himself only when he wished to, defiantly unwilling 
to live by the sound bite. He apparently set the same rules for those 
who wanted to remain his friend. ``When Joe first went in the hospital, 
people started calling me up for interviews about his health,'' Halper 
said. ``I didn't know anything, so I couldn't say much.'' Whatever 
he said was already too much. He soon received a letter from DiMaggio's 
lawyers, asking that he ``cease and desist.'' In the early weeks of 
his confinement, DiMaggio succeeded, the way he always did, in keeping 
a lid on his illustrious life. As the circumstances worsened, then 
grew grave, maybe the doctors figured they owed more to the public 
than they did to their patient. What the heck. In Ken Starr's America, 
the most salacious grand jury testimony is the centerfold of the daily 
newspaper. DiMaggio, no more the man of mystery, had become another 
phenomenon of the Internet. But when he awoke the other day and learned 
the whole country had been in his room, surveying his struggle, that 
was enough. ``No more press,'' he said, having come back to life to 
live it his way. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>