<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981213.0171 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
With the full House returning for a vote on impeachment this week, 
President Clinton on Sunday rebuffed Republican calls for him to admit 
to lying under oath and said flatly that he had not committed perjury. 
Looking grim, he deflected suggestions that he should step down. ``I 
have no intention of resigning,'' he said. ``It's never crossed my 
mind.'' Unable to escape the constitutional crisis engulfing his presidency, 
the president fielded questions about his fate side by side with Prime 
Minister Benjamin Netanyahu, in Jerusalem, where he had flown to try 
to revive the Middle East peace process. Charged with four counts 
of impeachment for perjury, obstruction of justice and abuse of power, 
Clinton said he would not admit to lying under oath. ``I could not 
admit to doing something that I am quite sure I did not do,'' he said. 
And he took recourse in public opinion polls to argue that he should 
be censured, saying ``apparently some three-quarters of the American 
people think it's the right thing to do.'' In Washington, leading 
Republicans said his remarks had further eroded his support and several 
said he should save the nation from an impeachment trial by resigning. 
``It would be a way of going out with honor,'' said Rep. Henry Hyde, 
the chairman of the House Judiciary Committee, who appeared on both 
ABC's ``This Week'' and CBS' ``Face the Nation'' news programs. ``I 
think it would save the country, if he cares about the country, and 
I know he does, I think it would save the country a lot of turmoil 
and tumult,'' Hyde said. Rep. Tom DeLay, the House majority whip from 
Texas, echoed Hyde's appeal for Clinton's resignation. The two men 
spoke a day after the Judiciary Committee ended its nine-week inquiry 
by approving, on a party line vote, its fourth article of impeachment 
charging Clinton with abuse of power and calling for him to be removed 
from the presidency and never allowed to hold another office. Hyde 
showed impatience with calls for Republicans to heed the message of 
the mid-term elections and the polls. ``This may be naive and stupid 
and probably both, but I just think a thermometer is not a terribly 
useful thing on matters of conscience and matters of principle,'' 
he said. The 74-year old Illinois Republican said, ``Look, if Jesus 
Christ had taken a poll, he would never have preached the gospel. 
The House is to formally receive the four articles of impeachment 
and an accompanying report from the Judiciary Committee Wednesday 
morning. The full House is to begin debating Clinton's impeachment 
and removal from office Thursday at 10 a.m. It will be only the second 
time in history that the full House has been called on to consider 
the impeachment of a president. Richard Nixon resigned the presidency 
in the Watergate scandal 24 years ago before a House vote. Andrew 
Johnson was impeached and saved from removal from office by one vote 
after a Senate trial in 1868. Both DeLay and John Podesta, the White 
House chief of staff, called the situation in the House too close 
to call, with about two dozen moderate Republicans able to tilt the 
vote either way. But the trend appeared to be moving against Clinton. 
A number of the Republicans who could make the difference said that 
the president had hurt his case with his insistence on Sunday that 
he had not perjured himself. ``Two simple words, `I lied,' would have 
gone a long way,'' said Rep. Rick Lazio, R-N.Y., who is accompanying 
Clinton on his trip to the Mideast. He spoke on CNN's ``Late Edition.'' 
Another Republican, Rep. Bob Ney of Ohio, said, ``I think the president 
hurt himself very clearly.'' Clinton's remarks, however, remained 
consistent with his defense before a grand jury last Aug. 17, when 
he denied that he had lied in a deposition in the Paula Jones sexual 
harassment case by saying he had not had sexual relations with Monica 
Lewinsky. Underpinning that August testimony was the idea _ repeated 
by Clinton's lawyers in their summations before the House Judiciary 
Committee last week _ that the president was intentionally trying 
to mislead his inquisitors in the Jones case while staying on the 
right side of the legal line between not helping his accusers and 
perjuring himself. ``Now, was the testimony in the deposition difficult 
and ambiguous and unhelpful?'' Clinton said on Sunday. ``Yes, it was. 
That's exactly what I said in the grand jury testimony, myself.'' 
While that argument might well serve as a defense in an actual perjury 
prosecution, it has infuriated Republicans who charge that the president 
has undermined the rule of law. Rep. Scott Klug, R-Wis., said, on 
Sunday, ``It's the same thing we've heard: I didn't, I didn't, I didn't. 
And I think everybody realizes he did.'' Even Democrats have been 
left arguing that the president deceived the nation, but his lies 
did not rise to the constitutional threshold for removing him from 
office. ``He lied to the American people,'' Rep. Dick Gephardt, the 
House minority leader, said on the NBC news program ``Meet the Press.'' 
``As bad as that is, I do not think it rises to the level of impeachment. 
If he committed a crime of lying under oath _ and there's a debate 
by legal scholars on whether or not he actually perjured himself _ 
it should be decided in a court of law, in a criminal proceeding and 
that will happen after he leaves office if he is indicted.'' Although 
House leaders have yet to negotiate how many hours will be set aside 
for the debate on impeachment, senior Republicans said the deliberations 
could spill over into Friday. The House will take separate votes on 
each of the four articles of impeachment. Both Joe Lockhart, the White 
House press secretary, and Gephardt appealed again on Sunday for Rep. 
Robert Livingston, the incoming House speaker, to reverse himself 
and allow a vote on censure to come to the floor, as well as the impeachment 
charges. On Saturday night, Livingston said censure would violate 
the separation of powers. ``I cannot believe,'' Gephardt said, ``I 
don't want to bring myself to believe that the leadership in the House 
is not going to allow the members to vote their very deeply held feelings 
on this very important issue.'' The Missouri Democrat said Democrats 
would use a procedural tactic to try to force the issue, if all else 
fails. If censure is not allowed to the floor, more Republicans and 
even a few more Democrats than expected might opt for impeachment 
because they would have no other way to show their disapproval of 
the president's conduct. If any article of impeachment is approved, 
Clinton's fate moves to the Senate for a trial. Unwilling to influence 
events, the Republican and Democratic leaders of the Senate have said 
they will remain silent until after the House acts. A two-thirds vote 
in the Senate would be needed to remove Clinton from office. Both 
political parties plan caucuses of House members on Wednesday where 
members of the Judiciary Committee are likely to brief members of 
the lameduck 105th Congress on the legal issues. The battle for votes 
is expected to become fierce across the next few days, although both 
the White House and Republican leaders tried to portray themselves 
on Sunday as not actually lobbying, while accusing the other side 
of pressuring House members. And in a sign of how bitter the fight 
has become, DeLay on Sunday raised questions about Clinton's foreign 
policy. ``I'm suggesting the president of the United States cannot 
be believed and I think it's reflective in his foreign policy,'' the 
Texas Republican said. ``Saddam Hussein knows it and that's why he 
jerks his chain all the time.'' Secretary of State Madeleine Albright 
shot back on CNN that any suggestion Clinton would try to manipulate 
foreign policy crises for personal reasons ''undercuts our national 
security.'' Clinton has never been well liked in Congress and that 
fact seems to becoming back to haunt him now. ``I'm prejudiced against 
him,'' Rep. W.J. Tauzin, R-La., who is a possible swing vote, admitted 
on Sunday. ``You see he's lied to me personally on a very serious 
matter.'' He was referring to negotiations over an energy tax in the 
1993 budget deal. Some Republicans also seem to still be harboring 
deep feeling about the Watergate scandal of a quarter of a century 
ago. Livingston on Saturday told reporters that Nixon ``faced impeachment 
because he covered up a burglary committed by others.'' He asked ``So 
why was impeachment the remedy for Nixon and not for Clinton?'' Clinton 
said he would not be calling members of Congress personally unless 
they sent word that they wanted to talk to him. Mostly, the White 
House and Democrats were trying to make an appeal to the public. ``We're 
going to make a special plea to the American people to get engaged 
and be involved,'' the White House special counsel, Gregory Craig, 
said Saturday night. Organized labor was also looking at some way 
to mount an appeal for censure. Local unions across the country have 
set up phone banks in recent days to lobby Republican lawmakers against 
impeachment, but internationals and the AFL-CIO have avoided taking 
a public position. ``We didn't want to make this a labor versus far-right 
fight,'' Peggy Taylor, the AFL-CIO's director of legislation, said 
in an interview. ``But after watching the hearings, and seeing how 
partisan this has become, it seems more and more outrageous.'' And 
members of Congress were finding their constituents weighing in. Rep. 
Jim Ramstad, R-Minn., said he is undecided but leaning toward voting 
for impeachment on the first article, which charges the president 
with lying to a federal grand jury. On Saturday night, as Ramstad 
rang a bell to raise money for the Salvation Army in front of a supermarket, 
he said people came up to him to argue for and against impeachment. 
``I was barraged,'' Ramstad said. ``Everyone has strong feelings.'' 
</TEXT>
</DOC>