<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981213.0072 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
If David Farber, the government's central witness at the Microsoft 
trial, is noteworthy for the number of people who want to be included 
on his influential e-mail list, Paul Vixie is famous _ some would 
say notorious _ for publishing an online list that companies desperately 
want to avoid being on. Vixie is the creator and keeper of the Realtime 
Blackhole List, a frequently updated list of Internet service providers 
and Web-hosting companies that he concludes are being used to send 
unsolicited bulk e-mail, or spam. Inclusion on the list is not merely 
embarrassing, it can be costly. Hundreds of Internet service providers, 
universities and other organizations around the world, following Vixie's 
advice, automatically refuse to deliver messages originating from 
an Internet service that has been ``blackholed'' (to use the industry 
patois). When Vixie puts an Internet service provider, or ISP, on 
the Blackhole list, the operator of that service will find that not 
just spam but also regular e-mail is blocked from reaching all of 
the service providers that adhere to Vixie's recommendations. Based 
on Vixie's estimate of the number of subscribers to his list, he says 
that a blackholed Internet provider will find itself unable to send 
e-mail to 25 percent of the addresses on the Internet. Those services 
that have been blackholed at various times include well-known companies 
like America Online, Microsoft Network, ICG Communications' Netcom 
On-Line Services, and Earthlink Network. Time spent in Vixie purgatory 
may last only a few minutes or can sometimes stretch out for weeks, 
depending how quickly the labeled offender takes anti-spam measures. 
Last June, the Microsoft Network spent three-and-a-half days on the 
list after Vixie concluded the company's e-mail servers were being 
used as a launching pad for spam. Vixie acknowledges that his tactics 
may seem harsh, because even nonspam messages get blocked, too. But 
he believes the severity of the consequences provides the best way 
to get the attention of offending ISPs. ``I got e-mail from some mother 
who could no longer send e-mail to her son in college,'' Vixie said. 
``But either I cause a lot of uncertainty for people until their ISP 
becomes a model network, or the spammers win, and you and I, and that 
mother, would have hundreds of messages coming in every day.'' His 
goals may seem admirable. But Vixie, a 35-year old Internet consultant 
without so much as a high-school diploma, is generating increasing 
controversy because of his virtually unparalleled degree of power 
to control Internet traffic. In fact, some critics accuse Vixie of 
being arbitrary and capricious. ``He's McCarthy reborn,'' said Alan 
Bechtold, owner of BBS Press Service Inc., an Internet service provider 
in Topeka, Kan., which spent several days on the list last month. 
``He's arrogant, he believes in his cause,'' Bechtold said, ``but 
he's totally blind to the damage he does.'' Bechtold said his company, 
which operates Web server computers on which other people maintain 
their own Web pages, was blackholed because it once provided space 
for a Web page by a businessman who used spam to advertise his own 
electronic-commerce business. But Bechtold said he had not been host 
to the businessman's site since last July, and that the businessman 
was using a different service to send the spam when Vixie added BBS 
to the Blackhole list. When a reporter asked Vixie about this, he 
conceded that he had not verified whether the businessman was still 
operating from BBS when he added the company to the list. In his defense, 
Vixie's supporters say that in the unregulated world of the Internet, 
he is tackling a problem that legislation and technology have not 
been able to resolve. The Realtime Blackhole List ``works because 
people trust Paul to make ethical, intelligent decisions about who 
goes on and who stays off,'' said John Mozena, co-founder and vice 
president of the Coalition Against Unsolicited Commercial e-mail, 
an anti-spam lobbying and trade group. ``If there is a consensus leader 
among the anti-spammers,'' Mozena said. ``it would be Paul.'' Vixie 
works from an office here in this Silicon Valley city, which is lighted 
by little more than his computer screens and is shared only with Elroy, 
his Labrador retriever and German shepherd mix. Vixie adds an ISP 
to his list once he determines its network is the originating source 
of spam and it does not move quickly enough to stop once he issues 
a warning. He says he promptly removes a company from the Blackhole 
list when it has proved to him that its e-mail servers _ the powerful 
computers that send, receive and distribute electronic messages _ 
are no longer being used to send or relay unsolicited bulk e-mail. 
He may act without government decree or official appointment, but 
his rise to power is hardly inexplicable or without support. Supporting 
himself through consulting work and charging nothing to maintain his 
Blackhole list, Vixie toils to serve ISPs, universities and others 
who operate e-mail servers and are desperate to stop the flow of spam. 
They loathe unsolicited e-mail because it clogs their systems, consumes 
computer processing power and annoys their customers. And typically, 
only the largest Internet service providers can afford to effectively 
track down and fight spammers on their own. That is why it is typically 
smaller service providers that subscribe to Vixie's list. By programming 
their own e-mail servers to automatically retrieve and implement his 
recommendations on which Internet providers to block, Vixie's subscribers 
are able to identify and block the incoming spam. They are also making 
a collective statement that other ISPs had better rid their systems 
of spammers, or else have even nonspam messages go undelivered. Vixie 
said that the average stay on the Realtime Blackhole List was no more 
than a few days. He said that on a typical day, he would add five 
networks to the list, and remove two or three. He said that very infrequently, 
if ever, would a subscriber to his list wind up being blackholed, 
because they were companies or organizations that tended to be as 
anxious to avoid spam as he is. Four volunteers working at separate 
locations help Vixie sift through potential spam, which they have 
received directly from spammers or which concerned cybercitizens have 
forwarded to the organization's Web site (http://maps.vix.com/rbl). 
The team then tries to track down the origin of the spam and send 
a warning to the company that operates the originating mail server. 
Vixie recently demanded, for example, that Earthlink, a large Southern 
California Internet service with 815,000 users, revamp its system 
to guard more effectively against being used by spammers, according 
to Steve Dougherty, Earthlink's director of Internet operations. Dougherty 
said Earthlink had already been planning to install such safeguards. 
He found Vixie to be terse and inflexible in his demands. And in the 
end, Dougherty said he had little choice but to accede. ``We accelerated 
our schedule,'' Dougherty said. ``He wields that kind of power. He's 
a guy who can drop 30 percent of our traffic.'' 
</TEXT>
</DOC>