<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981213.0220 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Charles E. Rose, who prosecuted bank robbers, narcotics traffickers, 
terrorists and organized-crime figures in 15 years with the U.S. attorney's 
office for the Eastern District of New York, died on Saturday at his 
home in Manhattan. He was 51. The cause was a brain tumor, said his 
sister, Marilyn Duer. From 1994 to his death, Rose was a partner in 
the Manhattan law firm of De Feis, O'Connell &AMP; Rose, specializing 
in defense litigation in white-collar crime and some organized-crime 
cases. He was with the federal prosecutor's office from 1979 to 1994 
and held the titles of assistant U.S. attorney, deputy chief and chief 
of the office's narcotics section, senior litigation counsel and executive 
assistant U.S. attorney. ``Charlie Rose was the finest prosecutor 
I ever worked with. He was smart, dedicated and a cop's prosecutor,'' 
New York Police Commissioner Howard Safir said Sunday. In Rose's early 
years in the U.S. attorney's office he prosecuted bank robbers and 
worked with the FBI-New York Police Department joint task force on 
bank robbery. Later, he shifted to supervising the prosecution of 
cases developed by the police department and the FBI in a task force 
on terrorism. In that role he was concerned mainly with a group seeking 
independence for Puerto Rico, whose bombing targets included the headquarters 
of the police department and the FBI headquarters at Federal Plaza, 
and also with an anarchist group, the United Freedom Front. In 1986, 
Freedom Front members were tried and convicted. Rose went on to work 
on cases involving heroin trafficking in organized crime. Later, he 
was prominent in the prosecution of reputed Mafia figures including 
Vincent Gigante, who was arrested in 1990 on federal charges that 
he conspired with 14 other reputed gangsters to rig bids and extort 
payoffs from contractors on multimillion-dollar bids with the New 
York City Housing Authority. A superseding indictment in 1993 accused 
Gigante of sanctioning the murders of six mobsters and plotting to 
kill three others, including John J. Gotti, the Gambino boss who was 
his former archrival. By early 1997, after Rose had stopped being 
a prosecutor, all defendants in the conspiracy case had been convicted 
or acquitted _ except for Gigante, whose case had been delayed by 
hearings about whether he was mentally deranged. Eventually he was 
tried and convicted. Rose was born and raised in the Bronx, received 
a bachelor's degree in 1968 from Cornell, a master's degree in 1976 
in criminology from the State University of New York at Albany and 
a law degree in 1979 from Brooklyn Law School. Besides his sister, 
of St. Peter's, Pa., he is survived by his mother, Marie L. Rose of 
Hohokus, N.J.; his wife, the former Carol Mennie, from whom he was 
long separated; and his fiancee, Elaine Banar of Manhattan. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>