<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981213.0190 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
As a woman who told authorities she was a victim of domestic abuse, 
in fear for her life and that of her 2-year-old daughter, Melanie 
Edwards seemed to have done all the right things. Ms. Edwards had 
filed for divorce, obtained a protective order against her estranged 
husband and moved to a secret location. She strictly followed the 
procedure under which she dropped off the daughter, Carli, at an agency 
for visitation with the husband, whom the courts had given continued 
rights to see the child. But all the careful steps taken by Ms. Edwards 
failed to save her or her daughter. On Wednesday night, moments after 
she returned to the agency to pick up her child, Ms. Edwards was shot 
four times in the head and body, and Carli was shot once in the chest. 
Both are dead, and police here have begun an intensive manhunt for 
her husband, Carlton Lee Edwards, whom Ms. Edwards had repeatedly 
identified as the source of her fears. ``I am very afraid for myself 
and my daughter,'' Ms. Edwards, 33, wrote in an Oct. 19 petition for 
a protective order. ``Carlton has threatened to kill me many times 
since we have been together.'' As an apparent case of domestic violence, 
the killing of Ms. Edwards and her daughter is hardly unique. But 
among advocates for the victims of such abuse, the case has clearly 
struck a particular nerve, because she took such clear steps to follow 
the procedures set up for such victims, and the system still failed 
her. ``Here's a woman who followed the letter of the law _ she did 
everything she could do under the law to keep herself and her daughter 
safe,'' said June Wiley, manager of the community advocacy program 
for New Beginnings for Battered Women and Their Children, a Seattle 
agency that aids domestic-abuse victims. Ms. Wiley added: ``She was 
really forced to choose between the devil and the deep blue sea. She 
could have moved, never to be heard from again. The choice was, do 
I violate the court order and protect my child or I do I comply and 
put myself and my daughter at great risk? She followed the letter 
of the law, and she's dead.'' In many ways, the case points up the 
tensions in abuse cases between the legal rights of the accuser and 
those of the accused. In some cases involving custody fights, lawyers 
for the men complain that the women can make up outrageous charges 
of abuse in a bid to get sole custody. Though Ms. Edwards said her 
husband, who worked until recently as an aircraft mechanic at the 
Seattle-Tacoma international airport, had made repeated threats to 
kill her, he had not been convicted of a crime; and while the authorities 
granted her petition for a protective order against him, he was not 
deemed to be a threat to his daughter. And so, as the divorce proceeding 
unfolded and Ms. Edwards' assertions about the threats remained on 
file, Edwards, 37, retained the right to four-hour visits with the 
daughter. Under the procedures known as staggered visitation, which 
are common in cases where women have received orders of protection 
but the men retain rights to see their children, Ms. Edwards would 
go to the offices of Common Ground, a local agency that acts as an 
intermediary between estranged parents. Then she would drop off her 
daughter at a pre-arranged time and leave. Fifteen minutes later, 
Edwards would come and pick up his daughter for a visit. At the end 
of his time with her, the procedure would operate in reverse, with 
his dropping off the daughter, leaving, and Ms. Edwards' returning 
afterward to retrieve the daughter. That was what happened on Wednesday 
night, police said. But rather than leaving, as he was legally required 
to do, Edwards apparently stayed nearby, then shot Ms. Edwards and 
their daughter shortly after his wife got to her car and buckled Carli 
in the back seat, according to police. In her petition for a protective 
order, Ms. Edwards said she had been threatened on many occasions, 
and physically beaten on others. ``Carlton rushed in after me,'' she 
said in describing an incident from this past summer. ``Carlton pushed 
me up against the wall with his hands around my throat, choking me.'' 
She said her husband told her, ``I'll kill you before I divorce you.'' 
Ms. Edwards had also removed a gun from their home and given it to 
police, though Edwards quickly received a concealed-weapons permit 
from an adjoining county and appeared to have simply bought another 
gun. His response to her claims are not on file, and it is not clear 
whether he hired a lawyer for the divorce proceeding. A police spokeswoman 
said Sunday that Edwards was still on the loose and that a fugitive-apprehension 
team, consisting of police officers, sheriff's deputies and state 
corrections officers, was looking for him. Shortly before the killing, 
police said, Edwards withdrew thousands of dollars from his own bank 
account and from a savings account established for Carli, and about 
four hours after the killing, he placed a cellular phone call to a 
friend in which he said he was ``going away on a trip.'' 
</TEXT>
</DOC>