<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981213.0111 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
The copier wars are full upon us. Canon USA, declaring ``X no longer 
marks the spot,'' is trying to convince corporate customers that its 
digital copiers can do anything Xerox's can do, and more. Hewlett-Packard 
Co., which has generally stuck to printers, is pushing hybrid printer-copiers 
called Mopiers. Xerox, meanwhile, keeps spewing forth new versions 
of its own digital copiers. But despite hugely expensive advertising 
campaigns that promote each product's features, the war will not be 
won on the product battlefield alone. Instead, whoever locks in the 
best distribution network may well push up to the head of the line. 
``We've said our sales will grow from $7.1 billion now to $10 billion 
in 2001, and that's not going to happen without strong distribution,'' 
said Tim Andree, a Canon spokesman. The question mark is the fate 
of Ikon Office Solutions and of Danka Americas, a unit of Danka Business 
Systems of Britain. Although together they distribute only about 9 
percent of the copiers sold in the United States, they are the primary 
outlets for Canon and other Japanese copier companies. But Danka and 
Ikon are having severe growing pains. Both have been on acquisition 
binges and each is having a tough time turning its hodgepodge of dealerships 
into a cohesive whole. Both swept their chief executives out of office 
in 1998 and brought in new management teams. Danka Americas, based 
in St. Petersburg, Fla., had domestic sales last year of $2.1 billion. 
It is still choking on the huge copier business that it bought from 
the Eastman Kodak Co. in 1996. As a result, the company is in severe 
financial straits, and most analysts expect it will soon sell off 
huge chunks of assets. In contrast, Ikon, which is based in Valley 
Forge, Pa., and has revenues of $5 billion, is profitable. But Ikon 
has been distracted as it weeds out secondary suppliers like Sharp, 
and concentrates on being the main distributor for Canon, Ricoh and 
Oce. ``H-P saw Danka and Ikon as potential allies, and their implosion 
has definitely retarded H-P's advance into this market,'' said Charles 
LeCompte, president of Lyra Research, a market research firm in Newtonville, 
Mass. Nor can Canon, which sells extensively through Ikon, be happy 
right now, said John Kelly, an analyst at Goldman, Sachs &AMP; Co. 
``It's never great when your main distributor is trying to increase 
profitability rather than sales,'' he said. Not surprisingly, copier 
companies are scrambling to find new outlets. Canon, which has become 
a fierce competitor to Xerox in the U.S. copier market, is beefing 
up its sales subsidiaries in New York, Philadelphia, Los Angeles and 
Chicago, and is concentrating more on direct sales to government offices. 
``When you are not getting the kind of orders you expect from Ikon 
and Danka, you have to focus elsewhere,'' Andree said. Hewlett, meanwhile, 
is scouring the country for independent dealers. ``Our strategy was 
always to go after worldwide accounts, and Ikon and Danka seemed to 
fit in with that,'' said Tim Haney, general manager of Hewlett's Mopier 
division. ``But neither of them can meet our needs now.'' All of which 
is good news for the Xerox Corp., which controls most of its own distribution, 
and whose well-known brand is the one to beat. ``Xerox has a 12-month 
window in which to gobble up even more market share,'' said Jonathan 
Rosenzweig, an analyst with Salomon Smith Barney. The company is exploiting 
that opportunity to the hilt, said Lynn Ritter, a copier industry 
analyst at Dataquest, a market research firm. ``You can bet Xerox 
is asking Danka and Ikon accounts, `Hey, are you sure you want to 
buy from these people when you don't even know if they'll be in business 
tomorrow?''' she said. Indeed, the sales representatives of Xerox, 
newly trained on how to sell products that can be connected to computer 
networks, are doing just that. They are holding firm on prices that 
are, in general, the market's highest. But they are offering rich 
trade-ins for non-Xerox equipment, they are promoting the interactivity 
of an all-Xerox line of printers and copiers, and they are not so 
subtly pointing out Xerox's financial stability. ``It's not that we 
have a big `Kill Ikon and Danka' program going,'' said David Myerscough, 
Xerox's senior vice president for corporate business strategy. ``But 
we figure we have 12 to 18 months before they are back to full strength 
and sure, we'll be more aggressive until then.'' In good part because 
of the troubles in its American unit, Danka lost $13.4 million last 
quarter alone. Under a 1996 deal, Kodak continues to manufacture copiers, 
but Danka must pay for much of Kodak's research and development. And 
Danka must buy Kodak's output whether the copiers sell well or not. 
Danka has paid Kodak for tens of millions of dollars' worth of copiers 
that are gathering dust in its warehouses, and is in arrears for millions 
of dollars more. ``It's a tremendous cash squeeze for us,'' said Brian 
Merriman, who left Toshiba to become president of Danka Americas in 
August. Danka has hired the investment banking firm of Wasserstein 
Perella to solicit offers for its European operations and for its 
facilities management and fax units. It has submitted a new business 
plan to suppliers and creditors, and they seem to approve. Kodak and 
other vendors have given Danka breathing room on its bills. And Danka's 
banks, which were threatening to call in loans, have extended $75 
million more in credit. Merriman said that Danka America's revenues 
were up 6 percent in the last quarter, ``because our folks are finally 
refocused on selling.'' He said Danka was poised to introduce some 
``very exciting'' new Kodak copiers and would continue to blanket 
the country with Canon color copiers. ``People forget that despite 
all the troubles, we've got more than 200 locations in 48 states that 
are selling and servicing customers every day,'' Merriman said. Ikon's 
executives display a similar combination of regret and optimism. ``We 
bought a lot of second-tier dealerships that didn't have much synergy,'' 
said Dennis LeStrange, Ikon's senior vice president for marketing. 
``But we're in 95 percent of the country, and we're stressing consistency 
and integration.'' Ikon has dropped all but a few high-volume suppliers 
and is juggling territories so that salespeople in charge of large 
corporate accounts are not distracted by smaller ones. And, LeStrange 
emphasizes, Ikon's 10,000-strong service staff has not been affected 
by the turmoil. ``Yes, Xerox is gaining momentum,'' he said. ``But 
we offer more flexible terms; we offer financing; we offer a broad 
range of technology, and absolutely no one offers service like we 
do.'' Xerox might disagree with that; Hewlett-Packard cannot. Of the 
top-tier copier makers, it may be fighting the worst headwinds. For 
one thing, it buys most of its printer engines from Canon. But now 
both companies are chasing the copier market, and Canon is unlikely 
to give a competitor exclusive rights to its latest models. And service 
is a big obstacle for H-P. When printers break, customers usually 
take them back to the store. Corporate copier customers are used to 
on-site installation and repair service. Since most of the latest 
copiers are plugged into computer networks, such on-site service is 
essential. Xerox, whose roots are in the copier world, already has 
an extensive field service organization; Hewlett, coming from the 
printer side of the business, is only now developing one. Hewlett 
has been busily signing on copier dealers large enough to serve corporate 
accounts. ``There are lots of qualified resellers who can offer a 
full gamut of services,'' Haney said. Hewlett's competitors call that 
wishful thinking. They say that the best dealers have been snapped 
up by Danka, Ikon and Canon, and that companies like Sharp, which 
Ikon has dropped, will have first shot at the remaining ones. Hewlett 
is distributing some Mopiers through Danka, which has an extensive 
service group. But neither side seems happy. ``They expected us to 
move more product, and we expected people to like the product better,'' 
Merriman said. The distribution battlefield may shift again before 
any clear winner emerges. The new arena may well be the Internet. 
``Computer-savvy buyers will go to a company's home page and configure 
exactly the product they want,'' Myerscough of Xerox said. ``They 
won't want a skewed pitch from anyone's salesman.'' 
</TEXT>
</DOC>