<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981213.0057 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
The latest two premieres for the Alvin Ailey American Dance Theater's 
season are by dancers in the company. Both pieces were introduced 
at City Center on Friday night, and both were intense in different 
ways. Each suggested its novice choreographer should be given further 
opportunities. In ``Restricted,'' Lisa Johnson was obviously telling 
some sort of story whose plot line had been abstracted into powerful 
images. The work had its sketchy aspects simply because specific dramatic 
ideas were evoked but not developed, and yet the use of energy had 
an unmistakable emotional impact. As it turns out, the choreographer's 
program dedication, ``In memory of Roxanne Eley,'' is relevant to 
the work. Asked after the premiere to identify Ms. Eley, a company 
spokesman said that she was Ms. Johnson's cousin, and that both women 
had grown up together in Washington. When Ms. Eley was raped and murdered 
there in 1996, it was because she was a lesbian, Ms. Johnson said. 
She said the title ``Restricted'' refers to the kind of life her cousin 
led. Like this viewer, most in the audience were presumably unaware 
of this background before seeing the piece, and it would be wrong 
to consider it as a literal retelling of Ms. Johnson's family tragedy. 
In generalized terms, the work seems to be about people breaking free 
to express a sexual identity. Initially tied together by a symbolic 
rope, the four members of the cast divide into a male-female couple 
and a female pair. Choices seem to be made here about partners in 
dance and in life; yet there is also a hint of confusion when, at 
the end, the man and one of the women from the female pair make contact. 
Ms. Johnson's strong suit is atmosphere. Although not always clear, 
she succeeds in conveying a troubled emotional resonance. The symbolic 
long yellow rope in which Renee Robinson, Venus Hall, Christina Angela 
Gonzales and Vernard Gilmore are entangled does not restrict them 
for long. Stacey Saltzman's silvery costumes give the dancers a starlike 
luster as they revolve and break loose to flail, kick and plunge into 
short phrases of movement with choppy gestures and asymmetrical shapes 
(knee up to one side). Influenced perhaps by Ulysses Dove's pieces 
in the repertory, Ms. Johnson avoids a fluid ``dancey'' phrase, and 
like Dove she chooses music (by Michael Mays) that is ruled by a big 
beat, a piston-driving sound. The images have their mysteries: Two 
women pass through a hoop formed by Gilmore's arms. In a solo, Gilmore 
hits his chin with clasped hands. As Ms. Robinson and Ms. Hall revolve 
in an embrace, Ms. Gonzales lies entwined in the rope, before a duet 
with Gilmore finds her lying horizontally across the back of his neck 
and shoulders. The dancers are splendid and Pamela Hobson's lighting, 
defining rectangles as restrictive spaces, adds extra symbolism. ``Ascension,'' 
the second premiere, is dedicated by the choreographer, Troy O'Neil 
Powell, as follows: ``To Mom, one of the most compassionate people 
I have ever known _ rest in peace.'' Like his dancing, O'Neil's choreography 
has a muscular wit. The piece offers a punch line, but its winning 
grace is an overall polish. The audience, this time, even broke out 
into wolf whistles when the curtain went up on Matthew Rushing, Jeffrey 
Gerodias and Glenn Sims in bathing suits and swim caps. Barbara Forbes' 
costumes, for one thing, are in gorgeous green, turquoise and purple. 
Brenda Dolan's lighting aptly gives the beach boy trio a golden glow. 
As at the start, the men occasionally face the rear. But usually they 
soar through space with athletic grace or push against an invisible 
resisting force that gives the movement, for all its exuberance, an 
exciting tension. Balletic leaps in a circle and high leg extensions 
are coherently joined with more spontaneous movement (a wiggle, shoulder 
rotation and beefcake pose); the solos have punchier movement after 
Desiree Vlad, strutting like a true femme fatale, enters along a diagonal. 
Michael Wimberly's music, prone to big beats, picks up a richer texture 
here with light percussion; Ms. Vlad gets passed around and at the 
end the men toss her into the wings and out of their club. Draw your 
own conclusions. Ailey's ``Revelations,'' also on the program, continues 
to be danced wonderfully this season. Uri Sands' fluidity of movement 
needs special mention; it was stunning on Wednesday when he and Ms. 
Robinson gave something extra to the image of born-again baptism in 
the ``Wade in the Water'' duet, which was rendered dramatically on 
Friday by Dwana Adiaha Smallwood and Bernard Gaddis. That evening 
was dedicated to Meg Gordean, who has just left the company after 
29 years as its publicity agent. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>