<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981213.0071 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
It might have seemed unimaginable five years ago that a Spanish-language 
radio station would dominate the metropolitan New York market. But 
since last summer, WSKQ-FM, which promotes itself as Mega 97.9, has 
been No. 1, surpassing the market's longtime leader, the light-rock 
station WLTW-FM. Offering a combination of salsa and merengue music 
aimed at listeners 18 to 34 years old, the Mega 97.9 has seen its 
ratings grow even since the the death in February of Junior Hernandez, 
its popular morning host. The success of the station, one of a dozen 
around the nation owned by Spanish Broadcasting System Inc., is testimony 
to the power of the expanding Spanish-speaking audience at a time 
when English-language radio formats are increasingly fragmented. Spanish 
is now the primary language of 10 percent of the U.S. population; 
in metropolitan New York the figure is 30 percent and growing. And 
compared with 1993, when there were 365 Spanish stations in the United 
States, there are now 454 stations around the country broadcasting 
full time in Spanish. The extended reach of Spanish radio has helped 
its share of the nation's total listening audience grow to 6.5 percent, 
from 5 percent three years ago, according to Robin Flynn, a radio 
analyst at the media consulting firm Paul Kagan Associates. Riding 
this demographic and cultural wave are Raul Alarcon and his son, Raul 
Alarcon Jr., owners of Mega 97.9 and Spanish Broadcasting _ a company 
that is second only to Heftel Broadcasting Corp. in terms of number 
of Spanish stations owned. A Cuban refugee, the senior Alarcon, 70, 
began his career in this country in 1960 as a disk jockey at WBNX-AM, 
a Spanish-language station in the Bronx. In 1983, he bought his first 
station, WVNJ-AM in New York. Since then, as he and his 42-year-old 
son have built their portfolio of a dozen stations, they have not 
hesitated to acquire and convert English-language stations to their 
style of radio, as when they bought WSKQ in New York from The Jewish 
Daily Forward newspaper and reformatted it as Mega 97.9. And the company's 
acquisitions are apparently far from over. ``I am continuing to buy 
stations,'' the younger Alarcon said recently in an interview at Spanish 
Broadcasting's headquarters in Miami. ``We have built up a tremendous 
amount of equity.'' Though Spanish Broadcasting is privately owned, 
it releases financial data because it has issued publicly held bonds. 
The company has yet to post year-end figures for the fiscal year that 
ended Sept. 30, but Alarcon said sales were $85 million, up 27 percent 
from $66.7 million a year earlier, and operating profits rose 16 percent, 
to $39 million. On the strength of such performance, the family is 
studying the possibility of spinning off an equity stake in the company, 
noting the success of CBS Corp.'s sale of a portion of its Infinity 
Broadcasting radio unit. The Infinity stock was offered at $20.50 
a share last week and closed at $23.3125 on Friday. For all the market 
momentum, though, Spanish Broadcasting faces some challenges _ not 
the least of which is greater competition. In Los Angeles, where the 
company owns two stations, it now has three Spanish-language competitors, 
compared with only one several years ago. Partly as a result, the 
company's Los Angeles flagship, KLAX, which was that market's overall 
ratings leader as recently as 1994, now ranks 11th. And then there 
is the continued stigma that Spanish-language stations face with advertisers, 
which still tend to favor a more mainstream audience. Current ad revenue 
figures are not available, but last year, when Mega 97.9 ranked third 
in the New York market in ratings, it was only 13th in revenue, with 
$21.5 million. That was well back of the top-ranked WLTW, or Lite-FM, 
which took in $38 million from advertisers, according to James Duncan 
Jr., editor of Duncan's Radio Market Guide. But a notorious attempt 
to exploit this cultural divide last spring may have had the unintended 
consequence of rallying more advertisers to the Hispanic cause. In 
May an internal memo at Amcast, a division of Katz Radio Group that 
sells national advertising for two English-language New York stations, 
advised its advertising representatives to discourage potential clients 
from buying ads on primarily black or Hispanic stations, stating, 
``Advertisers should want prospects, not suspects.'' After the memo 
was circulated in the industry, Katz issued an apology. Since then, 
said Cary Davis, general manager of Mega 97.9, some new advertisers, 
including General Motors Corp.'s Cadillac division and the NBC television 
network, have signed up with the station. Spanish Broadcasting's other 
main challenge is its heavy debt load. To avoid bankruptcy in the 
early 1990s, the company issued $175 million in high-yield debt and 
another $175 million in a privately placed issue of preferred stock 
that pays its holders an annual return of 14.25 percent in additional 
shares. The company's ratio of debt and preferred stock to operating 
profits is an unusually hefty 10.9, according to Bishop Cheen, a media 
analyst at First Union Capital Markets. This drain on profits makes 
it tougher to bid for stations at a time when prices are soaring and 
the giants are getting bigger. Competition for stations has mushroomed 
since 1996, when the Federal Communications Commission virtually deregulated 
radio by adopting rules that allow companies to own up to eight stations 
in a single market and an unlimited number nationally. CBS, for example, 
now owns 161 stations. And Heftel, the Alarcons' bigger Spanish-language 
competitor, which is publicly held, owns 39 stations. ``When they 
are surrounded by giants, the question is whether to consume or be 
consumed,'' Cheen said of Spanish Broadcasting. ``What they really 
should have is a smart strategic partner with deep pockets.'' The 
Alarcons do not disagree. Apart from seeking a partner or considering 
a stock offering, the company could conceivably opt for an outright 
sale. Indeed, Alarcon said Spanish Broadcasting had already received 
a $1 billion offer _ though he declined to identify the bidder, and 
several media executives said that figure sounded high. The Alarcons 
say they want to retain their independence. Still, if they intend 
for Spanish Broadcasting to grow and compete in a rapidly consolidating 
marketplace, they may well decide to sacrifice some of their autonomy 
_ either to a partner or to the public. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>