<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981213.0175 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Three dissident Iranian writers have been reported missing in the 
last month, and now all three have turned up dead. An opposition leader 
and his wife have been killed, stabbed to death in their Tehran home. 
Not since the revolution nearly 20 years ago has Iran witnessed such 
eerie, unexplained violence. And more than at any time since the election 
of President Mohammad Khatami, hopes that Iran might be moving toward 
a more tolerant new day are giving way to fears of darker times ahead. 
``I, too, may disappear soon,'' said Firouz Gouran, whose magazine, 
The Healthy Society, has been banned by a government edict. More than 
40 writers, poets and other secular intellectuals joined Gouran during 
the weekend for what was part protest and part wake, but the mood 
here is so unsettled that none dared to make the trip alone. In an 
open letter to Khatami that was drafted during the session, the intellectuals 
appealed for government protection. ``We writers wish to call on the 
chief executive, who is in charge of ensuring the safety of all citizens, 
to end this horrible situation by any means,'' they said. The body 
of the latest victim, Mohammad Jafar Pouyandeh, a writer last seen 
on Dec. 9, was identified by his relatives on Saturday. Family members 
said his body showed signs of strangulation. The dissident poet Mohammad 
Mokhtari, whose body was found last week, was also reported to have 
been strangled. The body of another dissident writer, Javad Sharif, 
was found earlier this month in what friends have said were suspicious 
circumstances. The opposition figures, Dariush Forouhar and his wife, 
Parvaneh, had been killed in a gruesome fashion several hours before 
their bodies were discovered on Nov. 21. The attacks have outraged 
many people in Iran, and they have prompted calls from Western literary 
societies, human rights groups and the State Department for swift 
government action. Khatami has condemned the killings in strong terms 
and vowed to seek the arrest of those responsible. So far, though, 
the main effect of the killings has been to expose Khatami's relative 
impotence. Within Iran's fractious power structure, Khatami commands 
little authority over the security and intelligence forces. They are 
more closely aligned with the country's more conservative supreme 
leader, Ayatollah Ali Khamenei. From the two ends of Iran's political 
spectrum, competing theories have been offered as to who may be responsible 
for the killings. The conservative-led judiciary, in a statement Sunday, 
blamed a ``mysterious and organized move inspired by foreign elements.'' 
But at the other end of the spectrum, some dissidents have alleged 
involvement by the Iranian Intelligence Ministry. Whoever was responsible, 
Khatami's admirers worry that undermining the president may be exactly 
what the killings are intended to do. In the struggle that has raged 
in Iran since Khatami's landslide 1997 election victory, they fear, 
the attacks may represent a new phase of a battle over the extent 
to which Iran should embrace political and cultural openness. ``We 
are sure that they want to close the society as before,'' Gholam-Abbas 
Tavassoli, a leading member of the Freedom Movement, said of what 
he believed was the prime motive behind the killings. In an interview 
published in the Iranian newspaper Zan, one of Khatami's lieutenants, 
Deputy Interior Minister Mostafa Tajzadeh, described the potential 
threat to Khatami's agenda in even starker terms. ``Anarchy will make 
society thirsty for security, and people will pay any price to get 
that security, even if they lose their legitimate rights and freedom,'' 
Tajzadeh said. Since Khatami took office, voices critical of Iran's 
ruling religious establishment have generally sought a higher profile, 
but as with the quest for greater openness as a whole, their efforts 
have met with no more than mixed success. In general, the path has 
zigzagged between advances and setbacks: New newspapers have flourished, 
censorship has been relaxed and voices of dissent have found greater 
tolerance. But each of these gains has been periodically eroded _ 
and sometimes sharply _ by the conservative-led judiciary. Long before 
the killings began last month, for example, clear warnings were sent 
to government critics _ including the detention of Ibrahim Yazdi, 
leader of a liberal Islamic group, for 11 days last December; the 
closing of several newspapers, most notably Jameah and its successor, 
Tous, the boldest of the new voices, and the jailing of editors, including 
Mahmoud Shamsvolazein of Tous, who spent 35 days in a prison outside 
Tehran this fall. Still, Khatami has generally been seen until now 
as doing all he can to promote freedom in the face of considerable 
obstacles. That perception has been reflected in a change of vocabulary; 
since Khatami's election, the word ``government'' has been used more 
narrowly, to refer specifically to the executive branch. To refer 
more broadly to the clerical establishment _ including the leadership 
headed by Ayatollah Khamenei, the judiciary and parliament, all seen 
as rivals to Khatami _ Iranians now use the words ``system'' or ``regime.'' 
But if the killings continue, Khatami's supporters fear, the distinction 
could be eroded _ not only in the minds of ordinary Iranians but in 
the eyes of foreign governments, whose good will Iran needs to overcome 
its financial troubles. On Saturday, the National Security Council, 
over which Khatami presides, held an emergency meeting to discuss 
the killings. And in a statement published in Iranian newspapers Sunday, 
the Ministry of Culture and Islamic Guidance denounced the killings 
as ``inhuman acts, whatever the intentions or aims of the perpetrators 
may have been.'' The ministry said of those responsible, ``Their only 
objective was to disappoint the people, undermine the system and strike 
a blow at the fresh and positive atmosphere that has until recently 
prevailed in the Islamic Republic of Iran.'' 
</TEXT>
</DOC>