<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981213.0141 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
The result was foreordained. The votes were strictly partisan. And 
much of the debate was aimed not at the history books, but at the 
30 or fewer uncommitted members of the House. But because the impeachment 
of a president comes along so infrequently, the logic and the rhetoric 
of the House Judiciary Committee's proceedings will inevitably be 
cited the next time Congress weighs impeachment of a president _ just 
as this time both sides cited as scripture the 1974 proceedings against 
Richard Nixon, or at least the arguments of the winning side then. 
Three issues stand out. First, the committee was almost entirely guided 
by the referral of Kenneth Starr, the independent counsel who has 
pursued President Clinton for more than four years. Except for sending 
the president 81 questions designed to get him to admit under oath 
to charges he had already denied under oath, the committee relied 
entirely on Starr's evidence. To avoid political embarrassment for 
themselves, neither party chose to call and cross-examine the most 
obvious witnesses _ Monica Lewinsky, for one. And the committee compiled 
its four articles of impeachment to include each of Starr's 11 alleged 
crimes and nothing more, except for proposing to impeach Clinton for 
sticking to his story in answering the 81 questions. On Saturday, 
the committee did drop some of Starr's weakest charges _ that Clinton 
had abused power by lying to aides who then misled the public. In 
all this, except for chattering constantly to television cameras, 
the committee seemed to view itself as a grand jury deciding there 
was probable cause for a trial, almost on the model described by Sol 
Wachtler, the former chief judge of the New York state Court of Appeals. 
In 1973, he said dutiful grand juries, if asked by a prosecutor, would 
``indict a ham sandwich.'' The second interesting idea was that, even 
if ultimately unsuccessful in removing a president, impeachment served 
as a deterrent to bad behavior by an ``otherwise errant president,'' 
as Rep. James Rogan, R-Calif., said. As authority he cited Jonathan 
Turley of George Washington University Law School, who also argued 
for the grand jury analogy. Rogan was defending a colleague, Rep. 
Bill McCollum, R-Fla., who had made the case with more flair, arguing 
that even if Clinton was acquitted, ``Impeachment would satisfy those 
who believe the president should be branded and given the scarlet 
letter.'' This argument, though rejected by the Democrats and not 
advanced by most Republicans, who said their goal was removal from 
office, has even more recent parentage than the ham sandwich idea. 
It may be traced to Donald Smaltz, the independent counsel whose case 
against Mike Espy, the former secretary of agriculture, ended up in 
acquittal on 30 counts (after dismissal of 10 more), despite his having 
spent $17 million in four years. Smaltz said on Dec. 2, ``The actual 
indictment of a public official may in fact be as great a deterrent 
as a conviction of that official.'' Those thoughts lead back to the 
most serious argument about impeachment heard all week. The best moments 
of debate were over whether the committee and the House should support 
impeachment if they had no hope of a conviction in the Senate. That 
argument matters, even if Republicans were seeking votes on the floor 
by portraying an impeachment as no more than a gesture, and Democrats 
sometimes skipped over the Senate entirely and said a vote to impeach 
actually removed the president. On Friday, Judiciary Chairman Henry 
Hyde, R-Ill., put one view clearly, when he said it was not true that 
by voting for impeachment ``we're throwing the president out of office.'' 
He said, ``What we do is we find whether there is enough evidence 
to warrant submission to the Senate for them to conduct the trial.'' 
But Rep. Barney Frank, D-Mass., said that was only technically correct. 
``The only justification for this proceeding and the only basis on 
which members can honestly vote for these articles is their belief 
that the president ought to be thrown out of office,'' he said. He 
said any lesser standard was a political effort to gloss over the 
meaning of voting for the articles of impeachment, which ended with 
the sentence, ``Wherefore, William Jefferson Clinton, by such conduct, 
warrants impeachment and trial and removal from office and disqualification 
to hold and enjoy any office of honor, trust or profit under the United 
States.'' The lesser argument about responsibility has its parallels 
in the way Congress does its ordinary business these days. Members 
regularly offer amendments they do not believe will pass just to set 
up television advertisements proclaiming that someone of the opposite 
party voted for crime or drugs or whatever. Last summer the House 
passed a number of bills desired by the Christian right even though 
it knew the Senate would never take them up. That is not the case 
here. Even if conviction by the Senate is almost impossible to imagine, 
the issue must go there if the full House votes for it this week. 
But there was no real agreement about how sure the committee had to 
be of Clinton's guilt before it voted to impeach. It was plain the 
Republicans were sure he had lied under oath, and they took the view 
that it was their duty to impeach and let the Senate worry about what 
came next, though indeed it will be up to them, as House managers, 
to prove it. They had no use for the argument, from prosecutors called 
by the White House, that ``responsible'' people do not bring charges 
if they think they cannot convict _ both because it is unfair to an 
accused and because it makes criminals think they can get away with 
crime. Rogan called the prosecutors' argument ``an absurdity.'' But 
for all the weight members put on the issue, it was sometimes blindingly 
clear that they had not done their homework about the consequences 
of their votes. McCollum, for example, astonished other members when 
he twice insisted that the Senate could convict Clinton but choose 
not to remove him from office. After the Constitution was read to 
him, he took it back. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>