<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981213.0139 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
There may or may not be enough rebellious Republicans to stop impeachment 
on the House floor this week. But the real question is whether there 
are enough of them willing to break with the rules set by their leaders 
for the handling of the impeachment vote. Rep. Robert Livingston, 
the speaker-designate, has vowed to block any attempt by Democrats 
to offer an alternative to impeachment, saying censure is outside 
the rules of the House and an attack on House Republicans. But Democrats 
accused Livingston, R-La., of hiding behind parliamentary rules that 
he could easily waive if he truly wanted to give House members a ``vote 
of conscience,'' as he has said any vote on impeachment should be. 
``It's the rawest of raw partisan politics,'' said Rep. Tom Barrett, 
D-Wis. ``Mr. Livingston is not just poisoning the well, he's poisoning 
the entire water supply.'' With Republicans barricading the road to 
censure, House Democrats are drafting a high-stakes parliamentary 
end-around that can only succeed with the support of at least a dozen 
rank-and-file Republicans. Democrats hope to convince them that Livingston 
is being so unfair that they should commit political heresy and vote 
to bring an alternative measure to the floor of the House. If the 
maneuver prevails, which the House parliamentarian's office said has 
not happened in modern history, impeachment would be quashed before 
a final vote. ``They may not let us bring up censure, but all the 
members, Democratic and Republican, are going to face a procedural 
vote on whether or not they want censure to come up as an alternative,'' 
Rep. Richard Gephardt, House minority leader, said Sunday on the NBC 
News program ``Meet the Press.'' ``They're they're going to have to 
face this issue, whether the Republican leadership wants them to or 
not.'' The rules of the House were set up to provide a structure for 
debate among members and to ensure that unrelated issues don't bog 
down bills on the floor. In the House, bills typically move through 
the relevant committees and, if approved, are assigned a rule, or 
a set of procedures, by the Rules Committee before going to the floor. 
These procedures, for example, set the length of debate and whether 
amendments are allowed. While enforced by the majority party, these 
rules also provide protections for the minority, including the right 
to offer an alternative to a majority-sponsored bill, even if only 
on a procedural vote. An article of impeachment follows a slightly 
different track. It is considered privileged, because once an impeachment 
article is approved by the Judiciary Committee, is goes straight to 
the House floor, bypassing the Rules Committee. It cannot be amended 
on the floor. Livingston and other Republican leaders argue that because 
the Judiciary Committee rejected a censure option as a part of its 
impeachment resolution, that alternative cannot be considered on the 
House floor. In parliamentary terms, it is not considered germane. 
Democrats say that Republicans fear that a censure alternative would 
drain support away from impeachment, particularly from some 20 to 
30 undeclared Republicans. ``They don't want to find a solution other 
than impeachment,'' Gephardt said. ``They're obsessed, apparently, 
with impeaching this president and dragging the country through this 
endlessly.'' Here is what Gephardt said he would do if Livingston 
did not relent. Just before a final vote on each article of impeachment, 
the Democrats would propose reconsidering the impeachment resolution, 
but with instructions to censure the president, rather than impeaching 
him. This is a motion to recommit. House Parliamentarian Charles Johnson 
would then advise Rep. Ray LaHood, R-Ill., whom Speaker Newt Gingrich 
named to preside over the impeachment vote from the speaker's chair, 
whether the Democratic proposal was germane to the underlying impeachment 
resolution. The parliamentarian is a nonpartisan position appointed 
by the speaker. LaHood is not technically bound to follow the parliamentarian's 
ruling, but LaHood said Sunday that he most certainly would. If LaHood 
ruled that the Democratic proposal was not germane, which Democrats 
say is almost certain to happen, they could appeal the ruling to the 
full House. This would be the crucial procedural vote, especially 
for the moderate Republicans who oppose impeachment and favor censure. 
But the parliamentarian's office said such a reversal has never prevailed 
in modern House history. Moreover, under Gingrich's reign, it has 
been considered heresy for Republicans to vote with Democrats on parliamentary 
votes because it is viewed as an attack on the Republican majority. 
Republican leaders would consider such a vote a more serious breach 
of party unity than a vote to oppose impeachment. ``That would require 
some Republicans to vote against their own chair, which is a tough 
vote for anybody,'' Rep. Henry Hyde, chairman of the Judiciary Committee, 
said on the CBS News program ``Face the Nation.'' Of course, if the 
parliamentarian ruled in favor of the Democratic proposal, LaHood 
would face an extremely awkward decision: Rule against the arbiter 
of procedure in the House or rule against your party's leaders. An 
expert on House rules, after listening to what Gephardt was contemplating, 
acknowledged that the high-risk gambit might just work, if the wording 
was right. ``It might well be germane to say impeachment is not warranted,'' 
said the expert, who spoke on condition of anonymity. If an appeal 
of LaHood's negative ruling failed, a House Democratic lawyer working 
on draft language said Gephardt would likely try again, using watered-down 
language that might not even mention the word censure. In any case, 
LaHood, who has a reputation for fairness, said in an interview, ``We'll 
play by the rules, as spelled out by the parliamentarian.'' 
</TEXT>
</DOC>