<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981213.0132 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Gov. Lawton Chiles, a homespun centrist politician from the middle 
of Florida who served three terms as a Democratic senator and was 
elected to two terms as governor, died Saturday at the Governor's 
Mansion in Tallahassee. He was 68. Chiles died from an abnormal heart 
rhythm, a medical examiner told The Associated Press. The governor, 
who had a history of heart trouble, was found by a Florida law-enforcement 
agent next to an exercise bicycle, where he was pronounced dead. Chiles 
was to have left office in January, after his successor, Jeb Bush, 
was inaugurated. Chiles was barred by law from serving a third term. 
Lt. Gov. Buddy MacKay, who lost to Bush last month, was sworn in to 
complete Chiles' term. In a sign of the stature Chiles accrued during 
four decades in politics, the House Judiciary Committee paused on 
Saturday to honor Chiles during debate of a resolution to censure 
President Clinton. In 12 years as a state legislator in Tallahassee, 
18 years in Washington and eight years as governor, Chiles earned 
a reputation as a lawmaker deeply concerned about the environment 
and the fiscal responsibility of government. In the Senate, he focused 
on what he called ``government in the sunshine.'' He was the chief 
sponsor of a 1976 federal law requiring regulatory agencies to conduct 
their meetings in public. And he pressed with some success for similar 
openness in congressional committee hearings and for requirements 
that officeholders disclose personal and campaign financial information, 
as well as similar rules for lobbyists. Chiles was also the main sponsor 
of the Federal Paperwork Reduction Act of 1980, and carried on this 
cause as governor by proposing the repeal of half of Florida's 28,750 
state regulations by the end of 1996. He began by issuing executive 
orders removing several thousand regulations and replacing them where 
deemed necessary with looser common-sense ``guidelines.'' He retired 
from the Senate at the end of his third term in 1988, ``burned out,'' 
in his words, by the impasses he had encountered in the two years 
he served as chairman of the budget committee. His efforts to achieve 
a bipartisan consensus on where and how much to cut federal spending 
were undercut by both Republicans and fellow Democrats eager to preserve 
certain projects, and by officials in the Reagan administration. In 
1989, depression was diagnosed in Chiles. Around that time, he had 
been taking part in negotiations to stem the growth of the federal 
budget. ``I began to see the president wasn't serious, the speaker 
wasn't serious, the majority leader wasn't serious,'' he said. ``It 
was all a charade. I just wanted to scream, `This is a fraud!' But 
I helped to create it.'' Chiles spoke of his depressive period as 
``not the blues, but the blacks, the black blacks.'' He couldn't digest 
food properly and developed insomnia. One day, after being shown a 
calendar jammed with appointments, he told his Senate staff, ``I can't 
see anything here that I want to do.'' His successful medical treatment 
included Prozac, then a new antidepressant. Having recovered by the 
spring of 1990, he re-entered politics, ran for governor and, by a 
vote of 57 percent to 43 percent, defeated a one-term Republican, 
Gov. Bob Martinez. During Chiles' nearly 40 years in public office, 
the population of Florida doubled to 14 million; in the same period, 
the state's political profile shifted from Deep South Democrat to 
an almost equal division of Democrats and Republicans. Noting this 
change, he described the new Florida as ``more a crowd than a community.'' 
But having early acquired a reputation for probity, the soft-spoken 
Chiles never lost an election. Noting the absence of scandal or indications 
of misuse of office in his career, David Schultz wrote in The Ledger, 
the daily newspaper of Chiles' hometown, Lakeland, ``It's refreshing 
and rare to find such integrity in public office.'' Chiles was an 
unknown state Senator when he entered national politics in 1970 after 
Spessard Holland, then Florida's senior senator, decided to retire. 
Chiles attracted attention by conducting a ``shoe leather, shoestring 
campaign,'' walking the length of the state, 1,003 miles in three 
months. Chiles refused campaign contributions of more than $10 (in 
later contests he raised this to $100). In the Democratic primary 
runoff he beat a former governor with nearly 69 percent of the vote. 
In the general election, ``Walkin' Lawton,'' as he was then known, 
upset Republican Rep. William Cramer, winning nearly 54 percent of 
the vote. Chiles' vote totals remained high thereafter: 63 percent 
in the 1976 senatorial race, 62 percent in 1982. After defeating Martinez 
in 1990 he sought re-election in 1994 and, defying a Republican tide 
that swept the nation, defeated Bush, the son of former President 
George Bush, by 51 percent to 49 percent. As senator, Chiles successfully 
fought a project to dig a barge canal across Florida. In 1974 he sponsored 
legislation creating the Big Cypress National Preserve, a 574,000-acre 
preserve that helps control water flow to the Everglades. And he opposed 
phosphate strip mining in the Osceola National Forest. As governor, 
one of Chiles' most notable achievements was in campaign financing, 
pushing through legislation requiring public money for candidates 
running for state offices. He also became a leader in encouraging 
litigation against the tobacco industry, first by sponsoring a law 
that permitted the filing of lawsuits against cigarette manufacturers 
and then filing such a lawsuit on behalf of the state in 1995. That 
suit, which sought to recoup the costs of treating Medicaid patients 
suffering from smoking-related diseases, culminated in 1997 in a $11.3 
billion settlement to be paid over 25 years. He also advocated health-care 
reform and adamantly opposed federal restrictions on benefits for 
legal immigrants. Lawton Mainor Chiles Jr. was born April 3, 1930, 
in Lakeland. His father was a railroad conductor. After attending 
public schools, he graduated from the University of Florida in Gainesville 
in 1952, and served in the Army as an artillery lieutenant in Korea 
in 1953 and 1954. Chiles returned to the University of Florida and 
received a law degree in 1955. He was elected to the Florida House 
of Representatives in 1958 and served four consecutive two-year terms; 
he was elected to the state Senate and served from 1966 to 1970. He 
is survived by his wife, the former Rhea May Grafton; two sons, Lawton 
III and Edward G.; two daughters, Tandy M. and Rhea Gay, and 10 grandchildren. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>