<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981213.0174 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
What has happened to Japan's Democratic Party? Just two months ago, 
the country's largest opposition party and its dynamic leader, Naoto 
Kan, were ascendant. Voters handed them the ability to control the 
upper house of Parliament in June, and they united with other parties 
to thwart the governing party on several fronts. Now, though, Kan 
and his Democrats have been flattened by scandals, dithering and internal 
dissension. Some opposition partners have abandoned them and made 
deals with the governing Liberal Democratic Party. And just last month, 
Ichiro Ozawa and his Liberal Party turned from friend to foe, signing 
a tentative agreement to form a coalition with the governing party 
that will greatly frustrate the Democratic Party's ability to hold 
legislation hostage to its demands, its most potent weapon. ``Popular 
support for the Democratic Party is on the decline _ they have no 
clear strategy and there's the whiff of scandal about them,'' said 
Takeshi Sasaki, a political science professor at Tokyo University. 
Even Yukio Hatoyama, Kan's deputy, is feeling glum. ``We pushed too 
hard right after the election,'' he said in an interview. ``There 
are a lot of things for which we owe hansei'' _ a word that can mean 
reflection, contrition or self-examination. He blamed his party for 
stealing too much of the thunder when the opposition successfully 
forced Democratic plans for fixing the banking system into law in 
September, the first time legislation has been crafted by legislators 
rather than bureaucrats. He said the party should have shared credit 
with its partners. ``We pushed the Liberal Party from us toward the 
LDP,'' Hatoyama said. ``We rejoiced too much when we were successful 
in getting the banking law passed.'' Contrite as he may be, Hatoyama 
is confident that if a general election were called today, his party 
would score big. He calculates that the Democrats would win 170 seats 
in the powerful 500-seat lower house, an estimate the governing party 
does not dispute, and Komeito, the second-largest opposition group, 
would probably win 50. That is not enough to secure a majority, but 
it would probably rob the governing party of its grip on the powerful 
Lower House. But the Democratic Party has so far fielded candidates 
for fewer than half the seats that Hatoyama expects to win, and general 
elections must be held by October 2000, although most expect them 
next year. Moreover, the party's most prominent representative, Kan, 
is mired in a sex scandal that threatens to shake his bedrock support 
among women. He began his political career by managing the parliamentary 
campaign of one of Japan's leading feminists. But a conservative weekly 
magazine has asserted that Kan spent the night in a hotel room with 
a former television anchor, a woman 20 years his junior who has been 
a consultant to the Democratic Party. Kan denied the story, but in 
an extensive interview published recently, he conceded that his actions 
could have been misconstrued. The scandal is being blamed for a significant 
drop in the Democrats' popularity. A recent poll taken by the Kyodo 
News Service showed support for Kan's party at 16.8 percent of the 
1,911 respondents, a drop of 6 percentage points since September. 
The governing party gained the favor of those the Democrats lost, 
with its support level rising 6.1 percentage points, to 32.5 percent. 
The sex scandal followed news reports asserting that Kan had accepted 
a $4.2 million payoff from Hiromu Nonaka, the powerful chief Cabinet 
secretary and a senior member of the governing party, to guarantee 
the passage of legislation to overhaul the banking system. Kan has 
also denied that accusation, and Hatoyama said both scandals were 
cooked up by Liberal Democrats frightened by the prospect of an opposition 
party with real teeth. Traditionally, Japanese opposition parties 
have been little more than opposition voices, offering little in the 
way of alternative policies. But the Democrats do offer distinctly 
different views on national security, electoral reform and fiscal 
policy, giving voters a clear choice. Many suspect that there are 
divisions within the party about how vigorously those policies should 
be pursued. Kan was reportedly angry with Hatoyama for refusing to 
yield on banking reform, arguing that the hard-line stance would give 
the governing party the opportunity to blame the Democrats for holding 
up legislation while the world was pressing Japan to move quickly. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>