<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981213.0159 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
It was fitting that this year's Heisman Trophy week began with the 
airing of a year-old grievance. In New York for a College Football 
Hall of Fame banquet, Tennessee Coach Phillip Fulmer once more expressed 
dismay over how his all-everything quarterback, Peyton Manning, could 
have been passed over for the game's most coveted trophy in 1997. 
When the announcement came at the Downtown Athletic Club last year 
that Michigan's Charles Woodson, a defensive back and occasional receiver, 
was the Heisman Trophy winner, the stunned look on Manning's face 
pretty much summed up the confusing, whimsical and sometimes vindictive 
nature of an all-out media campaign for an honor that is supposed 
to designate the most outstanding player in college football. ``We 
. . . I . . . have a different opinion of who was the best player 
in the nation last year,'' Fulmer said last week. Nearby was Texas 
Coach Mack Brown, who was just beginning a week of award appearances 
on behalf of his splendid running back Ricky Williams. Even though 
Williams capped off his yearlong status as the Heisman front-runner 
by earning the trophy Saturday night with the third-highest first-place 
vote total in the award's 64-year history, Brown's face flashed a 
grave look of anticipated disappointment. Like the game these coaches 
have dedicated their lives to, the outcome of the Heisman vote isn't 
always fair. In Manning's case, the only mistakes the gifted quarterback 
made were not beating Florida and having his famous lineage (son of 
Archie) and All-America off-field demeanor become overexposed. Not 
that Woodson wasn't a worthy choice. His opportunistic defense, his 
penchant for big plays as a part-time wide receiver and sheer return 
artistry powered Michigan to a perfect record and a share of the national 
title. But he was perhaps aided by a Manning backlash among voters 
who didn't think the Tennessee quarterback's on-field accomplishments 
matched his media-enhanced reputation. Williams had a different set 
of obstacles. He began as the front-runner by having led the nation 
in rushing in 1997, finishing a distant fifth in the Heisman voting, 
and by being within 2,000 yards of breaking Tony Dorsett's 22-year-old 
Division I career rushing record. He was the front-runner nobody liked 
because the Longhorns were coming off a 4-7 season, Brown was a first-year 
coach from North Carolina who presumably needed to rebuild, and well, 
the running back was a different-looking sort. In Austin, no less 
than the coaching legend Darrell Royal and the 1977 Heisman winner 
Earl Campbell had heart-to-heart talks with Williams about losing 
the dreadlocks and the stud in his tongue and playing down the tattoos. 
But coach, runner and the university's sports information department 
were determined to turn these perceived negatives into positives. 
Brown inherited a mixed bag at Texas, but knew that in Williams he 
had a once-in-a-lifetime recruiting tool. ``I hoped I could sit in 
living rooms,'' Brown said, ``and tell parents, `I had a kid from 
California who passed up millions to return for his senior year and 
won the Heisman Trophy. That's the kind of place the University of 
Texas is.' '' Next, he challenged his team to win the games necessary 
for Williams to be considered Heisman-worthy. But the Longhorns got 
off to a 1-2 start, losing to teams led by the Heisman's eventual 
second- and third-place finishers, quarterbacks Michael Bishop of 
Kansas State and Cade McNown of U.C.L.A. ``The first questions were 
all about Ricky and if this knocks him out of the Heisman,'' Brown 
said of the 48-7 loss to Kansas State in which Williams was held to 
39 yards. ``I had a whole team to worry about.'' But the Longhorns 
reeled off six consecutive victories on their way to an 8-3 season 
and a date in the Cotton Bowl. ``The Heisman Trophy is supposed to 
be an individual award, but in this case, it was a team award,'' Williams 
said. ``My teammates played hard for me.'' The running back also was 
gracious in thanking John Bianco, the sports information director 
who promoted his candidacy. It was a decidedly low-tech campaign in 
an era of video highlight e-mails and incessant mass mailings of postcards 
and glossy photos. Before the season, Bianco summed up his strategy 
this way: ``I'm not going to do anything but get Ricky in front of 
people. He's a good guy with a great story that people will like.'' 
Williams never succumbed to the advice from Royal and Campbell, but 
spoke movingly about returning for his senior year to continue his 
education studies. He talked football, music, history and what a great 
time he was having in college. He gave voters every reason to look 
at his numbers. He owns all or part of 16 Division I records, including 
most career rushing yards _ 6,279. He won the Heisman Trophy by the 
fourth-largest victory margin, and his countenance will certainly 
liven up the portrait room in the Downtown Athletic Club. And next 
year, no one will have a reason to wonder how he got there. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>