<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981213.0168 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
The Pentagon has asked President Clinton for the largest increase 
in military spending since the first four years of Ronald Reagan's 
Cold War buildup, but the administration has balked at the size of 
the request, having already pledged to preserve budget surpluses for 
the Social Security system. After years of dwindling resources following 
the collapse of the Soviet Union, Defense Department officials express 
hopes that Clinton will propose the Pentagon's first real increase 
in military spending since 1991, when the military budget spiked slightly 
for the Persian Gulf War. But their hopes for a large increase in 
next year's budget _ stoked by encouraging words from Clinton himself 
_ have waned in recent weeks as a White House battling impeachment 
also scrambles to find ways to support Social Security and balance 
competing demands from other agencies, administration and defense 
officials said. The Pentagon's concerns have become so acute that 
Secretary of Defense William Cohen and Gen. Henry Shelton, the chairman 
of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, delayed their departures on separate 
trips to Europe this week. Instead, they will stay in Washington to 
press their case in pivotal budget meetings at the White House on 
Monday. ``We need to fight for our money,'' a defense official said 
on Sunday. In a meeting with Clinton last Monday, Cohen, Shelton and 
the chiefs of the Army, Navy, Air Force and Marine Corps argued for 
at least a $10 billion increase in spending in next year's budget 
and a $112 billion increase over the next six years, the officials 
said, speaking on the condition of anonymity. Next year's increase 
_ to pay for everything from spare parts to raises for the troops 
to the peacekeeping mission in Bosnia _ would represent a roughly 
4 percent increase above the Department of Defense's current $258 
billion budget, the largest annual increase since 1984. Between now 
and 2006, the annual increases would grow steadily to $25 billion 
a year. But Cohen and the chiefs left that meeting without a firm 
pledge for any increase. And while Clinton expressed support in principle 
for addressing problems with the military's readiness, the officials 
said it now seemed unlikely that the president would propose more 
than a modest increase, if any, when he unveils his budget proposal 
in February for the 2000 fiscal year, which begins next October. ``I 
think there is a lot of sympathy for their needs over there,'' an 
administration official said. ``But I don't think that even in a perfect 
world, they would get every penny they're asking for.'' The wrangling 
has created a political problem for Clinton, who already faces intensifying 
pressure from Republicans in Congress to increase military spending. 
After inviting Cohen and the chiefs to submit requests for more money, 
Clinton will now face criticism for giving anything less than the 
amount they have calculated as necessary to keep the nation's military 
fit. ``There's been a spirit of expectation built up by a lot of folks 
that have heard what the president's been saying,'' one military officer 
said. Gen. Dennis Reimer, the Army's chief of staff, described last 
week's meeting with the president as an ``honest exchange,'' and he 
conceded that the Pentagon's demands had to be weighed against the 
constraints of the Balanced Budget Act of 1997. ``These are complex 
issues,'' he told reporters at a breakfast on Thursday. ``There's 
more involved than defense, obviously.'' At the same time, Reimer 
reiterated his belief that the Army needed $5 billion a year above 
its current $64 billion budget ``to do what we need to do the way 
it needs to be done.'' Without adequate resources, he warned, the 
administration needed either to reconsider its national security strategy 
or ``accept a hollowness in the force that we're not willing to accept.'' 
Clinton's aides emphasized that the president had not yet made a decision 
on the Pentagon's budget. He must first decide, they said, how to 
propose using the projected surpluses in the federal budget to avert 
the looming insolvency in the Social Security system. And then, they 
said, he could use any leftover surplus to pay for an increase for 
the military. In the meantime, the Office of Management and Budget 
has pressed Cohen and other Pentagon officials to pay for at least 
some of their $112 billion request _ which Cohen's office has already 
pared from $148 billion _ with savings from existing budget levels. 
In fact, $5 billion to $7 billion in savings resulting from lower-than-expected 
inflation and oil costs are expected to cover the raises and improved 
retirement benefits that Clinton has already touted, in a speech on 
Veterans Day and in an appearance before troops at Osan Air Force 
Base in South Korea. Military leaders, led by Shelton, have made improving 
pay and benefits _ including a raise of 3.9 percent this year and 
4.4 percent next year _ a top priority. Without them, they say, it 
will become even more difficult to attract and keep the most qualified 
people. ``I've approved pay raises that will significantly reduce 
the gap between military and civilian pay,'' Clinton told an assembly 
of troops at Osan on Nov. 22, who responded with hearty applause. 
``I ought to quit while I'm ahead,'' Clinton added. Military spending 
has declined sharply since President Reagan's buildup of weaponry 
in the 1980s. In today's dollars, adjusted for inflation, the Pentagon's 
budget has dropped 36 percent from a peak of $403 billion in 1985 
to $258 billion now, not counting the Department of Energy's spending 
on nuclear weapons. As a percentage of the federal budget, military 
spending is now at just under 15 percent, as low as it has been since 
the end of World War II. This ``peace dividend'' largely resulted 
from two things: the cut in military personnel from 2.4 million soldiers, 
sailors, airmen and marines to just over 1.4 million today and the 
ability to put off the purchase of new major weapons following the 
infusion under Reagan. Now, Pentagon officials say, the fighter jets 
and ships and tanks bought in the Reagan years need replacing or at 
least lots of spare parts. And the smaller forces are being asked 
to do more, from boxing in Saddam Hussein to responding to natural 
disasters like Hurricane Mitch to peacekeeping in Bosnia. (Ten percent 
of the Pentagon's $112 billion request alone would pay for keeping 
the troops in Bosnia.) ``To me those are extremely valuable things,'' 
the new secretary of the navy, Richard Danzig, said of the peacekeeping 
and humanitarian missions. ``They also create a lot of wear and tear 
and burden on our resources and our people.'' In recent months, Cohen 
and the chiefs have become increasingly vocal in warning about what 
they call an erosion of resources and the resulting strain on troop 
strength, training and morale. In August, Gen. David Bramlett, commander 
of the Army's Forces Command at Fort McPherson, Ga., warned that the 
Army had to divert money from things like base maintenance to pay 
for training meant to keep soldiers battle-ready. ``We cannot operate 
within current funding levels and have the viable fighting force we 
want to project into the next century,'' Bramlett wrote in a memorandum 
that ended up being widely circulated. In September, the nation's 
top commanders met with Clinton at Fort McNair here in Washington 
and laid out what amounted to a plea for more money to address the 
strains. A week later, Clinton responded with a letter to Cohen that 
many in the Pentagon viewed as a firmer commitment to new resources 
than it is turning out to be. ``We need to consider additional steps 
that may be needed to preserve the quality of the American military,'' 
the president said, though he pledged no specific increase. Though 
officials declined to detail how they would spend the increases, beyond 
bolstering pay and retirement benefits, they said the extra money 
would not go for large new weapons as much as for more mundane equipment, 
spare parts, jet fuel and other things necessary for training. ``I 
need to fix the unsexy stuff,'' said Gen. Charles Krulak, the commandant 
of the Marine Corps, who has been one of the only commanders openly 
critical of Clinton's previous military budgets. At least some of 
the money would speed up the purchase of some of the Pentagon's biggest 
weapons programs, including the Air Force's F-22 and the Navy's F/A-18 
fighter jets. Some administration officials and independent analysts 
said the Pentagon was pleading poverty without having squeezed enough 
fat out of its notoriously resistant bureaucracy or having reconsidered 
any of its expensive modernization programs, like those fighters. 
They noted that since the end of the Persian Gulf War the United States 
had not had to confront any new threat to its security that would 
justify a large increase in spending. They also pointed out that efforts 
to trim the bureaucracy _ like last year's Defense Reform Initiative, 
which was to save $6 billion a year _ had so far failed to produce 
significant savings. Michael O'Hanlon, an analyst at the Brookings 
Institution in Washington, said that almost a decade after the Cold 
War, the Pentagon still had not learned to adjust to fiscal constraints, 
using the opportunity of a relatively peaceful world to create a smaller, 
more efficient military. ``The Pentagon hasn't made the cuts,'' O'Hanlon 
said. ``People just waited for the first opportunity to ask for what 
they wanted all along.'' 
</TEXT>
</DOC>