<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981213.0107 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
In a major expansion of one of the nation's premier cultural landmarks, 
Carnegie Hall is going underground, turning a subterranean recital 
hall from 1891 into a high-tech performance space for small operas 
and other productions. The new hall would contain an orchestra pit 
and about 800 seats and would be one of the most significant additions 
to New York City's music scene since the construction of Lincoln Center 
in the '60s. It could be in operation as early as the 2000-2001 season. 
Music people who have spoken to the architect, James Stewart Polshek, 
say the project could end up costing as much as $50 million because 
of the awkward location and constraints of working around performance 
schedules. About $20 million has been raised or promised, about a 
third from public sources _ New York City owns the hall _ and the 
rest from private donors, officials said. The space was used as a 
movie theater from 1960 until last year. Several public officials 
involved in the project said the new hall would be designed with the 
latest in broadcast, communications and recording technology. Its 
size would be particularly attractive to many arts groups, especially 
those that present Baroque and chamber opera productions and find 
it hard to fill larger quarters. The hall would be the third in the 
building, the ocher Italianate palazzo on Seventh Avenue and 57th 
Street that the steel baron Andrew Carnegie built for less than $1 
million starting in 1889. Despite its reputation, it barely escaped 
demolition before being saved in 1960. The main concert hall has 2,804 
seats, and the adjacent Weill Recital Hall seats 268. The underground 
space, which opened some months before the main hall in 1891, was 
a 1,200-seat privately run movie house until 1997, when Carnegie Hall 
reclaimed it, along with a shoe store and a poster gallery on Seventh 
Avenue. Another large music hall, a home for Jazz at Lincoln Center, 
with 1,000 seats, is to be built at Columbus Center at Columbus Circle, 
where the Coliseum now stands. Judith Arron, Carnegie Hall's executive 
director, said last January that plans for a hall were under discussion 
but ``still in the dreaming stage.'' In the meantime, Polshek's architectural 
firm, which designed the $60 million renovation of Carnegie Hall in 
the '80s as well as projects at the American Museum of Natural History 
and Symphony Space, was engaged to plan the redevelopment of the underground 
hall. The project was discussed at a patrons' dinner in October, and 
last week Carnegie Hall sent out to reporters and others elaborate 
cardboard invitations for a Jan. 11 announcement of ``The Third Stage, 
an expansion campaign for Carnegie Hall.'' Jennifer Wada, a spokeswoman 
for Carnegie Hall, said the invitations did not constitute an announcement 
and declined to provide information on the project. Sanford Weill, 
the hall's chairman and co-chairman of Citigroup, also declined to 
be interviewed. The office of Polshek, the architect, referred questions 
to Carnegie Hall. Officials familiar with the plans said the hall 
would be designed with the latest technology and the flexibility to 
upgrade equipment as advances occur. It would also be equipped with 
what one called ``a high-tech center for cultural learning outreach,'' 
connecting students at Carnegie Hall with counterparts worldwide. 
The project has won pledges of financial support from City Hall, Gov. 
George Pataki and the state Senate, officials said. Since the violinist 
Isaac Stern rallied artists and other supporters in rescuing Carnegie 
Hall from the wreckers' ball, it has been one of the 34 city-owned 
cultural institutions directly supported in the city budget. Stern 
is the hall's president. The cost of the project has not been spelled 
out, but the work presents so many difficulties that the Metropolitan 
Transportation Authority was approached to allow removal of construction 
debris through the subway system. Scheduling the demolition and rebuilding 
around the full program of concerts, recitals and rehearsals is also 
problematic. Representatives of music ensembles and soloists said 
they had not been contacted by Carnegie Hall for bookings in the new 
space, but many said it would fill an important niche. ``Any new facility 
is a great opportunity for all of us who are still looking for the 
perfect hall in New York,'' said David Foster, president of ICM Artists, 
a leading management agency. A new midsize hall would attract new 
productions, he said, adding, ``If you build it, they will come.'' 
Other arts managers said that a hall of the kind envisioned by Carnegie 
Hall would be perfect for rarely performed quasi-operatic and chamber 
works by Stravinsky, Schoenberg, Rameau and Couperin, and could attract 
groups like the French early-music ensemble Les Arts Florissants and 
the kind of small opera productions that distinguished the Glyndebourne 
Festival in England in the days before its hall was expanded to 1,800 
seats. Many of the more experimental music companies now perform at 
the Brooklyn Academy of Music and at the three-week summertime Lincoln 
Center Festival. The city has a number of midsize music halls _ among 
them Florence Gould Hall, the 92nd Street Y, the Sylvia and Danny 
Kaye Playhouse at Hunter College and the Juilliard Theater _ but none 
as technically advanced as the planned Carnegie Hall complex. Large 
halls like the Metropolitan Opera's, with its 3,800 seats, are ill 
suited to less than spectacles, and the Met itself has long been playing 
with the idea of finding a smaller arena for ``mini Met'' productions. 
Joseph Volpe, the Met's general manager, said he had not yet talked 
to Ms. Arron about any collaborations. The underground space, known 
to two generations of moviegoers for its art films, plush scarlet 
seats and neo-classical columns, has a venerable history predating 
the main hall's. Completed in early 1891 while the construction upstairs 
was still going on _ loudly _ it played host to eminent musicians 
who performed the works of contemporaries like Brahms. In 1896, the 
American Academy of Dramatic Arts moved into the underground hall, 
and for the next 58 years instructors, including David Belasco and 
Charles Frohman, taught the actors' art to eager students, including 
Edward G. Robinson, Rosalind Russell and Spencer Tracy. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>