<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981213.0151 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Microsoft's archrivals, Sun Microsystems and Oracle, plan to announce 
a joint effort on Monday to make corporate computer users less reliant 
on Microsoft's Windows software. Sun and Oracle intend to create network 
server computers that users of desktop machines can draw upon for 
many of their basic computing activities, reducing the need for a 
full-blown desktop operating system like Windows. The move is also 
meant to slow the rapid rise of Microsoft's office-network version 
of Windows, called Windows NT. It is a strategy that Sun and Oracle 
have pursued in the past, so far without success. The new plan is 
based on a cross-licensing agreement the two companies signed earlier 
this month. The agreement gave Oracle the ability to use a portion 
of Sun's Solaris operating system software to create simple server 
computers that would be designed to run Internet and office data base 
applications. The agreement also permits Sun to add Oracle's data 
base software to the Solaris operating system, which competes with 
Windows NT from Microsoft. The plan conforms to a strategy that has 
been outlined by Oracle's chairman, Lawrence Ellison, in his effort 
to fight Windows and Windows NT by doing away with the need for an 
operating system. Last month Ellison announced that Oracle planned 
to introduce a new version of its Oracle 8 data base program code-named 
Raw Iron, which he said would be sold by makers of PC server computers, 
including Compaq, Sun Microsystems, Hewlett-Packard and Dell Computer 
as an adaptation that would, in effect, render the operating system 
invisible to the user. The new strategy is a refinement of Ellison's 
attempt in years past to persuade corporate computer managers to simplify 
their networks by replacing the personal computer on a worker's desktop 
with a simpler terminal called a network computer. That effort had 
the support of Novell, Sun, Netscape and a number of other Microsoft 
rivals. The companies began plotting an alternative to the personal 
computer in 1995, based on the idea of inexpensive desktop computers 
that would download software via corporate networks. But the approach 
has been slow to develop, in part because of the sharply falling cost 
of personal computers and in part because computer makers have been 
slow to offer commercially viable systems. But Ellison and his allies 
have not given up. In its most recent iteration, the network computing 
idea now calls for almost all computing tasks to be centralized on 
servers, so that users' own computers will do little more than act 
as monitors for the server computers. Sun Microsystems, for example, 
has begun developing an experimental version called Newt, which the 
company describes as an ``ultra-thin client.'' The device would have 
the advantage of reducing the costs of operating corporate computers 
while centralizing and simplifying their management. But it requires 
a relatively bureaucratic style of computing that takes away a great 
deal of the freedom to which users have become accustomed as they 
use PC's. Microsoft executives deride the Sun-Oracle approach as a 
style of computing that went out of fashion with the mainframes and 
minicomputers that held sway in the 1960s and 1970s. But the criticism 
has not deterred Ellison, who is promising a vast drop in the complexity 
and cost of computing for small businesses. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>