<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981213.0126 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Stone-faced and subdued, President Clinton flatly denied Sunday that 
he had committed perjury, as he reluctantly interrupted his efforts 
to rescue the Middle East peace plan he cherishes to address an impeachment 
vote that he said he could not control. In answer to reporters' questions 
here, the president called his deposition in the Paula Jones sexual 
misconduct case ``difficult and ambiguous and unhelpful,'' but beyond 
that expressed none of the remorse that filled his remarks at the 
White House on Friday about his affair with Monica Lewinsky. At his 
side, Israel's equally grim and even more embattled leader, Prime 
Minister Benjamin Netanyahu, unavailingly implored reporters to ask 
about Clinton's ``very clear voyage of peace.'' ``I would like to 
know the answers too,'' he added, not entirely kindly. It was in supporting 
Clinton's plans for peace that Netanyahu sacrificed his right-wing 
support and jeopardized his own hold on power. Sunday, in an extraordinary 
political tableau, the two men seemed far apart and the peace initiative 
in doubt as each tried to grapple with a complex interplay of domestic 
and foreign concerns _ and of self-interest, high purpose and power. 
In a round of meetings, speeches and ceremonial stops, Clinton focused 
on progress toward peace, believing as ever, aides said, that success 
at his policy goals would win him support at home. But a pugnacious 
reception from Netanyahu made those goals seem distant. While he said 
that the coming Congressional vote on impeachment was ``out of my 
hands,'' Clinton was clearly not indifferent to it. Sunday morning 
after midnight, once he reached his hotel, he made calls to two Democratic 
members of the House Judiciary Committee to assess the situation, 
advisers said. Later Sunday, he made his most forthright appeal that 
the House of Representatives consider censure as an alternative, saying 
that ``somewhere around three-quarters of the American people think 
that's the right thing to do.'' But speaking in combative terms, he 
dismissed calls by Republican moderates _the same people who might 
support censure _ for an admission that he had lied under oath. ``I 
could not admit to doing something that I am quite sure I did not 
do,'' he said. Two of the four articles of impeachment accuse him 
of committing perjury, but Clinton said that ``no credible argument'' 
demonstrated that he had done so. His aides in Washington are scrambling 
to line up votes against impeachment, but Clinton said Sunday that 
he would make no calls to Republican members. He will talk to them 
if they seek him out, he said. ``I don't know what's going to happen,'' 
he said. ``That's up to them.'' On his fourth trip to Israel as president, 
Clinton brought some wavering congressmen with him, including two 
Republican members of the House. He met with the group Sunday morning, 
but they discussed only the Middle East, said the White House press 
secretary, Joseph Lockhart. Lockhart said the president was not preoccupied 
with the coming impeachment vote: ``I can tell you, thankfully, his 
ability to concentrate on the peace process is not predicated on reporters' 
questions to him. That's a very small part of the day.'' Traveling 
with his wife and daughter, Clinton began his day with breakfast with 
Netanyahu and ended it at an official dinner beside him. In between, 
the leaders alternated visions of the Palestinians' commitment to 
peace. On Monday, Clinton will visit Palestinian-controlled territory 
in the Gaza Strip. Netanyahu accused the Palestinians of complying 
with none of the commitments they made after marathon negotiations 
led by Clinton at Maryland's Wye River Plantation in October. He has 
refused to cede more land to the Palestinians until they comply. The 
president saw more progress. ``The Palestinian Authority has taken 
some important steps,'' he said. But, he said, ``They certainly could 
be doing better to preempt violent demonstrations in the streets.'' 
Believing that symbols are substance here, Clinton paid careful attention 
to ceremony. Surrounded by children, he joined President Ezer Weizman 
in lighting the first candle of Hanukkah. And wearing a navy blue 
yarmulke on his silver hair, he silently placed an oval stone, which 
the White House said was taken from Wye River, on the tombstone of 
Yitzhak Rabin, the prime minister assassinated by a right-wing Israeli 
radical on November 4, 1995. Less than six weeks before that, on September 
28, 1995, Rabin shook hands at the White House with Yasser Arafat, 
the Palestinian leader, over a deal broadening Palestinian self-government 
that the president considers a landmark achievement. Netanyahu repeatedly 
reminded Clinton of Israeli fears and determination. At the dinner 
Sunday night, Netanyahu lectured on the Jews' lonely and turbulent 
history, as the Israeli leaders whose support he needs sat before 
him. He reminded Clinton of ancient Jewish ties to Gaza and Bethlehem, 
Palestine-controlled areas the president will visit in the next two 
days. Despite Palestinian aspirations for some control of this city, 
he fiercely called Jerusalem ``a city which never was and never will 
be the capital of any other nation.'' ``We have made excruciating 
sacrifices for peace,'' he said. ``We have given away parts of this 
land, parts which are the cradle of our civilization.'' He said he 
remained committed to the peace agreement. Clinton repeatedly affirmed 
the American commitment to Israeli security. But he also promoted 
the Wye agreement, which calls for Israel to withdraw in phases from 
another 13 percent of the West Bank, in exchange for Palestinian steps 
against terrorism. In a speech Sunday evening, he said that the peace 
process ``will succeed when we understand that it is not just about 
mutual obligations, but mutual interest, mutual recognition, mutual 
respect.'' As they negotiate, Clinton and Netanyahu have inverse problems 
and as a result, for the moment, opposed interests: Netanyahu's conduct 
of foreign policy _ specifically, his initial decision to abide by 
the Wye agreement _ has threatened his domestic position; Clinton's 
domestic troubles have raised questions in congressmen's minds about 
his ability to conduct foreign affairs, doubts he is trying to dispel 
here. But Clinton and Netanyahu also need each other. The president 
is very popular here; and Clinton has been warned that if Netanyahu's 
government falls, the peace process will freeze for six months. In 
his toast Sunday night, Clinton praised Netanyahu as ``the kind of 
leader with the potential to guide his people to a peaceful and secure 
future.'' And in his statement to reporters Sunday afternoon, Netanyahu 
said, ``If there's anyone who can help bring the peace process to 
a satisfactory conclusion, it is you, President Clinton. Your devotion 
to this cause, your perseverance, your tireless energy, your commitment 
have been an inspiration to us all.'' 
</TEXT>
</DOC>