<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981213.0124 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Prominent Republicans, some of whom complained that their leaders 
badly mishandled the White House scandal all year long, now say the 
party's march toward impeachment would cause no lasting political 
damage. Republican governors, state party leaders and strategists 
around the country said in interviews that the stakes were far lower 
than they were in the fall because there were no looming elections. 
Dismissing polls showing that the public overwhelmingly does not want 
President Clinton impeached, many Republicans argue that Americans 
have short attention spans and will be utterly uninterested in rehashing 
the impeachment debate when presidential and congressional elections 
take place in two years. ``If the election were a week from now, this 
probably wouldn't be a plus for Republicans,'' said retiring Gov. 
Jim Edgar of Illinois. ``But if you look at the year 2000, I don't 
believe what happens in the House Judiciary Committee or the House 
or the Senate is going to have as much impact as the speculation is 
today.'' Such newfound confidence among Republicans _ which others 
in the party warn could be the political version of whistling past 
the graveyard _ is all the more remarkable because most ascribed their 
dispiriting election results last month to the party's perceived preoccupation 
with the scandal. But the lack of greater concern about political 
fallout helps explain why many of the party's lawmakers have plunged 
ahead with the inquiry. Insisting that impeachment would be far from 
voters' minds by the year 2000, former Sen. Alan Simpson, a Wyoming 
Republican who heads the Institute of Politics at Harvard University, 
said: ``The attention span of Americans is, `Which movie is coming 
out next month?' and whether the quarterly report on their stock will 
change.'' Gov. Tom Ridge of Pennsylvania, who had chastised congressional 
Republicans for not pressing other issues during the campaign, is 
nevertheless skeptical that the scandal would again backfire. ``I 
hear people predicting a rash of Republican upsets if the Republicans 
vote for impeachment, that they would lose the majority of the House 
of Representatives in the year 2000,'' Ridge said. ``I don't necessarily 
share that view.'' Roger Stone, a Republican strategist who was an 
adviser to Richard Nixon, said the former president enjoyed respectable 
job approval ratings ``the day they threw him out.'' So, Stone added, 
``it's a mistake to judge the long-term effects of public opinion 
in a maelstrom of the storm because they'll shift again over time.'' 
Noting early polls showing that Gov. George W. Bush of Texas would 
defeat Vice President Al Gore for president in 2000, Stone said, ``If 
this were such a problem, if there were a generic negative in being 
a Republican, why does George Bush continue to lead Al Gore?'' The 
unexpected calmness of many Republicans is based on their assumption 
_ right or wrong _ that if the House voted to impeach Clinton, the 
Senate would not carry it out and the president would not ultimately 
be ousted from office. Several Republicans also argue that Clinton's 
sustained high job-approval ratings do not tell the full story. They 
contend there is little good will toward the president in either party 
and that Americans would come to understand that Republicans were 
only fulfilling their obligation in taking up impeachment. Yet other 
Republicans fear that the complacency in the party could be dangerous: 
They warn that if there was a protracted trial in the Senate, the 
matter could backfire and Republicans could be portrayed as fixated 
on destroying Clinton to the exclusion of the pressing issues facing 
the nation. They could also be accused of caving to the party's right 
wing. A poll last week conducted by The Wall Street Journal found 
that the Republican Party had slipped to its lowest level of popularity 
since the early 1990s. Former Sen. Warren Rudman of New Hampshire, 
for one, predicted that if Clinton was impeached and convicted by 
the Senate, Republicans would lose control of the House and Senate 
in 2000. There are plenty of examples of politicians' or parties' 
being haunted by actions of years past. For example, shortly after 
he took office in 1974, President Ford pardoned Nixon. Many voters 
never forgave Ford, and he lost to Jimmy Carter two years later. ``The 
fact that they're trying to get it all done before the end of the 
year is probably a wise move that gives them a couple years to be 
very engaged in policy issues,'' said former Rep. Mickey Edwards, 
an Oklahoma Republican who now teaches at Harvard University. But 
Edwards warned that there could be enduring political damage if some 
party leaders persisted with brazen talk of ousting the president 
and if Republicans ``continue to be perceived as very partisan.'' 
Some moderate Republicans, particularly in the Northeast, have also 
been outspoken in urging House Republicans not to impeach the president. 
They have warned that the inquiry could haunt the party just as it 
did in November. Gov. George Pataki of New York is planning to begin 
traveling the country to promote alternatives to what he said were 
the party's failed strategies this year. Most influential Republicans 
concede that they do not expect the party to benefit from the inquiry. 
That is why the Republican National Committee has gone out of its 
way to keep a low profile and not be identified with the inquiry. 
But while several of the Republicans interviewed said they expected 
that the party would suffer short-term damage from the inquiry, most 
expressed confidence that it would not be lasting. Ed Gillespie, a 
strategist who is close to several leading House Republicans, offered 
this assessment: ``We're better off as a party with the short-term 
damage that will result from moving forward out of principle than 
with the long-term damage that would result from quitting out of political 
calculation. When we have a front-runner and a standard-bearer, the 
party will be cast in that person's image, not in the Judiciary Committee's 
image.'' Several other Republicans agreed that they could now risk 
looking even worse if they did not act, and would particularly alienate 
the party's conservative base. Speaking with a sense of resignation, 
some Republicans said they had come to believe that if anything, the 
party would be viewed as failing to fulfill its obligations if it 
did not pursue the impeachment inquiry. ``Unlike in the Watergate 
years, the principle of honesty and integrity in government is now 
a Republican issue,'' said John McLaughlin, a Republican pollster. 
``If they surrender it, they're surrendering an important principle 
that will discourage their base of support.'' Despite the Republicans' 
poor performance in the November elections, McLaughlin said, Republicans 
should take heart because the outcome underscored how political dynamics 
could shift quickly and unexpectedly. ``What the last election proved 
is that voters have really short memories,'' McLaughlin said, adding 
that there might have been a Republican landslide had the election 
taken place in August, after Clinton admitted that he had misled the 
public about his relationship with Monica Lewinsky. Henry McMaster, 
chairman of the Republican Party in South Carolina, was particularly 
blunt, saying: ``Any Republican who doesn't vote for impeachment is 
going to have a lot of explaining to do. There would be a serious 
backlash.'' Mayor Stephen Goldsmith of Indianapolis said that with 
the elections so far off, it was critical for the party not to be 
lulled into thinking it did not have to develop new issues. ``The 
party, either way, can survive on the impeachment issue,'' Goldsmith 
said, ``if it has some other agenda that affects the quality of peoples' 
lives.'' Most Republicans agree that that the best thing for the party 
is to move the impeachment inquiry with as much dispatch as possible. 
But even if the inquiry continued month after month, Rusty Paul, chairman 
of the Georgia Republican Party, said he was unconvinced that the 
matter would hurt Republicans much more than Democrats. ``If it drags 
on for another year or so,'' Paul said, ``people will say, `A pox 
on both of your houses.''' Republican after Republican discounted 
the long-term impact of the inquiry, and said only the most panicked 
partisans should be worried. ``What I would watch is the passage of 
time,'' said Rich Bond, a former Republican Party chairman. ``There's 
room for swings in public opinion to come to our favor.'' Dwight Sutherland, 
a Republican national committeeman from Kansas, said the lines had 
already been drawn and that voters in two years would not very likely 
be swayed on either side over how the impeachment matter was carried 
out. ``There is danger,'' Sutherland said. ``We're going to be pilloried 
by the networks and respectable print journalists. But the alternative, 
which is selling your soul, is so much worse.'' 
</TEXT>
</DOC>