<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981213.0058 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Aetna Inc. has transformed itself in less than three years from an 
insurance giant known as a relatively easygoing nice guy into a hard-driving 
managed-care company that many doctors say they hate. Now, by swallowing 
two sizable competitors, Aetna is vastly increasing its power and 
making a risky bet that it can dominate the nation's health-care system. 
Aetna surprised industry insiders and investors last week by agreeing 
to buy the ailing health care business of Prudential Insurance Co. 
of America for a bargain price of $1 billion, or less than $200 for 
each managed-care member. Only a few weeks ago, Aetna said that it 
had sworn off mega-shopping while it digested another $1 billion-plus 
gulp _ the purchase in March of NYLCare, the health care unit of New 
York Life Insurance Co., for $600 a member. The new Aetna will have 
contracts with more than half the nation's 550,000 practicing doctors 
outside the government and a role in determining the medical care 
of 18.4 million Americans. ``We are going to change the landscape 
of the whole industry,'' said Richard Huber, the chairman, chief executive 
and main deal maker of Aetna, which is based in Hartford, Conn. He 
is plunging Aetna deeper into health care at a moment when optimists 
say the industry is returning to better times, meaning higher prices 
for patients and employers. Kenneth Abramowitz, an analyst at Sanford 
C. Bernstein who is a longtime supporter of managed care, said Aetna 
was ``making a big bet that borders on a gamble, but it is a very 
educated, worthwhile gamble.'' The down side is that Aetna will be 
so big that a serious misstep could sour investors on the whole managed-care 
industry. With Prudential Health Care, Aetna would have had about 
$20 billion in revenue for the first nine months of this year, of 
which $16 billion, or 80 percent, would be in health care, said Joyce 
Oberdorf, a spokeswoman for Aetna. Aetna agreed to sell its casualty 
insurance business in late 1995 and used the proceeds to buy U.S. 
Healthcare in 1996 for nearly $9 billion, which was more than $3,000 
a member. The U.S. Healthcare executives took charge and installed 
their own highly profitable, rigorous management style. In the first 
nine months, Aetna also had about $2.5 billion of revenue from managing 
$48 billion in retirement funds and pensions and $1.5 billion from 
selling retirement and health care services in foreign countries, 
Ms. Oberdorf said. Huber said that all three units _ health care, 
retirement and international _were growing at double-digit rates. 
Pretax operating profit margins so far this year were 4 percent to 
5 percent in health care, Ms. Oberdorf said, 14.5 percent in retirement 
services and 7 percent in international. Other managed-care companies 
have margins of 3 percent or less. Indeed, Prudential Health Care 
projects a loss of about $100 million this year, and the list of managed-care 
companies with operating losses also includes huge companies such 
as Kaiser Permanente, a nonprofit company in California that is the 
nation's biggest health maintenance organization, and, in the New 
York market, Oxford Health Plans and Empire Blue Cross and Blue Shield. 
Aetna has high hopes of combining its networks of doctors and hospitals 
with Prudential's to increase its market share in some of the most 
populous states, including New York, New Jersey, Texas, Ohio, Pennsylvania, 
Maryland, Virginia, Georgia and Florida. With advantages of size in 
bargaining with health care providers, the bigger managed-care companies 
grew almost three times as fast as smaller HMOs that had fewer than 
100,000 members, according to an analysis of 1997 reports to Interstudy, 
a nonprofit research center, by Donaldson, Lufkin &AMP; Jenrette, 
the Wall Street securities firm. ``Being locally dominant is a major 
competitive advantage,'' said Mimi Willard, a health care analyst 
at Donaldson. ``The largest health plans had nice profits. Two out 
of three of the smaller plans were unprofitable,'' she said. But she 
said that it was still not clear that size would add up to a national 
competitive advantage. What is more, based on its track record in 
its merger with U.S. Healthcare, Aetna may have problems retaining 
all the Prudential doctors, although many are already in both networks. 
Medical groups in several states have resisted Aetna's toughly enforced 
policy of requiring doctors to accept its lowest-paying HMO patients 
or give up all Aetna patients. Huber said Aetna ``absolutely'' intended 
to keep on insisting on these all-or-nothing contracts. Doctors have 
also complained that Aetna was late in paying for their services. 
Huber said Aetna was now paying these bills in 15 days, on average, 
and in eight days in the Northeast, where it is switching to electronic 
payments. Doctors have countered tough tactics from companies like 
Aetna U.S. Healthcare by lobbying successfully for state and federal 
laws that limit the HMOs on several fronts and, incidentally, add 
to their costs of doing business. Huber contends that the managed-care 
companies are moving to an era that will take them beyond their earlier 
stress on cutting costs by paying lower fees to doctors and hospitals 
and enforcing rules that limited referrals of patients to specialists 
and expensive tests. After years of discounts, ``we can't get cheaper 
prices'' for further savings, he said. So how will Aetna compete in 
a commodity-like business where many of the same doctors and hospitals 
are available at similar prices from the three remaining nationwide 
insurers _ Aetna, United Healthcare Corp. and Cigna Corp.? ``If they 
all have the same doctors, they have to compete on the quality of 
care the patient gets,'' said Douglas Sherlock, an independent managed-care 
consultant in Gwynedd, Pa. All the big companies, as well as Kaiser 
and many other well-entrenched regional HMOs, hope to compete by improving 
a so-far spotty record of preventive strategies intended to keep members 
well. They are combing their mountains of computerized information 
looking for patterns in diseases like asthma and diabetes, that could, 
in theory, be managed at lower cost. ``With a single database, we 
will be able to stratify our membership and see who is going to get 
sick tomorrow,'' Huber said. One study showed that fewer than half 
of Aetna's members who had suffered congestive heart failure were 
taking beta blocker drugs, a recommended therapy. ``What can we do 
today to make sure that all the preventive steps are being applied 
so they don't end up with another heart attack and become an expensive 
hospital bed occupant for us?'' he asked. But Aetna still has far 
to go to achieve a single database that would join its own computer 
systems with those of Prudential and NYLCare. Aetna has said it would 
not even complete the integration of NYLCare into its operations until 
well into 2000. Meanwhile, the company is spending heavily just to 
overcome computer glitches associated with the changeover to 2000. 
And with so many managed-care companies pushing for more preventive 
care and better management of diseases, quality of care could also 
become a commodity that will be available from numerous HMOs. Huber 
is well aware of the pressure to stay ahead of the crowd. ``Just give 
me two years' lead,'' he said. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>