<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981213.0223 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
It took an Arab-Israeli village to provide Hillary Clinton with the 
ideal backdrop for her first appearance here, pleading the case to 
the Israeli public for the land-for-security plan that is now seen 
here as much more her husband's priority than the Israeli prime minister's. 
This tiny planned community of 30 families an hour outside Jerusalem 
is one of the country's few experiments in cross-cultural living. 
It has a bilingual school that has won international honors and a 
carefully maintained ethnic balance of Arabs and Jews, all of them 
Israeli citizens. The self-described ``oasis of peace'' was chosen 
as a symbol of the possibility of reconciliation between Israel and 
the Palestinians, the goal of the agreement brokered by President 
Clinton six weeks ago in Wye Mills, Md. The town was flattered by 
the recognition. A big hand-drawn ``It Takes A Village'' poster, referring 
to Mrs. Clinton's book, was draped behind the podium where she made 
her nationally televised remarks. ``I'm very grateful for the hard 
work that the prime minister and Chairman Arafat and my husband did 
at Wye, that helped move us closer to fulfilling a dream of peace 
between Israelis and Palestinians, despite the setbacks that come 
when peace is being pursued,'' Mrs. Clinton said, with Sara Netanyahu, 
the prime minister's wife, sitting beside her. ``The strong belief 
that peace will prevail must once again be enforced,'' Mrs. Clinton 
said. Arriving by White House limousine about 4 a.m. Washington time 
for her first stop, Mrs. Clinton impressed local people with her stamina 
and poise. Later in the day, she accompanied Clinton to a memorial 
gathering at the Mount of Olives grave site of the slain Prime Minister 
Yitzhak Rabin and to a Hanukkah candle-lighting ceremony at the Israeli 
presidential residence. She also attended Clinton's speeches to Israeli 
youth leaders and a state banquet. But her independent itinerary before 
that was distinctly her own: it was at once an advertisement for her 
vision of multicultural education and community-based child-raising, 
and a carefully targeted appeal to ordinary Israelis on behalf of 
the U.S. peace effort. Her visit to Neve Shalom was followed by a 
visit to the oncology ward of a Jerusalem children's hospital funded 
by an American Jewish women's group, where Orthodox Jewish patients 
and Palestinians from East Jerusalem receive cancer therapy. Mrs. 
Clinton moved on to the headquarters of a home preschool program that 
was started in Israel to meet the needs of poor Arab and recent Jewish 
immigrant families, a program she helped adopt for use in rural Arkansas 
12 years ago. With fresh-scrubbed schoolchildren waving paper banners 
and earnest young teachers discussing their techniques, the scene 
at Neve Shalom seemed benignly archetypal for a Hillary Clinton visit. 
Three kindergarten children _ Muhammed Najar, 4, an Israeli Arab Muslim; 
Kerem Ben-Yeshai, 5, an Israeli Jew, and Mouna Boulos, 4, an Israeli 
Arab Christian _ stood in their classroom before a phalanx of cameras 
and solemnly lit a Ramadan lamp, a menorah, and, with an electric 
switch, a little tabletop Christmas tree. The banners held aloft at 
Mrs. Clinton's arrival were adorned with hastily crayoned flowers 
and doves, rather than national symbols. The original plan was to 
greet Mrs. Clinton with real flags, locals here said, but after fuller 
contemplation of the spectacle, the event's handlers had second thoughts. 
``They were going to have three flags, then they decided they didn't 
want Palestinian flags, so they decided on no flags,'' Laila Hasuna, 
an Arabic teacher at the Neve Shalom school, said with a wry smile. 
It was widely presumed here that the ban on Palestinian flag-waving 
was imposed mainly to protect Mrs. Clinton, who, on the strength of 
one offhand comment this year, earned a reputation among Israelis 
as a back-room advocate of independence for the West Bank and the 
Gaza Strip, which she is scheduled to visit Monday. Speaking in May 
via satellite to a gathering of European teen-agers, Mrs. Clinton 
said that she thought it was ``in the long-term interests of the Middle 
East for Palestine to be a state and for it to be a state that is 
responsible for its citizens' well-being, a state that has responsibility 
for providing education and health care and economic opportunity to 
its citizens, a state that has to accept the responsibility of governing.'' 
This seeming endorsement of statehood and her use of the officially 
taboo term ``Palestine'' was condemned by American Jewish organizations 
and quickly disavowed by the White House. During her tour Sunday, 
Israeli journalists shouted questions on Palestinian independence 
that were ignored. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>