<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981213.0080 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
It is lunch time in the children's quarters at the women's prison 
colony here, and 10 little pale faces are bent over bowls of grey 
mush, a blend of watery potatoes with a dash of meat. The meal is 
not a big hit with the scruffy 2-year-olds, but for the women who 
are trying to coax spoonfuls into their mouths, the fact that there 
is anything on the table at all is a small victory. By their calculations, 
the Russian government has practically stopped paying a daily food 
allowance for the 64 children, all under age 3, who live in the fenced 
compound where their mothers are serving sentences for crimes ranging 
from theft to murder. ``This year, for the children, we received 185,000 
rubles,'' said Lyudmila Yareva, who as head of the children's house 
can recite these figures by heart. ``After salaries and taxes, 47,000 
goes to food, which as you understand is nothing at all.'' At the 
rate the ruble is going these days, nothing is just about on target. 
Four months ago, 47,000 rubles was worth roughly $7,000. Today, as 
the value of the currency continues its downward drift, it is worth 
one-third that amount, or roughly $36 per child a year. In a time 
of shrinking budgets and rising inflation, when Russia cannot afford 
to pay its teachers or army officers a regular wage, let alone come 
up with the cash for multibillion-dollar payments on its foreign debt, 
state institutions like this one have been set adrift. At prisons 
and hospitals, orphanages and psychiatric hospitals, money for inmates 
_ their food, clothes, medicine and bed sheets _ is being squeezed 
out like drops from a desiccated lemon. Here in this women's prison, 
the official daily food allowance for the 1,600 women is 65 kopeks, 
about three cents at current exchange rates. Down the road at a juvenile 
detention center, the sum is greater _ 80 kopeks _ because as one 
official explained ruefully, his charges are ``under age'' and need 
more food to grow. According to the Ministry of Justice, the national 
average in Russian jails and prison camps is 67 kopeks. But these 
are official sums, which in Russia these days are usually not worth 
much more than the paper they are written on. In fact, here in Mozhaisk, 
60 miles southwest of Moscow, the women's prison actually spends almost 
four times more on its children than its budget allows. How Mrs. Yareva 
manages to clothe and feed her charges adds up to another one of those 
baffling puzzles that explain how this country and its people are 
able to survive in their calamity-prone economy. The answer is, as 
usual, a mishmash _ involving both the kindness of strangers and a 
dash of native ingenuity. The potatoes, for instance, come from a 
local farm which now relies on women prisoners to help dig up their 
crop. Milk is also ``free,'' after the prison, unable to dig its way 
out of a mountain of unpaid bills, agreed to provide milk maids to 
the local dairy. Soap comes from a local store owner who, after some 
pleading by the prison wardens, agreed to throw in a donation together 
with regular purchases. But mostly, these wards of the Russian state 
survive on ``gumanitarka,'' the Russian nickname for the humanitarian 
aid that in the last years has been sent to institutions like this 
one. In this case, toys, blankets, medicine and mattresses come from 
all over _ from Norway, from Germany, but also from sources close 
to home: from the grandmother who periodically shows up at the prison 
gates with a pile of neatly stacked baby clothes, to the Association 
of Russian Aristocrats, whose help is acknowledged by the signed photograph 
in Mrs. Yareva's office of the Grand Duchess Maria Romanova, and her 
son Georgi, acknowledged by some as the heir to the Russian imperial 
throne. ``We run around, we ask, we beg, we do what we can,'' Mrs. 
Yareva said, a bitterness creeping into her voice as she remembers 
the days when the prison got more money from the state than it was 
able to spend. The last normal year, she recalls, was 1990, when Russia 
was still Communist, before ``democratism, or whatever it is you call 
this.'' Even with help, the diet for these children is not what it 
should be. By Mrs. Yareva's reckoning, they actually live on 16 rubles 
(about 80 cents) a day, when the ``norm'' should be 20 (a dollar). 
The missing four rubles, she says, would go a long way toward buying 
them the proper portions of eggs, fruits and vegetables that they 
should be getting, and do not. Even getting the supplies they have 
received requires running around. For three weeks, prison wardens 
have been on tenterhooks, awaiting the delivery of a container full 
of gumanitarka that has been held up with red tape at a local customs 
office. ``There are papers that have to be signed at every level,'' 
Lidiya I. Pustovoit, a deputy prison director, explained as she dashed 
out the door to do battle for the shipment one more time. ``Each time 
I go there, there is another level, and another batch of papers.'' 
Bureaucracy and budget shortfalls are part of the prison's routine. 
But what happened in Russia on Aug. 17, when the ruble devalued and 
the banking system froze up after the government defaulted on its 
ruble debts, was an unexpected jolt, which threw a season's worth 
of planned repairs into confusion. By the time the banks released 
the allocated funds, fall here was turning to winter. By the time 
new pipes were being installed in the two-story house where the children 
live, winter had set in. The result has been an irregular water supply, 
and days with no hot water at all, at a time when temperatures here 
had dropped below freezing. But for mothers like Yanna Strukova, 27, 
who is here on a seven-year sentence for armed robbery, having her 
son, Seryozha, close by, where she can spend two hours a day with 
him, is for the moment better than the alternative. When he turns 
3 three next month, she faces a choice: either he goes to a state 
orphanage, or she has to persuade her mother-in-law, who already looks 
after her older daughter, to take him in. ``The whole problem is money,'' 
she said, shrugging her shoulders. ``Imagine, a grandmother on a pension 
of 400 rubles, keeping two children. She doesn't even have the money 
to travel up here and pick him up.'' 
</TEXT>
</DOC>