<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981213.0063 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Up to a point, you can sympathize with what Tom Brokaw is saying in 
``The Greatest Generation'': that the American men and women who were 
born around 1920, who came of age in the Great Depression, who fought 
in World War II and who rebuilt the postwar world and passed the results 
on to succeeding generations, were extraordinary. ``It is a generation,'' 
Brokaw writes, ``that, by and large, made no demands of homage from 
those who followed and prospered economically, politically and culturally 
because of its sacrifices.'' He continues, ``It is a generation of 
towering achievement and modest demeanor, a legacy of their formative 
years when they were participants in and witness to sacrifices of 
the highest order.'' It is a generation, he argues, that makes you 
think of all those words that Hemingway once said you couldn't use 
anymore: duty, honor, country, flag, family, church, faith, loyalty, 
self-sacrifice, purpose, modesty, responsibility. Sure, the generation 
made mistakes, Brokaw admits: racism, sex discrimination, anti-communist 
hysteria, Vietnam. Or as he puts it, somewhat cloudily: ``They allowed 
McCarthyism and racism to go unchallenged for too long. Women of the 
World War II generation, who had demonstrated so convincingly that 
they had so much more to offer beyond their traditional work, were 
the underpinning for the liberation of their gender, even as many 
of their husbands resisted the idea. When a new war broke out, many 
of the veterans initially failed to recognize the difference between 
their war and the one in Vietnam.'' Still, he concludes, ``This is 
the greatest generation any society has produced.'' Brokaw's motives 
in writing the book seem heartfelt. Walking the beaches in Normandy 
in 1984 with American veterans while preparing an NBC television documentary 
on the 40th anniversary of D-Day, he ``underwent a life-changing experience,'' 
he reports. ``I was deeply moved and profoundly grateful for all they 
had done. I realized that they had been all around me as I was growing 
up and that I had failed to appreciate what they had been though and 
what they had accomplished.'' So his book is a tribute to his parents 
and their friends, as well as to their conduct. And the stories he 
tells of them are diverting enough, occasionally even inspiring. Chronicling 
some 50 lives, he offers examples of the many virtues he is celebrating: 
people who distinguished themselves both in battle and on the home 
front, men who built careers despite being disabled by the war, women 
who overcame the obstacles that were stacked against them, minorities 
who used adversity to improve their people's lives. Some are individuals 
whom Brokaw met while researching D-Day. Others he came to know while 
growing up in South Dakota. Some are obscure and consider their achievements 
ordinary. Others were vaulted to fame by their wartime experiences: 
George Bush, Ben Bradlee, Bob Dole, Caspar Weinberger, among others. 
All stand as a rebuke to certain excesses in the contemporary culture: 
the desire to place one's own interests first, the habit of regarding 
the truth as the most recent words to pass one's teeth, the refusal 
to take responsibility for one's behavior, the tendency to view the 
births of one's children as random events to which one has little 
connection, the inclination to measure one's worth by how much money 
one has. In short, almost everything exemplified these days by many 
professional athletes, a few talk-show hosts and a certain president 
of the United States. But enough is as good as a feast, and what Brokaw 
offers here is far more than enough. Three stories would suffice to 
make his point; 50 are a surfeit causing the eyes to glaze over, especially 
when they repeat one another's point and lack sharp individual focus. 
Nor are they particularly well told, rambling as they are and replete 
with cliches. (The three times the word ``seminal'' is used, it refers 
to a woman's work, as in ``Betty Friedan's seminal book on the place 
of modern women, `The Feminine Mystique.''') Such is the predictability 
of Brokaw's prose that you can read every fourth sentence of it and 
get the idea. This is too bad, because the question of why patriotism 
waxes and wanes during a nation's history is a significant one worth 
deeper exploration than Brokaw has given it. Among the many people 
he talked with, only Andy Rooney challenged his thesis that the generation 
in question was a superior one, arguing, as Brokaw puts it, that ``the 
character of the current generation is just as strong; it's just that 
his generation had a Depression, World War II and a Cold War against 
which to test their character.'' The story that ``The Greatest Generation'' 
tells too repeatedly makes you suspect that Rooney is right: First 
came the challenges, then the heroic responses. Equally you suspect 
that somewhere in the United States today are people facing challenges 
nearly as daunting as Brokaw's wartime generation did _ challenges 
of poverty, of prejudice, of cultural displacement _ and facing them 
as heroically as Brokaw's subjects did. They may not represent an 
entire generation, but they will be heard from somewhere down the 
road. Dare one hope in these feckless times that they may someday 
be in charge of the show? PUBLICATION NOTES: `THE GREATEST GENERATION' 
By Tom Brokaw Illustrated. 390 pages. Random House. $24.95. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>