<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981213.0218 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Morris Udall of Arizona, a liberal conscience of the House of Representatives 
for 30 years and a tireless advocate for environmental protection 
and political reform, died late Saturday in Washington. He was 76. 
Udall died of complications from Parkinson's disease, according to 
the Morris K. Udall Foundation in Tucson, Ariz. First diagnosed in 
1980, the disease led to Udall's resignation from Congress in 1991. 
He spent the final stage of his life in a veterans hospital in Washington, 
seldom conscious. Udall was one of those rare figures who flourished 
even though his politics frequently did not square with the views 
of many of his constituents, known for their conservatism and support 
of Sen. Barry Goldwater. But from the time Udall was first elected 
in 1961 in Arizona's 2nd Congressional District until his retirement, 
they voted for him in overwhelming numbers and did not seem to care 
about his high ratings from liberal groups and unions. Arizonans identified 
with Udall's unabashed love of unspoiled nature, and they applauded 
his efforts to create safeguards for the environment, including curbs 
on strip mining and legislation to protect Alaskan wilderness. Udall's 
supporters came to believe that the 6-foot-5, one-time Denver Nuggets 
basketball player might be a viable presidential candidate. Udall 
believed it, too, hoping his reputation for honesty would help him 
become the nation's first elected post-Watergate president. But in 
1976 he finished second in six Democratic primaries, losing the nomination 
to Gov. Jimmy Carter of Georgia. Udall's liberal positions, including 
support for a national health insurance program, were too extreme 
for his party and he lacked the name recognition and money to finance 
his campaign. Udall considered running again in 1980, because he did 
not believe that Carter could defeat Ronald Reagan. But mindful of 
questions about his health, he supported Sen. Edward Kennedy, D-Mass. 
Udall had disclosed that he had Parkinson's disease, a progressive 
disorder often characterized by tremors, stiffness of muscles and 
a deterioration of certain functions of the brain. Despite his condition, 
Udall remained active in the House for another decade. In his years 
in Congress, he fought for the environment, urged curbs on tobacco 
products, favored cutting the national debt and pushed for campaign 
reform and disclosure. From the start, he disclosed his finances and 
put his income tax returns in open files. He gave up his law practice 
and did not keep outside sources of income. And, he played a key role 
in drafting and passing the Federal Election Campaign Act of 1971. 
Morris King Udall was born June 15, 1922, in St. John's, Ariz., the 
son of Levi and Louise Lee Udall. A great-grandfather had led the 
first Mormons into Arizona from Utah. His father started out digging 
ditches, achieved success as a farmer, took law-school correspondence 
courses and served for 16 years on the Arizona Supreme Court. Udall's 
mother wrote ``Mine and Me,'' a story of a Hopi woman. Morris Udall 
had two brothers and two sisters. One brother, Stewart, was elected 
to Congress and served until he was appointed secretary of the interior 
in President John Kennedy's Cabinet. Morris Udall won the election 
to fill the seat. At age 5, Mo Udall's right eye was accidentally 
injured by a playmate. But Levi Udall was still struggling and did 
not have enough money to obtain decent medical care for his son. Soon, 
the eye became infected and it was lost. Udall said the experience 
help mold him, and he fought for the right of all Americans to have 
quality care regardless of ability to pay. After graduating from high 
school in 1940, Udall entered the University of Arizona, but then 
maneuvered his way into the Army, serving in the South Pacific and 
achieving the rank of captain in the Army Air Corps in World War II. 
In 1946, he returned to the University of Arizona, where he was student 
body president and co-captain and all-conference forward in basketball. 
He also played briefly with the Denver Nuggets, but his athletic career 
was set aside in 1949, with the beginning of his legal and political 
career. He was elected chief deputy attorney for Pima County in 1950 
and later was elected county attorney before going to Congress. He 
is survived by Norma Gilbert, his third wife, and by four brothers 
and sisters, six children and seven grandchildren. Before illness 
took its toll, Udall enjoyed creating his own constituent newsletters, 
which were published in 1972 as ``The Education of a Congressman.'' 
His witticisms were the subject of another book, ``Too Funny to be 
President,'' published after his presidential bid. As a member of 
the House Post Office Committee, he would joke: ``Let's turn inflation 
over to the Post Office. That'll slow it down.'' When he was seeking 
the presidential nomination, he told audiences of the time he stopped 
in a New Hampshire barbershop, announced who he was and what he was 
running for, and was told by a patron, ``Yep, we were just laughing 
about that yesterday.'' But at the end of his life, Michael Lewis 
, a New York Times Magazine columnist, found that Sen. John McCain, 
the conservative Republican from Arizona, was one of Udall's few visitors 
at the hospital. ``Mo reached out to me in 50 different ways,'' McCain 
told Lewis. When McCain was first elected, he said, Udall took the 
young congressman in hand despite their ideological differences. ``There's 
no way Mo could have been more wonderful,'' McCain said. ``And there 
was no reason for him to be that way.'' Whenever he takes the Senate 
floor on behalf of American Indians or argues that the Republican 
Party should support environmentalism, McCain said, he remembers his 
debt to Mo Udall. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>