<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981213.0217 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
You had to feel sympathy for Judge John Koeltl on Friday evening. 
He was presiding over a hearing in U.S. District Court in Manhattan 
on whether the Giuliani administration should be allowed to kick the 
Hebrew Israelite preachers out of Times Square. It was like trying 
to decide which side to root for in the Iran-Iraq war. The preachers, 
commonly known as the Black Israelites, argued that the city had acted 
unfairly when it ejected them last month. Considering Mayor Rudolph 
Giuliani's less than fervent devotion to the principles of free speech, 
that argument sounded quite plausible. The city maintained that for 
years the Israelites and their sound system had made life miserable 
for pedestrians on the crowded sidewalk and for people working in 
nearby offices. Considering the preachers' penchant for screaming 
about the need to enslave and kill white people, that argument sounded 
pretty plausible, too. The judge told the lawyers to try negotiating 
an agreement that would allow the Black Israelites to return, with 
limits on noise and the space they could occupy. That was the most 
obvious compromise. Since the city has no right to choose which messages 
are fit to be heard, it's unfair to single out the Black Israelites 
for banishment as long as others are allowed to preach in Times Square. 
But there's another compromise that's just as equitable: Banish all 
the sidewalk preachers from Times Square _ and, while we're at it, 
the sidewalk sketch artists, musicians, jugglers, drummers, mimes 
and assorted hustlers. Granted, this ban would horrify those who think 
street preachers and performers add charm to Times Square. There are 
said to be tourists who enjoy even the mimes. But surely their pleasure 
is vastly outweighed by the collective pain of the other passers-by 
who just want to get to the subway or the office. Not even tourists 
enjoy being serenaded by an hour of drumming as they wait in line 
at the TKTS discount ticket booth. This ban would especially horrify 
Norman Siegel, the executive director of the New York Civil Liberties 
Union, which is defending the Black Israelites. (Although the black 
preachers often describe the white man as the devil, they explained 
on Friday evening that this did not preclude them from using one as 
a lawyer.) ``I would certainly oppose any plan to restrict free speech 
in Times Square,'' Siegel said. ``One of the most sacred rights in 
America is to be able to stand on a street corner and preach. As long 
as you're not obstructing pedestrians or creating a nuisance, like 
making too much noise at night, you should be free to get on a soapbox 
anywhere.'' But now that Times Square is so crowded that pedestrians 
are routinely forced to walk in the street, the city might be able 
to legally justify a ban on anything that obstructs those sidewalks. 
Preachers and hustlers would still be free to work on less crowded 
sidewalks nearby, and the city might also set aside special areas 
for soapbox orators, like Speakers' Corner in Hyde Park, London. Giuliani's 
recent decision to restrict groups from giving news conferences on 
the steps of City Hall was troubling because that site is such a logical 
place for political debate. But who goes to Times Square to be enlightened 
about politics or religion? Why give the sidewalks of New York's entertainment 
district to the least entertaining people in town? The Black Israelites 
and other sidewalk performers have privatized choice public space. 
They have taken over some of New York's most valuable real estate, 
paying at most a small fee for a permit, to further their own enterprises 
by collecting money and selling books, T-shirts and tapes. Even if 
the city didn't want to banish these sidewalk entrepreneurs from Times 
Square, it could at least start charging them market rates for the 
space. Besides bringing in revenue, charging market rents could help 
screen out incompetents _ a truly awful guitarist, for instance, could 
not collect enough money during his Times Square gig to pay the rent 
for it. Applying a market-rent policy uniformly in Times Square would 
also clear out other moochers, like the armed forces recruiting station 
that pays no rent for its prime spot. The new rents might drive out 
the newsstands, too, which would mean pedestrians in Times Square 
would be deprived of immediate access to the wisdom herein. But somehow 
they _ and the First Amendment _ would probably survive. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>