<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981213.0076 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
The government is moving cautiously but unmistakably toward a relaxation 
of Ireland's bedrock national policy: the military neutrality it has 
proudly maintained since gaining independence from Britain 76 years 
ago. The change is being pressed by Foreign Minister David Andrews, 
whose governing political party, Fianna Fail (Warriors of Destiny), 
has always denounced any move away from strict neutrality as disloyal 
to Ireland, if not treasonous. ``It is a hugely emotional issue,'' 
said Fergus Finlay, a political consultant and former senior official 
in the Foreign Affairs Department. ``For neutrality, read independence. 
For an awful lot of people neutrality is the cornerstone of our foreign 
policy.'' Now Andrews, in a series of national radio and television 
interviews and newspaper articles, is arguing that Ireland's neutrality 
should be reconsidered to permit the country to join the U.S.-sponsored 
Partnership for Peace, a group of nations that do not belong to NATO 
but have agreed to coordinate military polices with it. Andrews said 
the government would decide on the issue next year and that the decision 
could lead to a referendum on neutrality. Some officials and diplomats 
say the government will try to avoid a referendum by arguing that 
one is needed only if Ireland's neutrality is threatened, and that 
the association with NATO is not such a threat. The shift away from 
strict neutrality has been urged on Ireland for several years by the 
United States and by Ireland's European neighbors. In 1994, the U.S. 
ambassador to NATO, Robert Hunter, visited Dublin to urge top Irish 
officials to join the NATO program, which falls short of full membership. 
When the new U.S. ambassador, Dan Sullivan, arrives in Dublin in January, 
he is expected to restate the White House view that Ireland should 
join the partnership. It is not that the 12,000-strong Irish Army 
would play a major role in a big European war. It would continue to 
act as a peacekeeper, as the 700 Irish troops are doing now in southern 
Lebanon. But in a sense, U.S. and European diplomats say, Ireland 
owes allegiance. After remaining neutral in World War II, Ireland 
received the protection of the U.S. nuclear umbrella during the Cold 
War. At the same time, it received about $30 billion in development 
aid from the European Union. While 40,000 Irish volunteers fought 
in the British Army in World War II, many Irish men and women recall, 
some with shame, that on the death of Hitler in 1945 Prime Minister 
Eamon de Valera signed a condolence book at the German Embassy in 
Dublin. He later maintained that at the time, unlike other European 
leaders, he did not know of the Holocaust. Neutrality has had a deep 
impact on modern Ireland. De Valera's decision to keep Ireland neutral, 
which enraged British Prime Minister Winston Churchill, was based, 
historians say, on a fear that there would be public disorder, if 
not civil war, if Irish troops were ordered to fight with those of 
Britain, the despised colonial power in Ireland until 1922. Some historians 
say that because Northern Ireland, as a British province, sent tens 
of thousands of troops to the war, the result was a tightening of 
the political union between London and the Protestant-dominated North. 
This, in turn, made it politically difficult for Britain to agree 
to negotiations giving the overwhelmingly Roman Catholic Irish Republic 
more influence in Northern Ireland's affairs. The new Northern Ireland 
peace agreement approved in the spring tries to solve that problem. 
Enemies of any relaxation of neutrality include fringe nationalists 
who have argued that the partnership would lead to British soldiers 
ordering Irish troops in battle, or even in barracks in Ireland. Other 
opponents include the Green Party, which delights in pointing out 
that the Unites States has not paid its full U.N. dues and that this 
slows down payments to the Irish Army for its service in Lebanon. 
Officials acknowledge that the army makes a profit from peacekeeping. 
Some 40 Irish soldiers are expected to go to Kosovo as part of a peacekeeping 
force. ``Most people would see the partnership as a steppingstone 
to NATO,'' Finlay said. Andrews wrote in The Irish Times that ``as 
a voluntary, nonbinding security framework based on cooperation'' 
the partnership has been joined by ``all the other European neutral 
nations, Austria, Finland, Sweden and Switzerland. ``It does not entail 
membership of any alliance,'' he added. ``and since a country which 
goes to such enormous lengths to defend its neutrality, such as Switzerland, 
has no difficulty participating, I do not believe that the case against 
our participation on these grounds is persuasive.'' 
</TEXT>
</DOC>