<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981213.0094 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
As an organization dedicated to promoting Christian unity, the World 
Council of Churches has been a fairly spacious body for those who 
would affirm the fundamentals of the Christian faith. But over the 
past week, the Council has found itself in the unusual position of 
balking at accepting a new member. The resulting controversy illustrates 
the challenges facing the council as it attempts to keep the global 
ecumenical movement alive by occasionally reaching beyond its traditional 
Protestant and Orthodox Christian base to include independent churches 
in the developing world, where much of Christianity's growth is occurring. 
Founded 50 years ago with 147 member churches, primarily from Europe 
and North America, the council has more than doubled its membership 
to 339 since then, adding denominations from Africa, Latin America 
and Asia, and now claiming to represent more than 300 million Christians 
worldwide. But here in Zimbabwe's capital city, at the organization's 
Eighth Assembly since its founding, the council declined to accept 
a new member because of questions over that church's policy on allowing 
clergy to have more than one wife. The church in question is the Celestial 
Church of Christ, founded in 1947 in Nigeria by a Methodist lay man, 
S.B.J. Oshoffa, who reported receiving a vision of an angel who instructed 
him to teach people to trust in Jesus. The church holds that the Bible 
is inerrant, and, according to members, teaches that prayer can effect 
physical healing and that members can prophesy under divine inspiration. 
(The church derives its hymns from the words of those who have been 
so inspired.) Claiming between 5 million and 6 million followers worldwide, 
including in the United States, it is one of what are called the ``African-instituted 
churches,'' organizations without any direct ties to the European 
missionaries of the late 19th and early 20th centuries. When nearly 
1,000 assembly delegates gathered here on Dec. 3, they faced membership 
applications from nine religious organizations, including the Celestial 
Church, all endorsed by the council's executive committee. Eight were 
admitted during a session two days later, among them another African-instituted 
church, the Harrist Church, based in the Ivory Coast. But a decision 
on the Celestial Church's application was deferred. In response, the 
Rev. Alexander Bada, the church's supreme head, published a policy 
statement saying that ``the question of polygamy'' among converts 
to the church ``was not seriously addressed'' until after the death 
of Oshoffa in 1985. Since 1986, Bada's statement said, the church 
has held to a ``firm and irreversible'' policy of refusing to ordain 
anyone who has more than one wife. But, he said, to avoid splitting 
the flock and being seen to endorse divorce, it has not asked that 
polygamous priests ordained before 1986 give up their additional wives. 
In an interview, a clergy member in the church, Senior Evangelist 
Olantunji Akande, said the church's leaders did not feel they could 
ask polygamous clergy members to retire, because they believed that 
God had called those men to serve. Akande said the church also believed 
that divorce, even in a polygamous marriage, ``would go against the 
law of God, who said, `I detest divorce.' '' He said the council should 
look at the 1986 policy, which ``put the church back on to the path 
of rectitude.'' But last Thursday, the assembly, reconsidering the 
application, voted to reject it by a 3-to-2 margin. Still, the issue 
has not been laid to rest. Speaking before the assembly late Saturday 
afternoon, the council's general secretary, the Rev. Konrad Raiser, 
said the vote was ruled invalid after a delegate challenged the way 
it had been taken. Raiser said no new vote would be taken at the assembly, 
which concludes on Monday, but that the church's application for membership 
would be referred back to the council's central committee. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>