<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981213.0156 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Whenever the Jets are on a roll, Miami is usually in their travel 
plans. Miami, of course, is where the 1968 Jets fulfilled Joe Namath's 
``guarantee'' in Super Bowl III. Miami is where the 1982 Jets got 
stuck in the mud against the Dolphins in the American Football Conference 
championship game, alias the strange case of the missing tarpaulin. 
Miami is where Raul Allegre's overtime field goal lifted the 1991 
Jets into the playoffs in their season finale. And Sunday night, Miami 
is where the 1998 Jets were playing the Dolphins for first place in 
the East Division. In each of these crossroad games, palm trees swayed 
in the breeze _ outside the Orange Bowl for Super Bowl III and the 
muddy AFC championship game, outside Pro Player Stadium for Allegre's 
field goal and, Sunday night, for Bill Parcells' stomping on the sideline. 
The storyline of each game has mirrored the various emotions of Jets 
history: celebration, frustration, expectation and aspiration. Parcells 
keeps talking about aspiring ``to get there,'' meaning the Super Bowl 
XXXIII playoffs. He would prefer to get there with a first-place team, 
ideally with a bye through the wild-card weekend into the divisional 
playoffs. But the Jets can't be choosy, not after having been 4-28 
in the two seasons before Parcells arrived. Of their four crossroad 
games in Miami, the uncommon denominator is that the Jets have had 
a different coach each time _ the late Weeb Ewbank in Super Bowl III, 
Walt Michaels in the mud, Bruce Coslet when Allegre kicked the field 
goal, Parcells now. When the Jets stunned the pro football realm with 
their 16-7 defeat of the Baltimore Colts in Super Bowl III, it was 
only the franchise's ninth season. Surely there would be more celebrations. 
Instead, the Jets, despite finishing first again in their division, 
were knocked out of the 1969 playoffs by the Kansas City Chiefs in 
the Shea Stadium freezer. And the Jets haven't finished first since 
then _ the only National Football League team among those involved 
in the 1970 merger realignment not to win a division title. In 1982, 
a season interrupted by a players' strike, the Jets had a 6-3 record, 
tied for fourth in the overall standing. In the playoffs, they quickly 
routed the Cincinnati Bengals, 44-17, as Freeman McNeil galloped for 
202 yards, then jarred the Los Angeles Raiders, 17-14, as linebacker 
Lance Mehl had two interceptions. But when the Jets arrived at the 
Orange Bowl for the A.F.C. championship game, the field resembled 
a rice paddy. Despite heavy rain on Thursday and mostly steady rain 
thereafter until almost game time, the field had been left uncovered. 
When the Jets lost, 14-0, their president, the late Jim Kensil, growled 
about the absence of a tarpaulin. So did their coach, Walt Michaels, 
who quietly suspected Don Shula, the Dolphins' coach, of having created 
the mud to sabotage the Jets' offense, which depended on the speed 
of McNeil and wide receiver Wesley Walker. ``The only thing I know 
is the rules,'' Michaels grumbled. ``I can't understand it.'' Michaels 
was alluding to the NFL constitution that requires each team to have 
a tarpaulin available. But the Dolphins blamed the absence of a tarpaulin 
on the City of Miami, which operates the Orange Bowl. Whoever was 
at fault, the Jets lost. About two weeks later, Michaels lost his 
job as the Jets' coach. Early in the final week of the 1991 season, 
Allegre, the kicker on the 1986 Giants team that won Super Bowl XXI, 
was home in Austin, Tex., when his phone rang. The Jets needed a kicker 
for their finale in Miami. Pat Leahy, the Jets' longtime kicker, had 
hamstring and sciatic problems. As time expired in the Jets' finale, 
Allegre booted a 44-yard field goal to tie the score at 20-20. In 
overtime, he kicked a 30-yard field goal for a 23-20 victory. With 
an 8-8 record, the Jets had sneaked into the playoffs. ``This was 
just one of those destiny-type things,'' Allegre said. But the Jets' 
real destiny was to lose their wild-card playoff in Houston. The Oilers 
won, 17-10, in a game that turned on two plays at the Oilers' 3-yard 
line _ quarterback Ken O'Brien was intercepted in the third quarter 
and McNeil was stopped for no gain on fourth-and-1 in the fourth quarter. 
And Sunday night, with first place at stake in their division, the 
Jets were in Miami again. Where else would they be? 
</TEXT>
</DOC>