<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981213.0186 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Puerto Ricans on Sunday rebuffed for a second time in six years their 
governor's efforts to win statehood by giving the most votes in a 
status referendum to a ``none of the above'' option that many pro-commonwealth 
voters chose as a protest against the use of that option as a means 
of splitting the vote. The vote effectively maintains the island's 
commonwealth relationship with the United States. The five options 
on the ballot were commonwealth, ``free association'' (a form of independence 
that delegates certain powers by treaty to the United States), statehood, 
independence, and ``none of the above.'' The fifth option won 50.2 
percent of the vote, compared with 46.5 for statehood. Independence 
received 2.5 percent of the vote, and the commonwealth and free association 
options each received less than 1 percent. Historically divided over 
whether to seek a closer association with the United States through 
statehood or to remain distinctly self-governing as a commonwealth, 
the electorate this time was split among options that confused some 
voters and angered many others. The small vote for the option to maintain 
commonwealth status was evidence of this, reflecting a boycott by 
the pro-commonwealth Popular Democratic Party, which claimed the definition 
of that option was misleading. The party had urged its followers to 
vote for ``none of the above.'' The referendum drew a turnout of 71.1 
percent of registered voters, compared with 73.6 percent in a similar 
referendum in 1993. Some leaders of the independence movement had 
urged a boycott of the voting altogether because the options were 
not defined by their proponents and because the results of the vote 
would not be binding on the U.S. Congress. In the 1993 vote, statehood 
lost to the commonwealth option by 46.2 percent to 48.4 percent, while 
4.4 percent supported independence. On Sunday night, commonwealth 
leaders, who say the status quo needs enhancements but remains sound, 
said the vote reaffirmed the wish of Puerto Rico to continue its existing 
relationship with the United States a century after the Spanish-American 
War brought the two together. ``This vote means that we have here 
people who are proud of their history, proud of their relationship 
with the United States, proud of their American citizenship but, above 
all, proud of their Puerto Ricanness,'' Anibal Acevedo Vila, president 
of the Popular Democratic Party, told supporters at a victory rally. 
``This has been a reaffirmation of the commonwealth.'' The loss for 
the statehood option appeared to be a major setback for efforts by 
the ruling New Progressive Party to sway Congress into authorizing 
a future binding vote on the incorporation of Puerto Rico as the 51st 
state. Gov. Pedro Rossello has made the pursuit of statehood for this 
island of 3.8 million residents his main priority since taking office 
in 1992, and has counted on the resources of incumbency to promote 
statehood here and in Washington. For this referendum, leaders of 
the statehood movement tried to divide the opposition among the other 
four options. They also crafted the entire ballot measure as a petition 
to the U.S. government ``to resolve the current territorial problem 
of the island,'' seeking to make each vote count as a mandate for 
change. Sunday night, the governor, too, claimed victory at his own 
rally, saying that since the commonwealth option had garnered few 
votes, ``the commonwealth is finished'' and that statehood had won 
overwhelmingly among the four ballot options that called for a specific 
status. Rossello said he recognized the winning ``none of the above'' 
vote as a protest vote against him and his policies, but not necessarily 
against statehood itself. ``I will inform Congress and the president 
of the United States that among four options statehood surpassed 90 
percent of support by those who want a change for Puerto Rico,'' the 
governor said, calling statehood ``the best future for Puerto Rico.'' 
This year, Congress, where opponents of statehood have cited objections 
over issues of language and cost, reached the farthest point on the 
question of self-determination for Puerto Rico when the House passed 
a bill that would have set the terms for a vote to seek a final status 
choice. The proposal stalled in the Senate. It is not certain how 
Washington will interpret Sunday's vote. Some members of Congress 
have said they will disregard the ``none of the above'' votes because 
those votes convey no message. Jeffrey Farrow, co-chairman of President 
Clinton's Interagency Group on Puerto Rico, said Clinton was committed 
to respecting the choice of more than 50 percent of voters and to 
take action to help implement it. ``The message will be the votes 
cast for options one through four,'' Farrow said earlier this week, 
referring to commonwealth, free association, statehood and independence. 
``The message that will be cast for `none of the above' would be less 
clear. It wouldn't give us any direction.'' Popular Democratic leaders 
said they were forced to protest the referendum because the government 
denied them participation in crafting the ballot definition of commonwealth 
and that it ended up unfairly portraying that status as one that does 
not even guarantee American citizenship, which Puerto Ricans have 
had since 1917. But leaders said their protest was against the ``undemocratic'' 
way the ballot language was developed, not against a vote on self-determination 
itself. On Sunday night, the mayor of San Juan, Sila Calderon, a major 
Popular Democratic Party leader, said ``the Puerto Rican people have 
given a mandate for dialogue, for consensus and for clean politics.'' 
The two main camps _ commonwealth and statehood _ waged advertising 
campaigns full of negative ads and scare tactics in which both sides 
accused the other of gross distortions. Pro-statehood ads, for example, 
said voting for an option other than statehood could endanger Puerto 
Ricans' American citizenship. Pro-commonwealth ads said a vote for 
statehood could turn the island into ``an incorporated territory'' 
under which residents would pay federal taxes but not get full congressional 
representation. Despite the barrage of ads, interviews with voters 
indicated that as veterans of several status referendums, many were 
able to sift through the rhetoric for the real issues. ``I think we're 
doing very well and will continue to do very well with what we've 
got,'' said Josi Millan, 64, a retiree who voted for ``none of the 
above'' to support the status quo. ``I voted to stay the way we are, 
to keep our language, our culture, the Latinismo, and the ability 
to participate in all the pageants and sporting events.'' Statehood, 
he added, ``would change who we are. Under statehood, we would completely 
lose our Spanish language. Even though they tell us again and again 
otherwise, eventually Spanish would be lost.'' Puerto Ricans, who 
this year marked the 100th anniversary since their island was ceded 
to the United States by Spain after the Spanish-American War, are 
American citizens who are governed by federal law, including the military 
draft. But they do not pay federal taxes, cannot vote on federal elections 
or elect congressional delegations and do not receive federal benefits 
comparable to the states. Statehood supporters here and in Washington 
say the status denies equal rights and responsibilities and amounts 
to second-class citizenship. Even commonwealth supporters say the 
time has come for ``an enhanced commonwealth,'' one with more self-governing 
powers to spur economic growth such as flexibility for the island 
to enter into its own international trade deals to create new jobs. 
But the main pro-commonwealth leadership say the status needs tinkering, 
not gutting. They say it is a unique relationship that accommodates 
the island's considerable sense of nationhood _ it can field its own 
Olympic team and beauty pageant contestants, for example _ and gives 
Puerto Ricans the benefit of American citizenship. The United States, 
in turn, gets a major market for American products and American companies 
to invest in, and a major contributor to the nation's defense. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>