<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981213.0214 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Morris K. Udall of Arizona, a liberal conscience of the House of Representatives 
for 30 years and a tireless advocate for environmental protection 
and political reform, died late Saturday in Washington. He was 76. 
Udall died of complications arising from Parkinson's disease, according 
to Terrence Bracy, chairman of the Morris K. Udall Foundation in Tucson, 
Ariz. First diagnosed in 1980, the disease led to Udall's resignation 
from Congress in 1991. He spent the final stage of his life in a veterans 
hospital in Washington, seldom conscious. Udall was one of those rare 
figures on the Washington scene who flourished despite the fact that 
his politics frequently did not square with the views held by many 
of his constituents, who were known for their support of conservative 
issues and Sen. Barry Goldwater. But from the time Udall was first 
elected in 1961 in Arizona's 2nd Congressional District until his 
retirement, they voted for him in overwhelming numbers and they did 
not seem to care that he earned high marks from organizations like 
the Americans for Democratic Action and the AFL-CIO. Arizonans identified 
with Udall's unabashed love of unspoiled nature, and they applauded 
his efforts to create safeguards for the environment, including curbs 
on strip mining and legislation to protect more than 100 million acres 
of wilderness in Alaska. Udall's supporters came to believe in the 
1970s that the 6-foot-5-inch, one-time basketball player for the Denver 
Nuggets might be a viable candidate for president. Udall believed 
it, too, hoping that his reputation for honesty and rugged integrity 
would help him become the nation's first elected post-Watergate president. 
But in 1976 he finished second in six Democratic primaries, losing 
the nomination to Gov. Jimmy Carter of Georgia. His liberal positions, 
among them proposals to break up the large oil companies and to set 
up a national health insurance program, were considered too extreme 
by some elements in his party and he lacked the name recognition and 
money to finance his campaign. Udall considered running again in 1980, 
because he did not believe that Carter could defeat Ronald Reagan. 
But mindful of questions about the state of his health, he threw his 
support to Sen. Edward Kennedy, D-Mass. He had disclosed that he had 
Parkinson's disease, a progressive disorder that typically occurs 
in middle age or beyond and is often characterized by tremors, stiffness 
of muscles and a deterioration of certain functions of the brain. 
Despite his condition, Udall remained active in the House for another 
decade. In the 1980s, he continued to be in the vanguard of those 
who insisted that the environment be protected from industry, opposing 
oil drilling in the Arctic National Wildlife Refuge in Alaska. The 
coastal plain of the refuge was thought to be especially rich in oil 
but Udall, who served as chairman of the House Interior Committee, 
called it ``a sacred place'' that should never be invaded by oil rigs. 
He was also a leader in the fight to push a tough strip-mining bill 
through the House in the 1970s. The bill was vetoed twice by President 
Gerald Ford before it passed in 1977 and became one of the pioneering 
pieces of environmental legislation, reclaiming millions of acres 
of coal land. In his years in Congress he was in the forefront of 
efforts to protect the environment, expand the national parks system 
and restructure the energy industry; in recognition, the National 
Wildlife Federation named him its legislator of the year in 1973. 
In 1963 he proposed legislation to put cigarettes and other tobacco 
products under the control of the U.S. Food and Drug Administration. 
He favored putting the federal government on a pay-as-you-go basis 
and slashing the federal debt, and he promoted major legislation in 
postal reform and land-use planning. He worked overtime to reform 
the way the House does business. From the start he disclosed his finances 
and put his income tax returns in open files. He gave up his lucrative 
law practice entirely and did not keep outside sources of income, 
as do many congressmen. He fought for financial disclosure legislation 
and campaign-reform laws. He proposed curbs on lobbyists. He played 
a key role in drafting and passing the Federal Election Campaign Act 
of 1971, the first substantial revision of campaign financing laws 
since 1925. The law, which required candidates for federal office 
to file detailed reports on the money they raised and spent, was used 
to help expose the Watergate scandal in 1973. Udall also took on the 
powerful committee chairmen who controlled Congress under the seniority 
system. He wanted to break up the old-boy network by allowing the 
top three ranking members on each House committee to be eligible for 
the chairmanship. Morris King Udall was born June 15, 1922, in St. 
John's, Ariz., the son of Levi and Louise Lee Udall. One of his great-grandfathers 
had led the first Mormons into Arizona from Utah. His father started 
out digging ditches, achieved success as a farmer, took law-school 
correspondence courses and served for 16 years on the Arizona Supreme 
Court, for a part of that time as its highly regarded chief justice. 
Udall's mother was the author of ``Mine and Me,'' the story of a Hopi 
woman's life. Levi Udall stressed to his children the need for responsible 
people to enter public service. Morris had two brothers and two sisters. 
One of his brothers, Stewart, was elected to Congress from Arizona's 
2nd Congressional District and served until he resigned to become 
secretary of the interior in the Cabinet of President John F. Kennedy. 
``Stew's little brother'' Mo won the special election to fill his 
seat. As a boy, Mo Udall had more than his share of adversity. When 
he was 5, his right eye was accidentally injured by a playmate. At 
that point, Levi Udall was still struggling and did not have enough 
money to obtain decent medical care for his son. Morris Udall later 
recalled being taken to a doctor in St. John's who, he said, was ``mostly 
drunk'' and who recommended that the eye be treated with poultices. 
Soon, the eye became infected and it was lost. Udall said the experience 
help mold his sense of social consciousness and he fought for the 
right of all Americans to consult with qualified physicians without 
respect to their ability to pay. When in later life Udall talked about 
any of his problems, it was always with self-deprecating wit and no 
illness could change that. ``I'm a one-eyed Mormon Democrat from conservative 
Arizona and you can't have a higher handicap than that,'' he would 
say. After graduation from high school in 1940, Udall entered the 
University of Arizona, but after the United States entered World War 
II, he maneuvered his way into the Army despite the loss of his eye. 
In fact, he recalled, it was at Fort Sam Houston that he got his first 
decent glass eye; it not only fit, but the color matched, as well. 
He served as commander of an all-black squadron in Louisiana for two 
years. ``That really shaped my life,'' he later said. ``I fought their 
fights with them. We had some battles over local discrimination.'' 
He served in the South Pacific and achieved the rank of captain in 
the Army Air Corps. In 1946, he returned to the University of Arizona, 
where he was voted president of the student body and starred as co-captain 
and all-conference forward with the basketball team. After completing 
his undergraduate work, he played briefly with the Denver Nuggets. 
But his athletic career was set aside in 1949, after his admission 
to the bar. He returned to Arizona, set up a law practice with his 
brother Stewart and entered politics. He was elected chief deputy 
attorney for Pima County in 1950 and three years later was elected 
county attorney. He suffered a setback in 1954 when he failed to win 
a nomination for a Superior Court judgeship. But in 1961, he succeeded 
his brother in Congress and became a leading liberal voice there for 
the next three decades. Larry King, the writer, once described the 
lanky Udall's arrival at the Capitol: ``There was about him a disconcerting 
combination of painful country-boy shyness and a bawdy cow-lot humor.'' 
Udall prided himself on his independence and outspokenness. In 1967, 
he broke with colleagues in the House who wanted to unseat Rep. Adam 
Clayton Powell, D-N.Y. Udall said it would be an injustice to Powell's 
constituents. That same year, he returned to hawkish Arizona and made 
a speech in Tucson in which he said he had erred in supporting American 
involvement in the war in Vietnam. His experiences in World War II 
led him to cease being an active member of the Mormon church. Citing 
the church's policy of not allowing black people to become priests 
(which it has since rescinded), he said, ``For more than 25 years 
I have held and expressed a deep-seated and conscientious disagreement 
with the church doctrine on the role of blacks.'' Throughout his career, 
Udall was always regarded as a formidable parliamentary tactician 
and an astute politician. But he failed in his efforts to oust John 
McCormack of Massachusetts as speaker of the House in 1969, when McCormack 
was 77 and tiring but still too formidable for anyone else to dare 
challenge him. And he failed also in a bid in 1970 to oust Hale Boggs 
of Louisiana as House majority leader. When he lost to Boggs, after 
promised support from some liberals failed to materialize, he turned 
his ``Mo'' campaign button upside down so it read ``Ow.'' Udall was 
married to Patricia Emery from 1949 until their divorce in 1966. They 
had six children: Mark, Randolph, Judith, Anne, Bradley and Katherine. 
He married Ella Royston in 1968. She committed suicide 20 years later. 
In 1989, he married Norma Gilbert. He is survived by his wife; four 
brothers and sisters, Stewart of Santa Fe, N.M., David of Tucson, 
Elma of Albuquerque, N.M., and Eloise Whiting of Albuquerque; six 
children, Mark of Boulder, Colo., Randolph of Carbondale, Colo., Judith 
Udall Harding of Boulder, Anne Udall of Charlotte, N.C., Bradley of 
Eagle, Colo., and Katherine Udall of Norman, Okla., and seven grandchildren. 
Udall's son Mark was elected to the House of Representatives from 
Boulder this year. A nephew, Tom Udall, won a House seat from Santa 
Fe, in the same election. Udall resigned from the House after a fall 
in his home in Arlington, Va., in 1991. But he had decided even before 
that, he said, that he could not be a candidate for office in 1992. 
In his honor, Congress in 1992 established the Morris K. Udall Foundation, 
which is dedicated to environmental education and mediation. Before 
illness took its toll, Udall liked to write and took pleasure in creating 
his own newsletters to his constituents. Some of his newsletters, 
which were distinctive because they were devoid of self-promotion 
and concentrated on voter education, were published in book form in 
1972 under the title, ``The Education of a Congressman.'' His witticisms 
were the subject of another book, ``Too Funny to be President,'' published 
after his unsuccessful bid for president in 1976. Udall's humor was 
appreciated in Washington and Arizona. As a member of the House Post 
Office Committee, he would joke: ``Let's turn inflation over to the 
Post Office. That'll slow it down.'' When he was running his modest 
campaign for the Democratic presidential nomination, he told audiences 
of the time he stopped in a barbershop in New Hampshire, announced 
who he was and what he was running for, and was told by a patron, 
``Yep, we were just laughing about that yesterday.'' He enjoyed telling 
stories to his friends, and when in the final stage of his illness 
he fell mostly silent, it was an agonizing loss for his friends. ``You'd 
tell him a joke and his eyes would twinkle as he prepared to tell 
you two back _ but he couldn't get them out,'' said Rep. Pat Williams, 
a Democrat of Montana. Still, his friends remembered that even after 
he got Parkinson's disease and realized how serious it was, he joked 
about it. Indeed, he suggested there was a similarity between his 
disease and Paula Parkinson, a lobbyist who was involved in one of 
Washington's periodic sex scandals. ``They both cause you to lose 
sleep,'' he said, ``and they both give you the shakes.'' But as the 
disease progressed Udall was confined to the veterans hospital in 
Washington. Michael Lewis, a columnist for The New York Times Magazine, 
found that Sen. John McCain, the conservative Republican from Arizona, 
was one of Udall's few visitors. ``Mo reached out to me in 50 different 
ways,'' McCain told Lewis. When McCain was elected to the House in 
1982, he said, Udall took the young congressman in hand although they 
did not think alike on many issues. Four years later, when McCain 
won the Senate seat surrendered by a retiring Barry Goldwater, he 
felt his deepest sense of gratitude not to his fellow conservative 
but to Udall. ``There no way Mo could have been more wonderful,'' 
McCain told Lewis, ``And there was no reason for him to be that way.'' 
Whenever he takes the Senate floor on behalf of American Indians or 
argues that the Republican Party should support environmentalism, 
McCain said, he remembers his debt to Mo Udall. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>