<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981213.0138 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Adding momentum to the open-source movement for the free sharing of 
software, IBM plans Monday to make available the original programmer's 
instructions for a new mail program that can be used to store and 
forward e-mail messages with a high level of security. The program, 
Secure Mailer, serves as an electronic post office for server computers 
connected to the Internet. It was developed by Wietse Venema, an IBM 
researcher and computer security specialist. Executives said they 
were using the free, open-source model of software distribution to 
insure that the program would be widely available on the dozens of 
kinds of computers that are used to route Internet mail traffic. The 
open source model of software development, pioneered by a loosely 
affiliated group of expert programmers, is built on universal sharing 
of the programmer's original written instructions to the computer. 
In traditional, proprietary development models, those instructions 
are hidden because they have been compiled into the binary 1s and 
0s that computers understand. The open-source model has been gaining 
popularity in the last year based on the success of the free Linux 
operating system, and in recent months several major technology corporations 
have endorsed part or all of the idea. ``This is IBM's Christmas present 
to the Internet,'' said Abner Germanow, a computer security analyst 
at the International Data Corp., a market research firm. ``For these 
are core pieces of software, and we're going beyond trying to make 
money off of them, to the idea that by freely sharing them it will 
make the world a better place.'' Like many big companies, the International 
Business Machines Corp. seems to be cautiously feeling its way toward 
an open-source strategy. Secure Mailer follows by just a week the 
company's release of the source code for a compiler, the tool used 
by software developers to transform instructions written in a programming 
language into the computer's binary machine code. In addition, IBM 
is making its software compatible with Apache, a popular open-source 
Web server program, and earlier this year it announced plans to make 
a version of its DB2 relational data base program available for the 
open-source Linux operating system. ``We're still trying to understand 
exactly what open source means,'' said Paul Horn, vice president for 
research. ``It obviously plays an important role where standards are 
critical, but what it means to IBM is still under formulation.'' Secure 
Mailer offers an alternative to several other freely available programs 
that route Internet mail, including Sendmail and Q Mail, as well as 
to commercial programs like Microsoft's Exchange. Currently about 
70 percent of all e-mail worldwide is handled by Sendmail, a program 
that has been developed over more than a decade and supported by a 
programmer named Eric Allman and a loose group of colleagues. Recently, 
Allman started a company to develop a commercial version of the program. 
IBM researchers said one of the drawbacks to Sendmail was that it 
had been written as a large, monolithic piece of software. As a result 
it has both performance and security limitations. In contrast, Venema 
has developed Secure Mailer as a cluster of modules, all of which 
distrust each other. This creates a more secure program. The program 
could be compared to a ship that has many independent compartments 
and therefore is harder to sink, he said. Charles Palmer, who manages 
a computer security research group at IBM's T.J. Watson Research Laboratory, 
said that enabling other programmers to look at all the original instructions 
written by the program's author would give them a high degree of confidence 
in the security of a program. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>