<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981213.0146 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Following are excerpts from weekend editorials published in newspapers 
across the United States on the impeachment proceedings against President 
Clinton: MANCHESTER (N.H.) UNION LEADER AND SUNDAY NEWS, Dec. 13 Many 
comparisons are being made in these historic days between the attempted 
impeachments of Richard M. Nixon and William Jefferson Clinton. There 
is one clear difference, at least to date. For all his misdeeds, Nixon 
finally had the great good sense and love of country to resign his 
office. ... Clinton partisans say that an impeachment would be bad 
for the country. The trial, conducted in the U.S. Senate, would tie 
up the country for months or even a year. Financial markets may be 
disrupted. The Chief Justice will be tied up with the trial, delaying 
the Supreme Court's work. ... Fine, we say. The answer is simple, 
and has always been available to the President. He can resign. He 
can for once do the honorable thing and perhaps help repair the dishonor 
his actions have done to the White House and to the office and to 
the nation. If he will not do so, if he continues to delay, delay, 
delay and use every political and legal trick in the book, then the 
U.S. House of Representatives must and should do the honorable thing 
and vote his impeachment. To do anything less _ to plea-bargain _ 
only compounds the wrong that Mr. Clinton has done to the nation. 
LINCOLN (NEB.) JOURNAL STAR, Dec. 13 President Clinton should have 
resigned months ago, sparing the country the tortuous and unavoidable 
impeachment investigation into his misconduct. ... That leaves the 
question. What is the next best option? The answer is that he should 
be censured. ... Where Clinton crossed the line, where he jeopardized 
his presidency, was when he lied about it under oath. ... That action 
is inexcusable for the chief executive of the United States, sworn 
to uphold the law. There must be official action governmental sanction 
that holds him accountable. That action, however, does not have to 
be impeachment. It does not have to be, and should not be, removal 
from office. ... A better end to this sorry affair is for the House 
of Representatives to quickly, sternly censure Clinton, preferably 
with some sort of penalty such as a fine, and retain the possibility 
that he face criminal charges once he leaves office. LAS VEGAS REVIEW 
JOURNAL, Dec. 13 Mr. Clinton never admitted anything till he was cornered 
with the incontrovertible evidence of phone logs, visitor logs, tape 
recordings, and DNA evidence from a stained dress. Even then, his 
confessions have remained laughably partial. ... At the last moment, 
literally minutes before the slowly grinding gears of the majestic 
and fearful process were due to produce an impeachment referral from 
the House Judiciary Committee on Friday afternoon, Mr. Clinton sent 
word that the TV cameras should be prepared for a major presidential 
announcement. ... His remorse? In a carefully crafted use of the passive 
voice, he expressed remorse not for what he himself has caused, but 
`for what our country is going through' perpetrators unknown, presumably. 
And the `consequences' he is `prepared to accept?' Even as the House 
committee voted to recommend impeachment, the president said he would 
be willing to ``accept their censure.'' Once again, the president 
expresses no convincing concern for the primacy of the rule of law, 
for the credibility of his office, his administration, or the nation 
he leads. Instead he whimpers only about himself, his feelings, and 
how much or little he may have to do to make this problem go away. 
If it's not too late, perhaps one more article should be added to 
that referral. The Constitution allows the office of the presidency 
to be occupied only by an adult. DETROIT FREE PRESS, Dec. 12 Looking 
pale and nearly pathetic, President Bill Clinton threw himself on 
the mercy of the Congress Friday, in effect asking for a public scolding 
instead of an impeachment trial. A heavy censure is what Clinton deserves, 
and what the American people seem to want. The best outcome for this 
mess is for the House to vote down impeachment next week, spare the 
nation any more months of sex and semantics, then give the president 
a good thrashing on prime-time TV. ... We believe the result should 
be a well-considered decision against impeachment, followed by a strongly 
worded and publicly delivered condemnation of the president's conduct. 
BERKSHIRE EAGLE, Pittsfield, Mass., Dec. 13 Vote to impeach or not 
to impeach? Have these Republicans learned nothing at all from recent 
history? The same Americans that voted them into embarrassment in 
the last election want no part of an impeachment of President Bill 
Clinton. Polls clearly indicate that if he is to be locked up, Americans 
prefer he get locked up after his final two years in office. Even 
if House members rush to cast an impeachment vote before the current 
session runs out, there probably aren't enough votes to cover the 
two-third majority necessary to pass impeachment articles. Even if 
there would be, there certainly aren't the 66 votes such a measure 
needs to pass in the Senate. ... We know what Clinton did with Monica 
Lewinsky in the Oval Office. We know the moral thing to do would have 
been resignation. We know he's not going to do that. His actions were 
immoral, but they weren't illegal. If he perjured his testimony, it's 
going to be very difficult to prove. What we're witnessing now in 
Washington is completely unnecessary. And so it goes. It's time to 
move on. WICHITA (KAN.) EAGLE, Dec. 13 The U.S. House of Representatives 
this week should vote to impeach President Bill Clinton and move the 
matter to the U.S. Senate. It is with the deepest regret that The 
Eagle's editorial board makes that recommendation. The decision has 
been the most difficult in the memory of any of the board's members. 
This recommendation does not mean that Mr. Clinton should be removed 
from office for his reprehensible behavior in the Monica Lewinsky 
affair. That is a matter to be decided by the Senate in a sober and 
serious atmosphere ... . The House Judiciary Committee approved four 
articles of impeachment. The two directly involving perjury are the 
most serious; the president surely must be held accountable for his 
testimony in the Paula Jones lawsuit and to Kenneth Starr's grand 
jury. Though censure and censure-plus-a-big-fine have been discussed, 
either would be relatively meaningless _ at this point. At this point, 
impeachment by the House is the surest form of real censure, even 
though the process has been badly contaminated. At the bottom line 
is the painful judgment that America would best be served by the constitutional 
process of impeachment by the House and judgment by the Senate. BIRMINGHAM 
(ALA.) POST-HERALD, Dec. 13 Impeachment is a way of saying loudly 
and unmistakably that the president's actions constituted a betrayal 
of his trust. But all betrayals are not created equal, and the president's, 
while utterly dismaying, is not so horrendous that it absolutely must 
be allowed to cause this nation more grief than it already has. ... 
If his acts had cost Clinton credibility to the extent that he could 
no longer govern, the alternative to impeachment a vote of censure 
would make no sense. The public, however, continues to support the 
president in large numbers, meaning that the Senate will not convict 
and that a conviction, if it did happen, would cause havoc. The proceedings 
should end with a defeat in the House of the articles of impeachment. 
THE WASHINGTON POST, Dec. 13 The House Judiciary Committee has now 
completed its task, and it has failed miserably. It has approved four 
articles of impeachment, of which two are ill-defined and two are 
unsubstantiated. It also has arrogantly voted not to report a censure 
resolution, thereby seeking to deprive the full House of any alternative 
to impeachment. The House Republican leadership should remedy this 
situation by somehow ensuring that the full House gets to vote on 
the sensible alternative of a strongly worded censure resolution. 
There is no question that President Clinton committed grave offenses 
and aggravated them by refusing to acknowledge either the offenses 
themselves or their seriousness. The two perjury articles reported 
by the committee are both, in our judgment, factually accurate. But 
in this case, impeachment is an overly broad response. ... The obstruction 
of justice article remains factually unproven. While the charges are 
serious and the evidence supplied by independent counsel Kenneth Starr 
raises questions that cannot be dismissed, the committee has not done 
the required investigation to substantiate these allegations. In the 
face of this failure, the article is irresponsible. The abuse of power 
article, likewise, is a mistake. ... Failing to send the Democratic 
censure resolution to the floor is the committee's final, crucial 
mistake. Committee Republicans spent a good deal of time yesterday 
deriding censure as unconstitutional. But nothing in the Constitution 
prevents a censure resolution, as long as Congress does not seek to 
impose a fine or other material punishment on the president. ... That 
censure marks a viable third way may be why some Republicans wish 
to avoid it. The new House leadership should allow members to vote 
on a reasonable alternative to impeachment. THE PHILADELPHIA INQUIRER 
President Clinton's sworn lies and maddening denial have taken him 
_ and the nation _ to the brink of an impeachment that most Americans 
sensibly oppose. By expressing contrition but no legal admissions, 
Mr. Clinton made it easier for the polarized House Judiciary Committee 
to recommend impeachment to the full House. ... The crux of the full 
House's decision has to be whether the President's behavior meets 
the grave constitutional standard of `high crimes and misdemeanors.' 
As badly as he's behaved, it does not. ... The extreme punishment 
of removal from office is disproportionate to Mr. Clinton's misconduct. 
Instead, both houses of Congress ought to pass a searing condemnation 
of Mr. Clinton's disregard for the law. This joint resolution would 
require the President's signature, which he indicated Friday he would 
consider. ... CHARLOTTE (N.C.) OBSERVER A court may one day decide 
whether Bill Clinton committed perjury, but it's clear that he lied 
many times _ in a civil deposition, in grand jury testimony, to his 
cabinet, his family and his nation. He lied and lied and lied in an 
attempt to conceal his relationship with Monica Lewinsky. He could 
face criminal charges for his offenses after he leaves office. He 
could lose his law license. What should Congress do about it? ... 
The Constitution gives Congress one power regarding the chief executive's 
conduct: to determine whether a president committed treason, bribery 
or other high crimes and misdemeanors'' that justify removal from 
office. ... If the public approves of Mr. Clinton's job performance, 
if Congress is working with him, if world leaders rely on him, it's 
difficult to conclude that the nation's well-being requires his removal 
from office. ... But unusual times may demand unusual measures. A 
strong resolution of censure is not as bad as the likely alternative, 
a highly partisan effort to impeach the president. Rep. Bob Livingston, 
the next House speaker, should tell his fellow Republicans that and 
lead them in crafting such a resolution. It's time for responsible 
Republican leaders to lead. ST. LOUIS POST-DISPATCH, Dec. 13 Henry 
Hyde says the House Judiciary Committee had to vote for impeachment 
on Friday to uphold the rule of law. But the committee's partisan 
vote to impeach the president for lying about sex does more to trivialize 
the law than to vindicate it. It is simply wrong to say that the only 
way for Congress to stand up for the rule of law is to employ the 
100-megaton bomb the Constitution reserves for presidential abuse 
of office. As most of the country has been saying for months, there 
is another way _ to pass a resolution of censure that condemns the 
president for lying to the nation and misleading the courts. COLUMBUS 
DISPATCH, Dec. 13 Only rarely does a U.S. Congress vote on anything 
as momentous as the impeachment of a president, but later this week, 
the 435 members of the House will do just that. ... The Dispatch believes 
that at the very least, President Clinton is guilty of perjury, and 
that his position does not excuse him from obedience to the law or 
responsibility for violating it. Unfortunately, the central issues 
are nearly lost in the thick smog of angry, partisan charges and countercharges 
that now envelops the impeachment inquiry and that has come to sicken 
the American public. ... Now is the time to clear away this cloud 
of rancor and accusation and address the real issue. House members 
will find no dishonor in holding that breaking an oath of office is 
wrong, that lying under oath is wrong and that lying to the American 
people is wrong. They will show no cowardice in branding as unacceptable 
the cynical perversion of the law by the chief law-enforcement officer 
of the nation. To say that such a person has soiled the honorable 
office to which he was elected by the people is not vengeful or vindictive. 
Let each representative put aside partisanship, anger, insults and 
threats and cast a vote that best serves the Constitution and the 
nation. MINNEAPOLIS STAR TRIBUNE, Dec. 12 In pressing ahead with articles 
of impeachment against President Clinton, the House Judiciary Committee's 
majority doggedly flouts historical precedent, the wisdom of constitutional 
scholars and the demonstrated will of the electorate. Any reading 
of the Constitution's historical context shows that Article II, Section 
4 was crafted to protect this new democracy from an unjust use of 
power _ that is, from tyranny. Its stipulation of `Treason, Bribery, 
or other high Crimes and Misdemeanors' as a justification for impeachment 
denotes weighty offenses _ the level of misconduct that faced Watergate's 
grave, earnest Judiciary Committee. When citizens watch that somber 
panel's 1998 counterpart in action, they see not gravity but anger. 
They don't see, as Americans did in 1974, a bipartisan awakening to 
the horrible truth of a president's offenses against democracy. Instead 
they see a scornful majority counsel forced to make the worst possible 
inferences to hoist a sex scandal and its aftermath to the level of 
constitutional crisis. Call it Impeachment Lite, a pseudo-sorrowful 
ritual of impeachment as punishment. ... What the House may do is 
unthinkable. It is unthinkable for a majority party to punish a popular 
president for private behavior, against the demonstrated will of the 
electorate _ using a mechanism designed to protect the republic from 
abuse against the state. Clinton's behavior with Monica Lewinsky was 
improper and reckless. He handled its consequences badly. He deserves 
the stern vote of rebuke or censure that he told Americans Friday 
he is ready to accept. But those who vote to impeach will deserve 
the voters' wrath. For in using a protective measure as a punishment, 
they are misusing the Constitution they're bound to honor. ALBANY 
(N.Y.) TIMES UNION, Dec. 13 The case for impeaching President Clinton 
has now been drawn in stark contrast by chief counsels for the minority 
Democrats and majority Republicans _ so stark, in fact, that the House 
Judiciary Committee's votes stand out as a partisan exercise. If the 
full House wants to serve the national interest instead of partisanship, 
then lawmakers on both sides of the aisle will have to act more objectively. 
Mr. Clinton made the best case for mercy in his brief address Friday 
afternoon. That followed the lucid and superbly summation by the Democrats' 
chief counsel, Abbe Lowell, on Thursday. The case against Mr. Clinton 
was made, derisively and sarcastically, by chief majority counsel 
David Schippers. ... While much was made by way of comparison to Watergate, 
Mr. Lowell made clear that the Clinton's case in no way resembles, 
or approaches Mr. Nixon's abuse of power. To the contrary, this inquiry 
has been spun out of the Paula Jones sexual harassment lawsuit and 
pertains to conduct long before Mr. Clinton came to Washington. ... 
By contrast, Mr. Schippers' summation oozed with sarcasm and speculation. 
So what if Ms. Lewinsky denied, under oath, that she was ever told 
to lie or that she would be given a job in exchange for her silence. 
She knew what was expected of her, Mr. Schippers intoned. And she 
did get a job. ... Any fair reading of the facts, and the testimony, 
requires evidence of wrongdoing, not an assumption that it occurred. 
Ironically, it is Mr. Clinton's Republican foes who argue so strongly 
that perjury is perjury, and that Mr. Clinton's defenders cannot hide 
behind the claim that lies about sex are not as serious as other misstatements. 
But that raises the obvious question: If the law is to be considered 
literally, and without any room for nuance, then why isn't it just 
as necessary to weigh the evidence literally? ... The facts, and just 
the facts. In no way do they add up to impeachable offenses. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>