<DOC>
<DOCNO> ABC19981129.1830.0976 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> CAPTION </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Britain and Chile are denying reports today that they've worked out 
a deal to send former dictator augusto Pinochet home to Chile, to 
stand trial there. Pinochet is wanted in Spain for crimes against 
humanity. As ABC's Richard Gizbert reports, Pinochet's legal problems 
are already changing things for other accused dictators around the 
world, even some who are still in office. As a dictator with an abysmal 
human rights record, president laurent Kabila came to Europe this 
week watching the Pinochet case very closely. Kabila rules the democratic 
republic of Congo, and has been accused of ordering the massacres 
of opponents in 1997 during the civil war there. Kabila has also refused 
to cooperate with U.N. human rights investigators. On his arrival 
in Europe, Kabila found more than the usual human rights protesters 
were waiting. He got the diplomatic cold shoulder from French President 
Jacques Chirac who didn't even come to the door of the elysee palace 
to greet him. And there were three legal cases launched against Kabila, 
one in France, two in Belgium, for crimes against humanity. There 
was, through the Pinochet case a fantastic opportunity to challenge 
the implementation of international human rights law at a local level. 
The French case against Kabila was dismissed on Friday, but he was 
concerned enough to send an advance team to Belgium to make sure he 
could travel there without getting arrested. When the judges of Britain's 
highest court ruled this week that general pinochet had no immunity 
from prosecution, they were talking about former heads of state, not 
current heads of state. Human rights activists are now trying to stretch 
that legal precedent and make it apply to leaders who are still in 
power, like President Kabila. But the court drew that distinction 
between former and current leaders, for a reason. Serb strongman Slobodan 
Milosevic, for instance has a poor human rights record, but he played 
a central role in the Dayton accord that ended the bosnian war. Would 
Milosevic or any of the people involved in the Yugoslavian crisis 
have gone today if they thought there was a risk of them being arrested 
there? Human rights advocates argue the public will no longer tolerate 
its leaders making deals with despots. But at his summit with African 
leaders this weekend, the President Chirac met with several dictators. 
According to the Pinochet ruling, they are all immune from prosecution 
as long as they remain in power. That means that until a court rules 
that current leaders can be prosecuted, dictators have one more very 
good reason to maintain their hold on power, with all the means at 
their disposal. Richard Gizbert, ABC News, London. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>