<DOC>
<DOCNO> APW19981129.0673 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
A stormy negotiating session ended Sunday with a Palestinian official 
walking out and others saying the latest Mideast accord was in jeopardy, 
mainly over Israel's refusal to release military and political prisoners. 
During the negotiating session to work out details of last month's 
Wye peace accord, the Palestinians became furious over the so-called 
security prisoner issue. ``This is a crisis situation and we have 
asked for American intervention,'' said senior Palestinian negotiator 
Saeb Erekat, who was flying late Sunday to Washington to join Palestinian 
leader Yasser Arafat for meetings with Clinton administration officials 
on the issue. Tensions between the parties have been building since 
Israel released 250 prisoners, including 150 common criminals, two 
weeks ago. The Palestinians had expected Israel to release military 
and political prisoners who fought against the Israeli occupation, 
but Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu said no one jailed for murder 
or other violent acts would be among 500 prisoners to be released 
as part of the latest peace accord. ``I have no intentions, even the 
slightest of the slightest, to release murderers or to release Hamas 
members,'' Netanyahu told army radio, referring to the radical Islamic 
group. ``Hamas is at war with us and each Hamas member who is freed 
will join the ranks of murderers. To me, it doesn't matter who they 
murdered. It's important that murderers be behind bars and locks,'' 
he said. In Sunday's negotiating session in the Palestinian city of 
Jericho, Palestinian official Hassan Asfour stormed out of the meeting 
with Israeli Cabinet Secretary Dan Naveh. ``We felt that the Israeli 
government has no intention of dealing with the issues seriously,'' 
Asfour said. Erekat said he expected Israel to hand over another 150 
security prisoners in place of the criminals set free in the first 
release. ``We did not go to Washington to negotiate the release of 
car thieves,'' Erekat told The Associated Press. He said the sides 
had agreed in talks in Washington on terms for releasing prisoners, 
but Israel was not adhering to them. Implementation of the U.S.-brokered 
land-for-peace accord would be difficult to continue under the present 
circumstances, Erekat said. Yasser Arafat's Palestinian Authority 
has come under intense pressure from its citizens, who charge that 
negotiators are going soft on the prisoner issue. The matter is especially 
sensitive because many Palestinian families are affected by it and 
had expected peace deals to bring their relatives home. Among other 
Palestinian grievances raised at Sunday's meeting was increased Jewish 
settlement activity, Israeli confiscation of Arab-owned land for roads 
and a decision by Israel's Cabinet to hand over no more than 1 percent 
of the West Bank in any future withdrawal. In the West Bank village 
of Ein-Yabrud, Israeli troops separated Jewish settlers who tried 
to take over an Arab-owned home and Palestinian villagers after the 
two sides pelted each other with stones. The Israeli army declared 
the house and its surroundings a closed military area, forcing both 
sides to evacuate. And in the village of El-Khader near Bethlehem, 
Israeli bulldozers were forced to halt work ripping up village land 
to make way for a bypass road for Jewish settlers, while Palestinian 
farmers there challenged an expropriation notice in an Israeli court. 
The Palestinians have accused Israel of violating the Mideast peace 
agreement by confiscating large quantities of Palestinian land for 
new bypass roads for Jewish settlements which will be isolated as 
a result of Israeli troop withdrawals. Also Sunday, the Israeli army 
prevented Palestinian officials, including Cabinet ministers and legislators, 
from traveling from the Gaza Strip to the West Bank across Israeli 
territory. The Israeli army spokesman said the blockade was in retaliation 
for the refusal of the Palestinian police to let Israeli trucks carry 
building materials to an isolated Jewish settlement outside Gaza City. 
The Palestinians said new construction would be a violation of the 
agreement. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>