<DOC>
<DOCNO> APW19981129.0169 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Israeli Cabinet ministers called Sunday for military strikes against 
Beirut's power and water supplies in retaliation for the killing of 
Israeli soldiers by Islamic guerrillas in south Lebanon. Seven Israeli 
soldiers have been killed in the past two weeks by the Iranian-backed 
Hezbollah militia in the security zone which Israel occupies in south 
Lebanon to protect its northern border. Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu 
cut short a European trip to England and Spain to deal with a growing 
debate in Israel over the losses in Lebanon and calls for a unilateral 
Israeli withdrawal. The 12-member Cabinet security committee was to 
meet Sunday to hear military and security chiefs report on the Lebanon 
situation after Netanyahu returned from visiting soldiers wounded 
in the latest fighting. Army and intelligence chiefs, who met Saturday 
night, were unanimous in saying withdrawal would be a dangerous gamble 
unless Syria, which has 40,000 troops in Lebanon, guarantees that 
Hezbollah will not attack the civilian towns in northern Israel after 
the withdrawal, Israel radio said. Lt. Gen. Shaul Mofaz, the armed 
forces chief of staff, said Friday that unilateral withdrawal would 
lead to more bloodshed, not less, and the victims would be civilians 
as well as soldiers. The ideas of a one-sided pullback has the support 
of Foreign Minister Ariel Sharon, a former general who was the architect 
of the 1982 Lebanon invasion. He has called for a staged withdrawal 
from Lebanon but added that the Lebanese government would be held 
responsible for preventing Hezbollah attacks from the areas which 
Israel has evacuated. Should Lebanon fail to prevent these attacks, 
Sharon has argued that the ``rules of the game'' would have to change 
and that Israel could target Lebanese power stations, water pumping 
facilities, bridges and roads. Other ministers Sunday came out in 
support of attacks on civilian facilities in retaliation for the stepped-up 
guerrilla campaign. But there was no widespread support for the one-sided 
withdrawal in the 18-member Cabinet. ``The way to make them want this 
is to let Beirut wake up in the morning without water and electricity 
and then, believe me, they (the Lebanese) will send forces (to restrain 
Hezbollah) and so will the Syrians,'' said Avigdor Kahalani, the minsiter 
in charge of the national police force. He said this would affect 
Syria as well as the Lebanese because the Syrians have expanding economic 
interests in the current construction boom in Beirut. Hezbollah receives 
all its arms and other supplies from Iran through Damascus airport, 
and it is believed in Israel that the Syrian forces in Lebanon could 
stop the Hezbollah attacks if the Syrian government wished, Kahalani 
said. Trade and Industry Minister Natan Sharansky said on Israel radio 
that Israel should place the responsibility for the Hezbollah attacks 
``not on the guerrillas but on those who send them.'' However, there 
was concern in the armed forces that Israeli air strikes against power 
stations and other facilities would lead to an escalation of the conflict. 
The defense establishment is not in favor of opening a new front against 
Syria in Lebanon, Israel radio reported. Left-wing opposition leaders 
argue that Syria will never agree to stop the bloodshed in south Lebanon 
until Israel agrees to return the Golan Heights which it captured 
from Syria in the 1967 Mideast war. Sharon said Sunday that to allow 
linkage between the Golan and south Lebanon would make Israeli soldiers 
in Lebanon and the towns and villages in northern Israel hostages 
to Syria. ``Every time Syria demands more and more in the negotiations 
(on the Golan) ... they will put pressure by increasing terrorist 
activities and attacking the villages, so you have to separate the 
two problems,'' he told reporters. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>