<DOC>
<DOCNO> APW19981129.0669 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Alex Corretja captured the ATP Tour World Championship on Sunday for 
his first major title, rallying from two sets down to beat Carlos 
Moya in an all-Spanish final. Corretja outlasted his good friend 3-6, 
3-6, 7-5, 6-3, 7-5 in the season-ending event to avenge his loss to 
Moya in the final of the French Open. ``Carlos, I'm sorry, I know 
how you feel right now,'' Corretja said. The four-hour victory was 
the longest final on the tour this year and worth dlrs 1.36 million. 
It propelled Corretja three places up to No. 3 in the final 1998 computer 
rankings, a career high. Moya, who squandered a 3-1 lead in the fifth 
set, collected dlrs 660,000 and will finish the year ranked fifth. 
He won two titles in 1998. It was the first all-Spanish final in the 
history of the event and the first Spanish triumph since Manuel Orantes 
won what was then called the Masters in 1976 in Houston, Texas. Corretja 
said he was dedicating the victory to his recently deceased uncle 
and aunt. Moya, 22, opened the match with a break of serve and did 
it again to win the first set, smashing a volley on his fourth set 
point. Another break of serve in the second game was enough for Moya 
to win the first set. Corretja, 24, finally gained a break of his 
own when he hit a deep-angled forehand winner to take a 3-1 lead in 
the third. His advantage did not last long, however, ending in a double-fault 
in the very next game. Moya saved another break point with an ace 
to hold for 4-4. Corretja, who had upset top-ranked Pete Sampras in 
the semifinals, was in trouble again in the 11th game, but hit a sizzling 
backhand passing shot down the line to hold serve. In the next game, 
Moya's forehand sailed into the net, giving Corretja the set. A double-fault 
by Moya gave Corretja a 5-3 lead and he served out the fourth set. 
Corretja fell down 1-3 in the fifth, but broke right back. A forehand 
by Moya that sailed long gave Corretja another break, a 5-4 lead and 
a chance to serve out the match. He wasted one match point, when Moya 
hit a volley winner after a long rally, and then dropped his serve. 
But Moya could not hold serve either and the drama ended on Corretja's 
second match point in the next game when Moya's forehand sailed long. 
Corretja gained the biggest victory of his career and his ninth title, 
fifth in 1998. It was Corretja's first win over Moya in four matches 
this year. Moya beat Corretja in the quarterfinals of the Monte Carlo 
tournament, before winning the major clay court event. At the U.S. 
Open, Moya also beat Corretja before losing in the semifinals. Coming 
into this elite tournament that brings together the top eight players 
of the year, Moya had lost all five of his indoor matches of the year. 
He had not reached a final on any other surface than clay. But he 
seems to thrive in the event, having reached the semifinals in his 
first appearance last year. He beat big-serving Tim Henman in Saturday's 
semifinals. Corretja has a better indoor record, having won the tournament 
in Lyon, France in October, becoming the first Spanish player to win 
an indoor title since that Orantes victory in the 1976 Masters. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>