<DOC>
<DOCNO> CNN19981129.1300.0055 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> CAPTION </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
We begin with the latest reaction from lawmakers on President Clinton's 
impeachment inquiry. The big topic on the talk show circuit today 
-- Mr. Clinton's answers to 81 questions from the house Judiciary 
committee. Congressional republicans are not pleased with the response, 
calling the answers evasive and disappointing. Democrats contend the 
American public is satisfied with Mr. Clinton's answers and that should 
be enough. Well, I don't think anyone is happy about the way the impeachment 
process is going. I think most people thought it has taken much too 
long and would like to see it completed sooner rather than later. 
I think whatever they do in the house I'd like to see them do it this 
year. I would say that probably close to a majority of republicans 
would prefer it not go to impeachment, that this be worked out through 
censure. But no matter what happens, I can't see this getting enough 
votes to pass on the house floor. The impeachment inquiry resumes 
Tuesday as the house Judiciary committee goes back to work. Carl Rochelle 
has more. The focus is back on Capitol Hill, where house Judiciary 
committee members will review the president's answers. But if lawmakers 
were looking for any new revelations from the president, they will 
probably be disappointed. Anyone who thought the president should 
be impeached beforehand will still think so, and anyone who thought 
the president should not be impeached will think that. Republicans 
continue to draft three proposed articles of impeachment, and the 
Judiciary committee will hold more hearings and take more depositions 
next week. At the same time, the idea of censure and reprimand instead 
of impeachment is becoming more and more of a possibility. But Georgia 
republican Bob Barr is one committee member who wants impeachment 
and nothing less. Censure as it's currently being discussed by a certain 
small number of members of the house is absolutely meaningless. It 
would be worse than doing nothing, because it would give the American 
people the appearance that we're doing something, when in reality, 
we're not. Censure means nothing from a constitutional standpoint. 
One political analyst and presidential watcher strongly disagrees. 
Censure would be a very important act. It would be the first time 
a president of the United States has been censured by the Congress 
in over a hundred years. It would say that the history books would 
say, "William Jefferson Clinton, 42nd president of the United States, 
who had been censured for bringing dishonor on the office by the Congress 
of the United States." I don't think that's irrelevant at all. The 
White House has indicated it will at least consider the possibility 
of censure and has raised the issue with moderate republicans. The 
president's personal lawyer, David Kendall, indicated that he plans 
to send another memorandum to the committee on behalf of the president 
in the very near future. That memorandum is expected to make a detailed 
argument why nothing brought before the committee so far rises to 
the level that would merit impeaching the president of the United 
States. Carl Rochelle, CNN, the White House. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>