<DOC>
<DOCNO> NBC19981129.1830.0081 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> CAPTION </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Good evening. We begin tonight in our nation's capital where the impeachment 
issue is about to begin. The house jock Judiciary committee begins 
taking testimony behind closed doors tomorrow with the inquiry likely 
in two weeks. There is a question of what should happen next. NBC's 
Joe Johns reports from the White House tonight. Congressional republicans 
divided on national television today over where their party stands 
on the president. With the house Judiciary committee gearing up to 
approve articles of impeachment, probably within the next two weeks, 
the disagreement is over simple math. The speaker pro tempore: the 
GE whether there is enough GOP yick T balan of my support in the full 
house to pass a resolution to actually impeach the president. A member 
of the congressional leadership and a conservative critic of the president 
thinks the votes are there. I think the majority the majority of the 
house will uphold will uphold T Ru the rule of law and impeach the 
president and send the case to the Senate. But a moderate house republican 
stands by his prediction that 15, 20, perhaps more of his colleagues 
would defect. I would say that probably a majority of the republicans 
would prefer it not go to impeachment, that this could be worked out 
through censure. But the censure option has problems too. The president's 
written responses to questions from the Judiciary committee about 
the Monica Lewinsky affair have angered some in Congress. This censure 
idea without an admission on the president's part is a Political cop-out. 
I know he has. If you look A-- on't think there is anybody that I 
don't believe there's anybody who has looked at that record who doesn't 
believe he's committed perjury. But one of the president's harshest 
democratic critics says censure is the emerging option. I truly believe 
that there is an emerging consensus in support of a strong censure 
resolution, so long as it bluntly condemns what the president did 
and so long as it's passage is dependent on bipartisan support. This 
week, the Judiciary committee will hold a hearing on the consequences 
of perjury and take depositions from more witnesses. The White House 
has yet to say whether the president or his attorneys will make a 
presentation defending Mr. Clinton on December 8th as they've been 
invited to do. A committee aide predicted that the next two weeks 
will be frenzied and unpredictable as the house struggles for a way 
to wrap this case up before the new Congress is sworn in. Joe Johns, 
NBC news, the capitol. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>