<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981129.0026 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
``No matter how cynical you become, it's never enough to keep up.'' 
That aphorism, a sage comment on the absurdities of 1980s culture, 
was written by Jane Wagner for the actress Lily Tomlin, in their 1985 
Broadway hit, ``The Search for Signs of Intelligent Life in the Universe.'' 
But Ms. Wagner and Ms. Tomlin could just as well have applied that 
same observation to the trajectory of the 1990s money-and power-drunk 
world of high technology, an industry that seems to be trying to one-up 
itself, almost daily, in the ``how cynical can we get?'' department. 
Just how cynical indeed is becoming abundantly clear as the board 
room and courtroom dramas play out between Microsoft Corp. and its 
archrivals _ Netscape Communications Corp., America Online Inc. and 
Sun Microsystems Inc. _ and, of course, the U.S. government. Hard-core 
cynics find honesty contemptible unless it serves a purpose; the truth 
too often makes suckers out of those who practice it. It is an attitude 
so embedded in our business culture that feigned ignorance is now 
an acceptable courtroom defense. For example, we shake our heads and 
tut-tut when we read about the videotaped deposition in which Microsoft's 
chairman, Bill Gates, the most powerful and feared executive in all 
of technology, ``cannot recall'' a single negative e-mail or its context, 
even when the wording suggests that he was articulating his ideas, 
plans, visions and strategies with great fervor. Yet few people, in 
or out of the industry, cried foul when one of Gates' advisers _ a 
former Justice Department official, no less _ characterized the Gates 
testimony as a success because he had refused to concede anything 
to his questioners, even when it appeared they had him dead to rights. 
And how cynical is it for some industry executives who say they believe 
in an unfettered free market _ and who, not coincidentally, reap the 
secondary benefits of Microsoft's success _ to argue that Microsoft's 
dominance has been good for consumers? Most economists would argue 
that what is good for software buyers _ whether corporate or consumer 
_ is choice and quality. Microsoft asserts that the market domination 
of its Windows operating system insures both, by providing a stable 
platform on which developers can build myriad application programs. 
Certainly true _ until one then considers that most of Microsoft's 
vast revenues derive from its own Windows applications. Few companies 
are brave enough to develop products that compete head on with Microsoft's; 
historically, the odds of winning that market battle are next to zero. 
But choice spurs quality. One could argue, for instance, that the 
very best software Microsoft has produced in the last 10 years has 
been its browser, Internet Explorer. Coincidence? Not likely. Internet 
Explorer is Microsoft's only major consumer application that has had 
serious competition _ Netscape's Navigator, which once dominated its 
market niche at the 90 percent levels of Microsoft's Windows. Microsoft 
joined the battle with a huge advantage: It could afford to give its 
browser away free, and did so. When that failed, Microsoft _ in what 
may someday be known as one of the greatest cynical acts in industry 
history _ effectively killed the entire market segment by declaring 
the browser to be not a browser but the ``HTML engine'' of Windows, 
an inextricable component of its operating system. But the deepest 
cynicism, set forth with great righteousness by Microsoft and its 
defenders, is their assertion that, given the opportunity to do so, 
its competitors would act exactly as Microsoft has. Unfortunately, 
this defense is absolutely true. Strong-arm tactics and cutthroat 
behavior have long been considered not just acceptable business practices 
in technology, but de rigueur. And all the industry aspires to the 
stock price and the market heft of Microsoft _ although none want 
to be sued by the government, of course. But the argument is specious. 
No other company has the opportunity to act like Microsoft; it is 
too late. Not surprisingly, Microsoft was quick to point to last week's 
announcement of America Online's takeover of Netscape as proof that 
there is plenty of healthy competition in the industry. But while 
consolidation sometimes enhances competition, even a troika as apparently 
formidable as the America Online, Netscape and Sun Microsystems alliance 
lacks the muscle to nudge Microsoft from its market dominance or to 
stem its hegemony in cyberspace. Even if the alliance were to conquer 
every new market they envision, the personal computer market is enormous 
and still growing, and most new _ and old _ machines will be powered 
by Microsoft's operating system for many years to come. But the merger 
announcement was a classic tactic for a cynical industry. Many such 
announcements have been made over the last decade or so, and despite 
the vast media coverage they engender, most do not work and are quietly 
dismantled later, when their public relations value has waned. Such 
cynicism is perfectly legal, of course, but it demeans everything 
it touches. Take nothing at face value, it demands, because everyone 
has an agenda and everything has a price. At some point, even principled 
people start to waver: ``If they can do it, why shouldn't I get mine, 
too?'' By most accounts, that is where the technology industry is 
today, a game with few rules and only brute moves _ jockeying for 
position, cutting the flanks of the competition whenever possible. 
Yet, that game, too, has a price _ but it is a price of a different, 
more personal sort. As Jane Wagner put it so eloquently, ``The trouble 
with the rat race is that even if you win, you're still a rat.'' 
</TEXT>
</DOC>