<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981129.0066 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
As part of his budget for the coming year, President Clinton will 
propose expanding Medicaid and Medicare to allow tens of thousands 
of people with disabilities to retain their health benefits when they 
return to work, administration officials say. Under current law, many 
of these people must, in effect, choose between working and keeping 
their health insurance coverage. If they take jobs and earn any significant 
amounts of money, they jeopardize their disability benefits and the 
insurance coverage they receive through Medicaid and Medicare. Many 
people with disabilities caused by severe injuries and chronic illnesses 
say they could work, thanks to advances in medicine and medical technology, 
but do not do so because they want to keep their medical benefits 
under the two government health programs. Eight million disabled people 
of working age receive more than $50 billion a year in cash benefits 
in the form of Social Security and Supplemental Security Income payments. 
Fewer than 1 percent of them return to work. The definition of disability 
is strict; people qualify for benefits only if they are so disabled 
they cannot engage in any ``substantial gainful activity.'' The number 
of people receiving disability benefits has risen sharply in recent 
years _ 60 percent in the last decade. People are qualifying for benefits 
at younger ages and staying on the rolls longer than in the past. 
Federal officials have concluded that they must find ways to get more 
people back to work. The president's proposals would help people with 
HIV, the virus that causes AIDS, as well as people with kidney disease, 
spinal cord injuries, multiple sclerosis, various types of mental 
illness, and impairments caused by strokes and heart attacks. Medicaid, 
in particular, covers two items of great value to many people with 
disabilities: prescription drugs and the services of personal assistants 
or attendants, who help the disabled perform everyday activities at 
home or at work. Sandra Thurman, director of the Office of National 
AIDS Policy, said the president's proposal would help many people 
with HIV keep their Medicaid benefits while they work. ``Without prescription 
drugs and Medicaid coverage,'' she said, ``they might not be able 
to work or continue to be healthy. We're always encouraging people 
to move from welfare to work. But to keep people in the workplace, 
paying taxes and living healthy productive lives, we need to provide 
a minimum amount of support to make sure that happens.'' Administration 
officials said the president's proposal would create several new options: 
_ People who lose eligibility for Social Security disability benefits 
because they return to work would be allowed to continue their Medicare 
coverage. People with disabilities often take low-paying jobs that 
do not offer health insurance, or they do not qualify for employer-sponsored 
health benefits because they work part-time. _ People with disabilities 
could purchase Medicaid coverage even if they took jobs and earned 
income that disqualified them from the Supplemental Security Income 
program. States could set the eligibility criteria and charge premiums 
for such Medicaid coverage. _ States could allow ``working individuals 
with disabilities'' to buy Medicaid coverage even if they lost eligibility 
for cash benefits because of medical improvements in their conditions. 
Under current law, for example, a person with severe arthritis may 
receive cash disability benefits and Medicaid. The Medicaid pays for 
therapy and a new drug that allows the person to go back to work. 
Although this temporary remission is mostly attributable to health 
care coverage, the person may lose both disability benefits and Medicaid 
under existing law. ``Many of us are unable to go to work because 
if we do, we will lose our Medicaid and Medicare,'' said Paul Spooner 
of Framingham, Mass., vice president of the National Council on Independent 
Living, a nonprofit group that assists people with disabilities. ``That 
is a risk we cannot take. Our very lives depend on the prescriptions, 
personal assistance, technology, therapy and medical care we receive.'' 
Clinton's proposal is similar to legislation drafted this year by 
Sens. James Jeffords, R-Vt., and Edward Kennedy, D-Mass. Bob Dole, 
the former senator and Republican presidential nominee who has long 
been an advocate for people with disabilities, endorsed that proposal, 
as did Sen. Charles Grassley, R-Iowa. The bill did not reach the floor 
of either house. It did not encounter active opposition; time simply 
ran out when the Senate adjourned in October. People who receive disability 
benefits are periodically re-examined to see if they still qualify, 
and they may lose eligibility if they have even modest amounts of 
earned income. Under the president's proposal, no such review could 
be conducted solely because of a person's work activity, and such 
activity could not be used as evidence that the person was no longer 
disabled. Thomas Lowery, an employment specialist in the Illinois 
Department of Human Services, said the president, Jeffords and Kennedy 
appeared to be taking the right approach. ``For millions of people 
with disabilities,'' Lowery said, ``the biggest obstacle to re-entering 
the job market is the risk of losing health insurance. A lot of them 
could return to work if there was a way for them to get insurance. 
``I recently had a 44-year-old client with a heart condition who received 
$805 a month in Social Security disability benefits. His medications 
cost more than $500 a month. Medicaid paid for them. But if he were 
to go back to work, how could he afford to pay for those medications? 
He didn't have enough skills to do anything but an entry-level job 
paying the minimum wage, a little over $800 a month.'' Administration 
officials and lawmakers from both parties want to find better ways 
of providing job training and other services to disabled people. They 
say people with disabilities should be able to get employment services 
from private organizations, as well as state agencies. Accordingly, 
they would issue a federal voucher, or ``ticket to work,'' that could 
be used by a disabled person to pay for such services. One reason 
for the growth in the disability rolls is that Congress expanded eligibility, 
and court decisions have forced the Social Security Administration 
to liberalize the standards further, especially for people with mental 
impairments. Moreover, Social Security officials have publicized the 
disability programs and actively sought out people who might qualify. 
Also, many states have encouraged people to move from state welfare 
programs to Supplemental Security Income, so the federal government 
would pay more of the costs. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>