<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981129.0135 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Three big games remain in a wild college football season, and the 
things we know for sure can be counted on one hand. One, Ricky Williams 
of Texas earned his Division I-A career rushing record and deserves 
the Heisman Trophy. Two, Idaho will face Southern Mississippi in the 
Humanitarian Bowl, and Tulane's reward for an undefeated campaign 
is a matchup against Brigham Young in the Liberty Bowl. Three, Notre 
Dame's 10-0 loss to Southern California knocks them out of a Bowl 
Championship Series game. Four, the Syracuse Orangemen are in a BCS 
game, and bowl organizers who wear more gaudy sports coats aren't 
too happy about it. Five, if the BCS favorites all win next weekend 
_ top-ranked Tennessee plays Mississippi State, second-ranked UCLA 
faces Miami and third-rated Kansas State takes on Texas A&AMP;M _ 
someone will be left lamenting about the unfairness of it all. All 
of this leaves a whole other hand for the so-called keepers of the 
college game _ the news media, coaches, conference commissioners and 
bowl organizers _ to slap each other around for agreeing to this computer-driven 
BCS formula. Or they can use that free hand to twist each other's 
arms to do the right thing and make the most meaningful bowl matchups 
happen. No matter what happens when the three top unbeaten teams finish 
their seasons next Saturday, the BCS has added interest and fueled 
conversation about college football. It isn't quite the March Madness 
of the basketball tournament, but the mystery of the BCS ranking has 
raised the game's awareness. Besides matching No. 1 against No. 2 
in a true title game this year at the Fiesta Bowl, BCS organizers 
have said repeatedly that their secondary mission was to make the 
Rose, Orange and Sugar bowls games that people wanted to see. Heading 
into the final weekend, however, both goals are in trouble. If Tennessee, 
UCLA and Kansas State each win, the Volunteers and the Bruins will 
meet in the Fiesta Bowl because the Wildcats can't make up enough 
computer points in the strength-of-schedule component of the formula 
_ especially after Texas A&AMP;M lost to Texas on Friday. That is 
tough for the BCS. It's unfortunate that any undefeated team is locked 
out of the title game, but the Wildcats happen to be ranked No. 1 
in the coaches poll. At the beginning of the year, the coaches agreed 
to award their final No. 1 ranking to the winner of the Fiesta Bowl 
as a way to legitimize the claim that it was a title game. Now, they 
are in the strange position of having to abandon the team that they 
believed was best and crown another champion for no reason other than 
politics. Still, this embarrassment can be compounded depending on 
what the Rose, Sugar and Orange bowls decide to do. The Rose Bowl 
is locked into Big Ten champion Wisconsin (10-1), and its organizers 
appear to want to stay out of the back-room deal-making by selecting 
Arizona (11-1). The Wildcats have never appeared in the Rose Bowl. 
Their only loss is to UCLA, and the bowl's traditional Big Ten-Pac-10 
flavor will remain intact. The game's organizers have no incentive 
to jeopardize their gate. Both teams travel well, and if the Bruins 
manage to lose at Miami, they will bump Arizona because they won the 
conference. ``I guess we have to be UCLA fans,'' Arizona quarterback 
Keith Smith acknowledged. So that leaves Kansas State to the Sugar 
Bowl. But getting the matchup the Wildcats deserve is problematic. 
Florida State (11-1) is ranked fourth in both polls, as well as in 
the BCS, and has impressed The New York Times computer so much that 
it has the Seminoles ranked No. 1. Their sole loss was early in the 
season and they have played one of the strongest schedules in the 
country, with victories over Texas A&AMP;M, Florida, Southern Cal 
and Georgia Tech. But Florida State is the Atlantic Coast Conference 
champion and that league has a tie-in with the Orange Bowl, which 
doesn't want to give up the Seminoles _ especially when Syracuse (8-3) 
is the likely opponent. It doesn't matter that in Donovan McNabb the 
Orangemen have one of the most exciting players in the game. Or that 
Syracuse lost one thriller to Tennessee and won another against Virginia 
Tech over the course of a grueling season. The Orange Bowl can't count 
on central New York to migrate south to watch its team, so it needs 
the numbers that Bobby Bowden and Florida State will bring. Ohio State 
(10-1) is the alternative to Florida State, and the Buckeyes are not 
ikely to draw as many people. That means the Buckeyes are left to 
test Kansas State. ``Look what we've done, for goodness' sakes,'' 
Ohio State Coach John Cooper said. ``We had eight games over 500 yards 
total offense; we led the Big Ten in total offense. We averaged 7.7 
yards every time we snapped the ball in the Michigan game against 
a defense that, the last eight weeks of the season, some people thought 
was the best in the country.'' The Buckeyes also lost late to Michigan 
State and ranked behind Florida State in every poll and computer service. 
Their schedule is far weaker than that of the Seminoles. Yes, it might 
be a good game. But Kansas State might be in a position to win a split 
championship. The Wildcats are a solid No. 2 in the media poll and 
if UCLA _ ranked No. 3 by the news media _ were to beat Tennessee, 
it could open the door for the Wildcats. No one may be clear on who 
is No. 1 and No. 2, but every measure points to Florida State being 
among the nation's top four teams. The BCS may not be able to put 
together a definitive title game, but if it can match its No. 1 team 
against its No. 2 team, it should be able to match its No. 3 and No. 
4 teams with some forceful arm-twisting. Kansas State deserves that 
game and the chance to capture a part of a split title. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>