<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981129.0036 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
For years, I've been resisting the temptation to read one of those 
blockbusters by Judith Krantz until, finally, I couldn't wait any 
longer. And now I've just finished ``The Jewels of Tessa Kent,'' Ms. 
Krantz's latest novel, and there's a tear in my eye (despite my effort 
at world-weary self-control) at the blissful, star-crossed passion 
of it all. But let me be frank. I feel jealous, yes jealous, at the 
ease with which Ms. Krantz seemed to spin out her tale of the ultra-glamorous, 
the ultra-rich and the ultra-tragic. And I feel relief as well, relief 
that, at long last, I have relinquished, if only briefly, my claim 
on highbrow culture, and have experienced total immersion in sudsy, 
perfumed, tumescent melodrama. I might as well just admit it: I wanted 
so much to hate ``The Jewels of Tessa Kent,'' to find it bathetic 
and overdone. It is bathetic and overdone, and _ here comes the critical 
admission of a lifetime _ I kind of liked it anyway. Well, it's not 
surprising, really. Since Ms. Krantz gave up writing about orgasms 
for Cosmopolitan, her novels (which don't just have orgasms, they 
have ``exploding orgasms'') have sold 75 million copies worldwide. 
And the millions of women who buy them presumably know what they want. 
(I assume that they are mostly women, though, who knows, maybe there 
are male acolytes too, reading books like ``Scruples'' and ``I'll 
Take Manhattan'' as though engaging in a solitary vice.) Let's not 
be snobbish. Flaubert's Emma Bovary read the 19th-century French equivalent 
of Judith Krantz when she was a girl. (``Gloomy forests, romantic 
woes, oaths, sobs, tears and kisses, small boats in the moonlight,'' 
as Flaubert put it.) With Ms. Krantz it's not so much small boats 
in the moonlight as large stone farmhouses in Provence, but never 
mind. The core melodramatic concept _ the dark and tormenting family 
secret of a rich and celebrated main character _ go back as far as 
Henry Fielding's ``Tom Jones.'' So where to begin? With beauty and 
money, of course, because in Ms. Krantz's new novel beauty and money 
are literally the same thing (well, not literally the same, but literally 
is one of the words that Ms. Krantz uses a bit loosely, as a general 
emphatic, not to be taken literally). Beauty and money are inseparable 
in the Judith Krantz world, and one glows with vicarious pleasure 
as the dramatis personae disport themselves beautifully and richly 
across these pages of upwardly mobile middle-class tumult and strife. 
It's not enough to say simply beauty and money. Ms. Krantz's Tessa 
Kent is beyond beautiful. She is a movie star ``born with a physical 
presence no one else had ever possessed in the history of the screen,'' 
no less. But don't be fooled by the glitter and the dazzle of her 
life, by the lover whose idea of foreplay is to cover her ``from her 
neck to her feet with the contents of her jewel cases''; don't be 
taken in by Tessa's extraordinary fame, or by the seemingly blissful 
nature of her life, by her marriage to a super-millionaire who is 
a good man, or by the way she glories in his ferocious possessiveness 
of her, glories even in his selfishness, glories in her willingness 
to give herself to him ``gladly in an undivided way.'' Don't be fooled 
because life is not easy for Tessa Kent. Or it is easy, but there 
is that family secret, hidden like William Blake's invisible worm, 
cradled inside the gorgeous, enfolding petals of the rose. And there 
is tragedy lurking, for not even the beautiful and the wealthy are 
immune to accident and disease and the consequences of their mistakes. 
Sooner or later, you, the reader, realize with a special Schadenfreude-laden 
thrill that there is going to be a reckoning. In Tessa's case, the 
secret is something that happened when she was 14 and attending a 
Roman Catholic school, sent there by her clawingly ambitious mother 
and her pious father. The worst imaginable happens _ seduction by 
the handsome captain of the football team, shame, a mighty effort 
to achieve forgiveness and forgetfulness. Then comes movie stardom, 
love, marriage, fabulous wealth. The jewels are symbolic of it all. 
Yes, they symbolize the voluptuousness of her husband's possession 
of her. Yes, they symbolize the lustrous rhapsody that is her existence. 
Yes, she adored them and exulted in them, especially the rare green 
diamond in her ring. And yes, the jewels will also symbolize her contrition 
when, yearning for reconciliation with the daughter she had never 
fully recognized, she converts them into the true gold of the good. 
There are others in this story, especially Maggie, Tessa's secret 
daughter, a clumsy and unhappy child who grows up to be a beauty about 
whose breasts Ms. Krantz writes a great deal _ also about her ``open, 
impetuous, curious, innocent lips, groaning with hungry haste and 
need.'' Averting the risk that she will be swallowed whole by an avalanche 
of swollen adjectives, Maggie manages to be an interesting character, 
clever and smart as well as sensuous and greedy for experience, making 
up for the lost time of her childhood. When she is finished groaning 
with hungry haste, Maggie earns the gilded life that she will live 
as the novel closes, secure in the knowledge that, after all, she 
did the right thing, and so, in the nick of time, did Tessa, her mother. 
Ms. Krantz's savory tale ends in the first week of June 1994, with 
Tessa bravely facing a new tragedy and Maggie a new future. Even in 
the midst of all that beauty and money there is sadness, and in the 
midst of sadness, hope. ``The Jewels of Tessa Kent'' is a morality 
tale for our time that will be enjoyed by many millions. Despite my 
better judgment and my reckless, impetuous, larger-than-life effort 
not to, I enjoyed it myself. PUBLICATION NOTES: `THE JEWELS OF TESSA 
KENT' By Judith Krantz 389 pages. Crown. $25.95. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>