<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981129.0087 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
If America Online followed all the advice it was getting for how to 
take advantage of its pending purchase of Netscape Communications 
Corp., it would merge its AOL.com Web site with Netscape's Netcenter 
Web site, it would use Netscape's browser on its online service, and 
every time someone used the Netscape Communicator program to check 
for messages, it wuld chirp, ``You've got mail.'' But America Online 
defiantly puts separation above synergy and would rather own multiple, 
if somewhat competitive, offerings than create one big homogeneous 
master brand. ``We look at things like a media company rather than 
as a technology company,'' said Barry Schuler, president of America 
Online's main programming division. ``Why does Time Warner have both 
HBO and Cinemax? Because the audience segments in attitude and behavior.'' 
And thus rather than blur the lines between the America Online services 
and those of Netscape, Schuler said his company would more crisply 
delineate the Netscape brand to appeal to more technologically sophisticated 
users. This is a very different approach than that taken by most online 
companies. Microsoft Corp., for example, recently tied together all 
of its far-flung Internet activities under the MSN brand. But America 
Online's driving force these days is its president, Robert Pittman, 
who as one of the creators of MTV concocted a second music channel, 
VH1, to appeal to an older audience, and then started Nickelodeon 
to appeal to children. Pittman is fond of saying that while Pepsi 
may beat Coca-Cola in taste tests, ``In America, brands win.'' As 
a result, America Online has maintained the separate identities of 
its other acquisitions: Compuserve, another online service, and Mirabilis, 
the provider of the ICQ chat service, popular among technologically 
hip youth worldwide. Users of these services see nary a mention of 
the America Online name. Some think that all this talk of market segments 
leads to a confusing overlap of products. ``I think the consumer would 
be better served if they put all their wood behind a single brand, 
be it Netscape, ICQ or AOL,'' said George Bell, chief executive of 
Excite, which bought the Webcrawler search service from America Online 
and kept it as a separate portal, a strategy Bell now thinks was flawed. 
``It's really hard to manage not only the multiple businesses you 
buy but the multiple consumer propositions you keep alive through 
all those brands.'' Yet, America Online argues it must make changes 
gingerly, because many of its core users find the whole cyberworld 
baffling and cannot tell the difference between a browser, an online 
service and a hard drive. This confusion has been a factor in America 
Online's phenomenal success. Once a user puts one of its ubiquitous 
disks into a computer, it automatically installs the software, sets 
up the modem to dial into the network and handles everything from 
e-mail to Internet browsing to finding sports scores in one seamless 
environment. America Online says it will not add any features from 
Netscape that will make the service more confusing. ``They don't need 
Netscape to revitalize the AOL brand,'' said Paul Noglows, an analyst 
with Hambrecht &AMP; Quist, the California investment bank. ``It is 
continuing to grow and gain momentum.'' Netscape, of course, is most 
known for pushing the technology in just one piece of that puzzle: 
browsing. Netscape's browser software, known as Navigator, is the 
window through which users can view pages on the World Wide Web. But 
Netscape does not offer a connection to the Internet; that has to 
be arranged either through an Internet service provider or a corporate 
network. Nor, until recently, did it provide any information or content. 
The company's Web site, called Netcenter, was an attempt earlier this 
year to build a new advertising-supported business when it was forced 
by competition from Microsoft to start giving Navigator away free. 
Navigator, a Web guide or ``portal'' service modeled after Yahoo, 
lures its audience because it is the first screen that many Navigator 
users see when they start to surf. Netscape's browser and its Web 
site do bring to America Online several audience groups that are underrepresented 
in its main service. For example, America Online is very strong among 
teen-agers, who use it to chat among their friends, and among older 
adults, who like its simplicity. But Netscape has much greater penetration 
among college students, who often are given its browser as part of 
their school networks. Moreover, America Online wants to create a 
new online service based on the Netscape browser that it hopes it 
would especially appeal to recent college graduates who need to arrange 
for online access after losing their accounts at school. ``We think 
these people are never going to get excited about the AOL brand, but 
they do have an affinity for the Netscape brand,'' Schuler said. Of 
course, this risks offending some of the independent Internet service 
providers who distribute Netscape's browser. But then again, their 
only alternative is Internet Explorer by Microsoft, which runs its 
own MSN Internet access service. In fact, America Online says it will 
continue to use Microsoft Internet Explorer itself in its main online 
service. The reason is that in return, Microsoft includes a copy of 
America Online's software in every copy of the Windows software package, 
saving the company hundreds of millions of dollars a year in mailing 
out disks. That deal does not give Microsoft much more than bragging 
rights, though, because the version of Internet Explorer that America 
Online uses is so well integrated into its own software that most 
users do not know when it is running. Moreover, it does not contain 
any of the links to Microsoft's MSN online service that are in other 
copies of Internet Explorer. Similarly, America Online does not plan 
to merge the Netcenter site with its own huge AOL.com site. Netcenter's 
main audience is one of America Online's weakest groups: people who 
use the Internet during the day at their offices. The company had 
hoped that daytime users would use its Internet site, AOL.com, as 
a portal instead of Yahoo. But AOL.com does not appeal to that audience 
because it is mainly a friendly and colorful site that was designed 
to be used by people on America Online's proprietary services as their 
first step onto the Internet. Netcenter, by contrast, has a more businesslike 
tone. And Netscape has been developing a series of services that combine 
its software and Web site to appeal to professionals. For example, 
it will let you move a copy of your file of personal contacts from 
Netscape's Communicator program, onto its Web site, so that you can 
look up a phone number from the road (assuming you have the right 
password). America Online does plan to link Netscape gingerly to its 
other brands. It will place a button to download Navigator on the 
software program ICQ chat service users must run in order to send 
and receive instant messages. There are more than 10 million active 
users of the ICQ chat service. America Online is working on ways to 
put more features on that program that will drive ICQ users to advertising-supported 
Web sites. There may be some link as well with Compuserve, when its 
new software is introduced at the end of the year. That will lower 
costs by running Compuserve's service using America Online's vast 
computer network behind the scenes and pave the way for a marketing 
blitz that emphasizes Compuserve's traditional appeal as a more sober, 
professional, less entertainment-oriented service than America Online 
itself. Now the company has to decide whether to risk a potential 
delay in the product introduction to replace Internet Explorer with 
Netscape Navigator in the Compuserve software. But don't expect any 
chipper voices talking about the arrival of e-mail. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>