<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981129.0171 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
The takeover of District Council 37, New York City's largest municipal 
union, by its parent union in Washington is a stark indication of 
how far the council has fallen. The parent union hopes to restore 
order, integrity and a little luster to the disgraced district council, 
which is the target of a district attorney's investigation into allegations 
of vote fraud, embezzlement and kickbacks. But transforming the council 
into an effective fighter for its more than 100,000 members will not 
be easy. In some ways, the council, a coalition of 56 union locals, 
resembles less a union that battles for its members than a dues-paying 
club whose leaders take bloated salaries and extravagant trips. When 
Gerald McEntee, president of the American Federation of State, County 
and Municipal Employees, named one of his top aides, Lee Saunders, 
to run the district council, neither man tipped his hand about what 
reforms would be instituted. But Saunders, as trustee, can be expected 
to introduce far-reaching changes. Still, the move leaves many questions 
unanswered. Will Stanley Hill, the executive director of the council 
who was pushed aside Saturday, ever take back his old post? How many 
union officials will be indicted as a result of the inquiry by the 
Manhattan district attorney? What will happen to Albert Diop, who 
was widely considered the man behind the council's throne and whose 
local was the locus of the voting fraud in the 1996 contract ratification? 
What will shunting Hill aside mean for his ally, Mayor Rudolph Giuliani, 
and for the council's five-year contract with the city? A small group 
of dissident leaders is already proposing changes. They say the council's 
executive director should be directly elected by all members; the 
current process is dominated by a handful of leaders. In light of 
a history of election fraud, the dissidents say every council election 
and ratification vote should be overseen by an independent outside 
group, like the American Arbitration Association. And these critics 
say the council's executive board needs to be reorganized so that 
it is no longer a group of unquestioning supporters of the executive 
director. Many board members receive a stipend of $30,000 or more 
each year for attending one or two lavishly catered meetings a month. 
Lawyers familiar with District Attorney Robert Morgenthau's investigation 
say more than one-third of the council's 24 board members are under 
investigation. Joseph DeCanio, president of a highway laborers' local, 
has pleaded guilty to embezzling more than $50,000 as part of a scheme 
to supply Thanksgiving turkeys to other locals. The heads of four 
other locals are being investigated for buying turkeys from DeCanio 
and perhaps receiving kickbacks from him. Francine Autovino, president 
of a local representing City University administrative assistants, 
is being investigated over the disappearance of $190,000 from her 
local's treasury. She denies any wrongdoing. Prosecutors are also 
investigating Charles Hughes, president of a local for cafeteria workers 
and crossing guards. An internal judicial panel expelled Hughes from 
the union after finding that he embezzled more than $1.7 million. 
Hughes' lawyer insists he is innocent. And Diop, who heads the clerical 
workers' local, is under investigation over his local's paying rent 
for him to use a penthouse apartment in the district council's headquarters. 
Diop's local flew more than 100 people to AFSCME's recent convention 
in Hawaii. Prosecutors are looking into that, too, along with Diop's 
role, if any, in the 1996 voting fraud. Diop denies any participation 
in the fraud and council officials say he did not live in the penthouse. 
Robert Myers Jr., treasurer of Diop's local and the treasurer of the 
parent district council, is also under investigation into the writing 
of checks on Diop's behalf. ``It's as bad as any union mess since 
the federal takeover of the Teamsters in 1989,'' said Arthur Schwartz, 
a lawyer for several locals in the council. Several supporters say 
Hill will probably seek to regain the executive director's post when 
the trusteeship ends. But Hill's critics predict that AFSCME will 
bar him from that position by concluding that he breached his fiduciary 
duty by not preventing corruption from flourishing on his watch. Among 
the names mentioned as possible successors to Hill are Charles Ensley, 
president of a local representing 14,000 social workers, and Saunders 
_ that is if he puts the pieces back together and deftly lines up 
political support. Hill's passing from the scene could make labor 
relations tougher for Giuliani because Hill has been so conciliatory 
to the mayor, whom he enthusiastically supported in last year's election. 
Saunders, is expected to take a more aggressive stance on numerous 
issues, including workfare and contract talks. With Hill having admitted 
that the council's contract was ratified through fraud, several council 
leaders and some other unions whose contracts are patterned after 
the council's are demanding that their contracts be reopened. And 
several locals in the council say they will sue the city Monday, charging 
that it owes the union damages on the ground that city officials knew 
or should have known about the fraud in the 1996 ratification vote. 
The mayor undoubtedly recognizes that if he agrees to reopen any contracts, 
it might make him look soft on labor and could hurt his conservative 
credentials at a time when he may seek the vice presidency. However, 
if Giuliani wants to run for a U.S. Senate seat and needs to tack 
toward the center and woo unions, then, labor experts say, it would 
make political sense for him to reopen the unions' contracts. The 
unions now screaming at the mayor may warm up to him if he offers 
them a 1 percent or 2 percent raise above what their existing contracts 
provide. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>