<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981129.0140 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Now, the New York Jets say, they are getting serious. And on Sunday 
they proved it on the field. They continued their biggest point-scoring 
splurge in 30 years with a commanding 48-21 rout of the Carolina Panthers 
at Giants Stadium. It was the most points the Jets had scored in a 
game since 1986, and it was the seventh straight game in which they 
have scored at least 20 points. The last time that happened, Weeb 
Ewbank was coach, Joe Namath was in charge of the offense, Matt Snell 
was running, Don Maynard was catching and the Jets were headed to 
their only Super Bowl. Who knows how far the 1998 edition can go? 
This much is certain: They have an 8-4 record, having won six of their 
last seven games; they are tied with Miami for first place in the 
American Football Conference East, and winning the division title 
is in their hands. ``No question,'' Vinny Testaverde said, ``that 
if we run the table, we win the division.'' Sunday, in a crushing 
performance against the 2-10 Panthers, the Jets overcame their unsettling 
inability this season to beat the league's have-nots. They scored 
in a variety of ways: on Bryan Cox's first career safety; on wide 
receiver Keyshawn Johnson's first career run; twice on Testaverde-to-Wayne 
Chrebet passes, and four times on field goals off John Hall's suddenly 
accurate foot. And along the way a newly healthy Curtis Martin rushed 
for a pair of touchdowns. ``This was a good one to get out of the 
way,'' coach Bill Parcells said. ``Now we can concentrate on our conference.'' 
The Jets face the Seattle Seahawks here next Sunday, then finish with 
games against their leading division rivals, the Dolphins, Bills and 
Patriots, all of whom they have beaten once. The Panthers came into 
Sunday's game reminding the Jets of their earlier losses to the Colts 
(2-10), Ravens (5-7) and Rams (3-9). ``We've seen it before,'' Testaverde 
said. ``What we didn't want to happen is what happened to us in previous 
games.'' There was no fear of that. Not with Martin amassing 110 yards 
on only 21 carries, or Chrebet snaring seven passes for 107 yards, 
or Johnson adding 77 more on three receptions. Testaverde completed 
76 percent of his passes (16 of 21 for 255 yards, with the two touchdowns 
and no interceptions), and his touchdown-to-interception ratio now 
stands at 20-4. The defense, meanwhile, sacked the Panthers' Steve 
Beuerlein five times. Anthony Pleasant, a quiet end on a no-name, 
predominantly free-agent defensive line, got to Beuerlein twice, while 
the always active linebacker Mo Lewis had eight tackles and two assists 
to lead the Jets for a second straight game. The Panthers were held 
to 82 rushing yards while the Jets' offensive line helped block for 
201. But the numbers were overshadowed by the growing sense of urgency 
that the Jets finally seem to have accepted, and appear able to handle. 
It was their second straight powerful performance, coming only a week 
after they routed the Oilers, 24-3. ``I don't think we had to prove 
it to ourselves,'' Martin said, ``but it's what a good team does.'' 
So it seemed to bother the Jets hardly at all when the Panthers grabbed 
a 7-3 lead on their first possession. Fred Lane's 1-yard touchdown 
run was set up when the Jets blew their assignments: On third-and-11, 
Jerome Henderson dashed onto the field too late to be in position 
to cover the dangerous Rocket Ismail, and Corwin Brown could not handle 
him. Beuerlein connected with Ismail on a 62-yard play, the longest 
pass against the Jets this season. But two plays after Lane's score, 
Martin produced his longest run as a Jet, 60 yards, for the Jets' 
first touchdown. He cut this way and that over his beloved artificial 
turf _ a surface that is likely to be replaced by grass next year 
in Giants Stadium. ``I like turf,'' Martin said after a game that 
included several pinball-machine type runs, in which he spun and bounced 
off players. ``I think I'm faster on it, but I'll do whatever the 
majority of the guys want.'' And so it went, a powerful, efficient 
ground game, a pressure defense doing so many things right. The offense, 
orchestrated from high above the stadium by the coordinator Charlie 
Weis, even called on Johnson to try an end-around midway through the 
second period and it was good for a 35-yard touchdown. ``They're doing 
a good job utilizing the talents I have on the field,'' said Johnson, 
who always praises those he believes are smart enough to give him 
the ball. If there was any question which way the game was headed, 
Martin provided the answer early in the third period. After Aaron 
Glenn's career-high fifth interception of the season, the Jets had 
the ball on the Panthers' 30. Testaverde tossed a 19-yard pass to 
Keith Byars, who knocked Kevin Greene out of the game in a helmet-to-helmet 
collision when the linebacker tried to tackle him. Martin then went 
over from 1-yard out for a 29-7 lead. Carolina was backed up on the 
next drive, thanks to one of its 10 penalties and a good kickoff by 
Hall. Cox, a week after his controversial performance against the 
Oilers that led to a $10,000 fine for unnecessary roughness, sacked 
Beuerlein in the end zone, giving the Jets two points and setting 
up a free kick that they quickly turned into a 36-yard Testaverde-to-Chrebet 
touchdown pass. The defense relaxed, yielding a pair of Carolina touchdowns, 
but early in the final period Testaverde and Chrebet connected again, 
this time for 21 yards. Chrebet was in on the play instead of Johnson, 
who was, according to Testaverde, ``a little nicked up.'' ``Some days,'' 
Beuerlein said later, ``it goes like this.'' Many of the fans in the 
crowd of 71,501 had seen the Jets have those kinds of days only a 
few years ago. Perhaps that is why most of them were still around 
in the fourth quarter. This is still sort of new. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>