<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981129.0111 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
The mayor of Buenos Aires, Fernando de la Rua, became the favorite 
to replace Carlos Saul Menem as president of Argentina by winning 
a landslide victory Sunday in a primary election to carry the banner 
of the center-left Alianza opposition coalition in next October's 
general election. The balloting followed a primary campaign, which 
inspired little excitement, between de la Rua, a cautious politician 
running on his record of improving the capital's finances, and Graciela 
Fernandez Meijide, a congresswoman from Buenos Aires province who 
promised a full-scale attack against government corruption. De la 
Rua appeared to benefit from the strength of his Radical Party's political 
machine and a construction and tourism boom in Buenos Aires that has 
given the city a new image of prosperity. De la Rua declared victory 
three hours after the polls closed, pledging ``a fight against corruption'' 
if he wins the presidential election. ``We want an Argentina with 
more jobs and more development,'' he said. Ms. Fernandez Meijide conceded 
defeat and pledged to work for her opponent's election. ``I'm not 
going to be a hypocrite and deny that I wish I had won,'' she said, 
``but this vote will lead to a reconstruction of our country.'' Based 
on early returns and exit polls, several television news stations 
projected that de la Rua would win more than 55 percent of the vote. 
The two candidates ran a close race in and around Buenos Aires, but 
de la Rua pulled away with a big victory in the provinces. A 61-year-old 
golf and tango aficionado who has been a government official and politician 
his entire professional life, de la Rua ran a traditional campaign 
complete with a trip to Rome to be photographed with Pope John Paul 
II. Few political experts think he would take the country in any dramatic 
new directions should he take power in early 2000. Sunday, appearing 
on television before the polls closed in an ascot and double-breasted 
blue blazer, he projected a cool confidence, saying, ``Like any other 
Sunday, I'm eating lunch with my family and going to Mass.'' In televised 
debates and other campaign appearances, the two candidates in the 
primary election went out of their way to minimize policy differences 
and to emphasize their desire to stay united to defeat the governing 
party. They hugged in public and jointly endorsed the Alianza platform, 
which pledged to crack down on corruption, take political influence 
out of the judicial system, and funnel more government funds into 
education, job training and credits for small business. The Alianza 
platform also promised to double exports, to $50 billion a year by 
2003, and to reduce the unemployment rate to 6 percent from the current 
rate of over 12 percent. But the platform did not offer many specifics 
on how the goals would be accomplished. Both candidates also said 
that if elected they would not diverge from Menem's major economic 
policies _ neither reversing his sweeping privatizations nor his one-to-one 
peg of the peso to the dollar. Those actions brought Argentina's chronic 
hyperinflation under control and enticed a spectacular volume of foreign 
investment over the last eight years. De la Rua's Radical Party, traditionally 
the party of Argentina's middle class, and Ms. Fernandez Meijide's 
Frepaso, a more liberal party that broke away from the ruling Justicialist 
Party, cobbled together a coalition last year and managed to gain 
control of the lower house of Congress in elections last October. 
De la Rua has agreed to choose a member of Frepaso as his vice presidential 
running mate. The candidacy of Ms. Fernandez Meijide, a 67-year-old 
former French teacher who is a Benny Goodman fan and sews her own 
clothes, received worldwide attention because one of her three children 
was kidnapped by the security forces during the military dictatorship 
in 1976 and never seen again. But while voters seemed to like her 
image as an outsider, she was so careful not to appear threatening 
or too liberal that she stirred little enthusiasm among voters. On 
television Sunday, she appeared as a motherly figure, stirring a pot 
of risotto in a cramped kitchen. ``We're going to work hard to keep 
the Alianza strong and united through the campaign,'' she said. ``We 
understand that the nation needs to make changes.'' Recent polls indicated 
that each of the coalition's candidates would be comfortably ahead 
of Eduardo Duhalde, governor of Buenos Aires province, who is favored 
to win the Justicialist primary next April. The former finance minister, 
Domingo Cavallo, the architect of Menem's economic program, is running 
far behind on a third-party ticket, but he may play the role of the 
spoiler. The Justicialist Party, which still carries the flag of the 
late President Juan Domingo Peron and his wife Eva, remains the largest 
and most powerful political force in the country. But the party is 
deeply divided between Duhalde and Menem, who tried to run for re-election 
despite a constitutional ban. His candidacy was blocked by party leaders. 
Menem is jockeying to remain leader of the party after he leaves office 
in early 2000, but Duhalde is trying to block his efforts in party 
councils and the courts. Duhalde is doing his best to distance himself 
from Menem because of a series of scandals that has implicated several 
Cabinet members in recent months as well as a persistently high unemployment 
rate that many economists predict will go up in the coming months 
because of the deepening recession in neighboring Brazil. De la Rua 
and Cavallo contend that the nation needs to reject not just Menem 
but also his party, an argument that polls indicate appears to strike 
a chord with a large proportion of voters. A poll published Sunday 
in Clarin, Argentina's leading circulation newspaper, indicates that 
the three issues that most concern Argentine voters are unemployment, 
corruption and the increase in reported crime. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>