<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981129.0075 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
By the time an e-mail message reaches a resident of Grants, N.M., 
an isolated town 75 miles west of Albuquerque, it has traveled where 
few Internet transmissions have gone before. The town's primary Internet 
provider, Cibola Internet Services, is linked to cyberspace by a satellite 
about 23,000 miles above the Earth. At $1,700 a month, the service 
is not cheap, but the alternative was even less appealing: Cibola's 
owner, Louis Uttaro, said he had waited six months for the local phone 
company to install a high-speed line with a monthly fee of $2,200. 
Thousands of businesses, schools and Internet service providers in 
remote areas have turned to satellite access to the Internet because 
land lines are either unavailable or too expensive. Yet service by 
satellite is still a small player in the Internet marketplace, and 
industry analysts are skeptical that traditional satellite connections 
such as that provided to Cibola will ever be affordable enough to 
play a large role in the overall market. Nonetheless, two California 
start-up companies say they have engineered ways for more people to 
use the same satellite simultaneously to gain access to the Internet 
and thus make the technology more affordable and widespread. The goal 
of these companies is to offer less expensive alternatives to a T1 
line, the high-speed connection that most Internet service providers 
and large corporations lease from local telephone companies. A T1 
line can handle 1.5 million bits, the smallest units of information 
handled by a computer, a second. One company, Tachyon Inc., based 
in San Diego, plans to begin testing its technology in Europe within 
a month, offering high-speed access, equal in some cases to what is 
offered by a T1 line, for $400 a month. The second company, Aloha 
Networks Inc. in San Francisco, plans to start a similar service, 
called SkyDSL, within six months. Both systems cost several thousand 
dollars to install and are aimed at businesses, not individual consumers, 
and at buyers primarily outside the United States. ``This works in 
Dubuque, in Mazatlan, in Dubai _ anywhere there is not good cable 
and good service,'' John Koehler, president of Tachyon, said. ``Our 
business is to provide communication links from anywhere to the Internet.'' 
The satellite companies do not plan to compete directly with dial-up 
access, digital subscriber lines, cable modems or T1 lines, which 
can cost $350 to $3,000 a month, depending on how far the line must 
be stretched. ``Land lines aren't going to go away,'' said Nicholas 
Negroponte, founder of the Massachusetts Institute of Technology's 
Media Lab and a member of Tachyon's board. ``If you want to move bits 
from a specific point in Manhattan to a specific point in London, 
there is no better way than to stretch a fiber line between them.'' 
But he sees Tachyon's solution as having great potential in regions 
devoid of telephone and cable lines. ``I'm looking for ways that rural 
communities and developing nations can get Internet access long before 
they can get wired or even wireless terrestrial structure,'' he said, 
``and this is the only way of doing it for the next four or five years.'' 
Analysts are skeptical, though, that the technology will enjoy widespread 
success. Abhi Chaki, a senior analyst with Jupiter Communications, 
a market research firm in New York, projects that by 2003 at most 
2 percent of online households in the United States will use satellite 
access to the Internet. And he says he does not think that overseas 
markets will grow as much as the start-up companies expect. Chaki 
said customers would not be very likely to switch from land lines 
even if the satellite technology improved, in part because they would 
perceive it as unreliable. ``If technology alone were responsible 
for owning market share, you'd see Apple and Betamax owning the markets,'' 
he said. Even the proponents of satellite access acknowledge that 
the technology presents some serious challenges. The way satellite 
access works varies by company, but in general, when an Internet user 
requests a connection to a Web page, the signal first travels through 
a land line to a satellite dish, typically on the roof of the company 
or the service provider. The dish then transmits the signal at least 
22,300 miles into space via radio waves to a geostationary satellite 
_ one that is always in the same position in relation to the equator, 
so that the ground antenna never has to move. The satellite sends 
the request back to Earth, where it is directed to the Internet. Once 
the information is retrieved, it is sent by the same process back 
to the user. The whole process takes only seconds. But one drawback 
of satellite-based Internet access is that the data do not travel 
at the same speed in both directions. Data sent from the satellite 
down to the user travel at speeds of 500 kilobits to 2 megabits a 
second, but the speed of information sent from the user up to the 
satellite is typically not much greater than that delivered through 
a standard 56 kilobit-per-second modem. Bigger satellites and more 
transmission power are required for a faster trip up, and most businesses 
would find the cost prohibitive, industry analysts say. The unequal 
speed coming and going, known as asynchronous bandwidth, may be fine 
for individuals who typically send out, or ``upload'' to the network, 
only e-mail and Web page requests, and it is common with some nonsatellite 
forms of Internet access. But it is a problem for corporations that 
want to maintain Web pages. A second sticking point with satellite 
access is that the distance the data must travel can cause delays. 
A third is that the geostationary satellites cost about $2 million 
a year to lease, yet can process only a limited number of simultaneous 
data streams _ about 400 sources at a time, said Jim Omura, president 
and chief executive of Aloha. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>