<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981129.0129 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
The railroad used to rumble through the cornfields and cow pastures 
here, braiding this southeastern South Dakota town into a necklace 
linked to the commercial cosmos of Chicago. But the freight trains 
don't come this way anymore. And increasingly, the wild oceans of 
lavender pasqueflower and buffalo grass and the fields of alfalfa 
and soybeans surround fading farming towns that are trying to hold 
on to their people and maintain their economic pulse. A lot of those 
people are like Ethel Mingo, a 73-year-old widow who until recently 
was happily ensconced at 604 Henderson Avenue here, a trim, whisper-yellow 
house on a red gravel road at the western hem of this mile-square 
town. Mrs. Mingo has affection for this community of 850 or so people, 
even though, she says, ``you can't even buy a towel in Armour.'' But 
she thought her days here might be numbered after a ruptured disk, 
spinal fusion surgery and a ``triple aneurysm the size of a tennis 
ball'' left her legs beholden to a walker and her lungs harnessed 
to an oxygen tank. She could no longer make it to the basement to 
do the laundry or up the mud room steps to the kitchen. She feared 
that a retirement home in a larger town was her only option. But Mrs. 
Mingo was just the sort of person South Dakota's maverick governor, 
William Janklow, had in mind when he came up with a way to address 
his state's worst problems: rural towns faltering as family farms 
went under; an exodus of young people; and too many older people with 
homes they could no longer handle. Janklow said he thought that if 
he could supply the elderly with smaller homes that were easier for 
them to manage, then they could stay in their towns and turn their 
larger homes over to younger families, maybe luring some new blood 
to the rural communities. ``I wanted to help the small town maintain 
its viability,'' said Janklow, who said his state has a high percentage 
of elderly _ 16 percent _ and the largest proportion of small towns 
_ 96 percent of the state's communities have fewer than 5,000 people. 
``If people don't have the services they need in a small town,'' Janklow 
said, ``they'll have to go to another town. I tell people, `Quit dreaming 
for a General Motors plant when you're a town of 300 people and start 
maintaining the economic viability of your elderly.''' To implement 
his plan, Janklow tapped a resource that South Dakota and other states 
have in great supply: prison inmates. The governor assigned prisoners 
to build single-story houses, complete with accessible entrances and 
bathrooms for the disabled. Anyone at least 62 years old or disabled, 
who lives in a town with fewer that 5,000 residents, can buy one of 
the houses, and have it delivered from the prison, all at cost. Mrs. 
Mingo bought a 768-square-foot house last year for $19,000 and had 
it set it on a vacant lot across the street. She sold her old three 
bedroom home for $35,000 _ less than its market value _ to Warren 
and Pam Parker, a couple moving into town because they could not afford 
to keep their hog farm. Mrs. Mingo can peer out her front window and 
see Mrs. Parker, tending the snow-on-the-mountain flowers that she 
had left in the front yard. And she can still drive the several blocks 
to her son's drugstore on Main Street where she does the bookkeeping. 
Janklow, a 59-year-old Republican with a reputation as a stubborn 
prairie populist, who recently stopped Canadian agriculture trucks 
for inspections in a protest of federal trade policies, was elected 
this month to his fourth term as governor. He served his first two 
terms from 1978 to 1987, and was elected again in 1994. He believes 
in putting inmates to work partly, he acknowledges, because of what 
he calls his ``juvenile delinquent'' past, when he shot holes in the 
water tower of his hometown of Flandreau. He was expelled from high 
school and a judge sent him to the Marines. ``I'm the toughest, most 
hard-nosed, right-wing conservative you've ever met,'' Janklow said. 
``I believe in punishment and I believe in retribution.'' But he said 
he also believes in preparing inmates for their release with job training 
that gives them ``dignity and self-respect.'' South Dakota inmates 
wire schools for computers, put out forest fires and build hunting 
cabins and outhouses for state parks. They raise beetles that destroy 
a weed called purple loosestrife. When a tornado leveled Spencer this 
spring, inmates were brought to the town to help families sift through 
the rubble. Under a vast sky recently, about 60 inmates at the medium-security 
Springfield State Prison 116 miles southwest of here pounded nails 
and slapped on sheet rock inside a high fence topped with razor wire. 
Even murderers can join the work crews, but everyone has to apply 
for the jobs, which pay 25 cents an hour. Virgil Miller, the construction 
supervisor, says 275 inmates, of about 700 in the prison, are on a 
waiting list. ``Makes the time go by quick,'' said William Eutzy, 
33, who is serving a three-year sentence for forgery. Eutzy, wiring 
the second bedroom of a house destined for the Pine Ridge Indian Reservation, 
has earned an electrician's apprenticeship license at the Springfield 
prison. ``When I get on the streets, I'm going to get back on my feet.'' 
In another house, Ron Huffaker, 29, sentenced to 10 years for selling 
marijuana, was installing oak cabinets, made by inmates at another 
prison. ``Every once in a while, an elderly lady will write a letter,'' 
he said. ``Makes you kind of feel good that it's going for a good 
cause.'' Janklow's method of quality control is to exploit that feeling. 
``I tell them, `If you don't do a good job, you've got to understand 
you're not hurting me, you're hurting somebody's grandma,''' Still, 
when the first crews of inmates proudly affixed wooden plaques beside 
the front door that said ``Made by the Inmates of Team 267,'' Janklow 
said that was taking things a bit too far. ``I made them take the 
plaques off of the front of the houses,'' he said. ``Now, they can 
put them inside the closet.'' The inmates have also begun to build 
day care centers that are sold to would-be entrepreneurs in small 
towns, where a shortage of child care is one reason young families 
leave. Janklow neutralized opposition from home builders by making 
sure the houses were small and built in small towns so big companies 
would see no profit in building them. And small contractors get work 
building foundations and garages or other extras for the houses. So 
far, 263 houses have been sold to elderly and disabled people in 135 
small towns. In Woonsocket, Edwina and Aleck Larson bought one after 
Mrs. Larson lost both of her legs to illness. In Menno, Alta Herman, 
her memory starting to slip, set one up on her daughter's land, so 
she can live on her own but be close to help. Three houses have been 
sold in Armour, named for the meat-packing baron and, this time of 
year, rising from a blanket of autumn-exhausted cornfields. One went 
to Lyle and Janice Dierks, who have lived here for 35 years. After 
Dierks, 63, and his wife, 57, both learned they had cancer, they began 
looking for something easier to manage than their aging two-story 
house on Main Street. After a two-year search, the Dierks, whose son 
has moved away, figured they would have to move to a city _ until 
they saw the inmate-built homes on display at a state fair. They sold 
their big house to newcomers, Mike and Beth Adam, a young couple who 
plan to stay until their two young children are grown and who have 
redecorated with Adam's hunting trophies _ white-tailed deer heads 
and the pelt of a sleek black bear. The Dierkses' new house is 10 
blocks away on the south end of Main Street, where Dierks enjoys watching 
the harvest bustle at the Armour grain elevator across the street. 
Besides, he said, ``I'm right in the middle of my fishing lakes here. 
I'd hate to have to give that up.'' 
</TEXT>
</DOC>