<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981129.0109 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
With the war in neighboring Kosovo as the example of what could happen 
if they fail, the leaders of Macedonia's most radical ethnic political 
parties are forming a coalition to govern this fragile ex-Yugoslav 
republic. After two weeks of surprisingly smooth negotiations, a government 
that could prove to be a significant Balkan experiment in power-sharing 
between ethnic groups is to be approved by the parliament on Monday. 
Expressing an idea that seems whimsically romantic in the violence-racked 
Balkans, Arben Xhaferi, a leader of Macedonia's ethnic Albanians, 
said: ``We can find common ground for ethnic integration through mutual 
understanding.'' Indeed, Xhaferi himself thought this ideal impossible 
to achieve until very recently. He and many other Albanians, who number 
about a quarter of the population in Macedonia, feared they would 
never have true representation because, they said, the Slav-dominated 
political system was rigged against them. They saw as their main opponent 
the most nationalist party, the Internal Macedonian Revolutionary 
Organization. When that group, as the senior member of a coalition, 
won control of the parliament in elections this month, the stage seemed 
to be set for another hardline Balkan nationalist group to take power 
and oppress ethnic minorities. Instead the leader of the nationalist 
party, Ljupco Georgievski, started negotiating with Xhaferi _ whose 
support he did not need to govern _ to see how they could work together. 
Until recently Georgievski, 32, who will be the new prime minister, 
had accused Xhaferi's supporters of only wanting to destroy Macedonia 
by seceding. In reviewing ways to settle their differences, Xhaferi 
said, ``a small miracle'' occurred. ``Actually, we had never talked 
before,'' he said. ``We had shaken hands at a couple of events. But 
I thought, `We are here and they are here, so let's put our problems 
on the table and see if they are as bad as we think.' '' Ethnic Albanians 
in Macedonia feel strongly that they are systematically discriminated 
against by the government, and foreign diplomats concur. In a very 
poor country, the ethnic Albanians are generally the poorest, have 
the worst medical care and schools, and hold proportionally many fewer 
jobs in the public sector. Worst of all, many feel they have no stake 
in Macedonia, which broke away from Communist Yugoslavia in 1991, 
and see independence as the only solution, perhaps in league with 
Albania or Kosovo, the ethnic Albanian province in southern Serbia. 
Last June, when the insurrection in Kosovo seemed to favor the Albanian 
separatists, a despondent leader of Xhaferi's party said Albanians 
in Macedonia were beginning to believe that they too should take up 
guns. Three days later that man, Alajdin Demiri, began a two-year 
prison sentence for raising an Albanian flag outside the city hall 
of Tetovo, a largely Albanian city of which he was the mayor. When 
ethnic Albanian politicians began to talk with Georgievski, one of 
his first concessions was that Demiri and another mayor convicted 
of the same offense be released. According to Xhaferi, they also agreed 
on a plan to give much more power to local governments and to settle 
a sometimes violent rallying point for both sides: a university where 
instruction is in the Albanian language. Many Slavs in Macedonia fear 
that ethnic Albanians are trying to form a separate society, and demand 
that higher education be in Macedonian. Georgievski, at considerable 
political risk, has agreed to use state funds to support the Albanian-language 
university, Xhaferi said. Georgievski said he expects no trouble from 
extremists in his party or in Xhaferi's; rather, he is determined 
to convince them to join him. ``In Macedonia, we will make them part 
of the system,'' he said. Xhaferi, who in the past has hinted that 
Albanians here may have to secede in order to secure political rights, 
now says they must learn to work with Macedonian politicians. Foreign 
diplomats and Macedonian politicians say even the most radical people 
here now see that the landlocked country, sandwiched between Serbia, 
Albania, Greece and Bulgaria, will remain poor and isolated unless 
its leaders learn to cooperate. Faced with an increasingly disgruntled 
Albanian population, Macedonian leaders decided it was smart to include 
some of their representatives, according to Christopher Hill, the 
U.S. ambassador. ``In the Balkans all the other countries are a problem,'' 
said Vasil Tupurkovski, an ethnic Macedonian who heads the other party 
in Georgievski's coalition. ``We want to be the stable country.'' 
Tupurkovski, a veteran politician who in 1991 was one of the few scrambling 
to prevent the wars that engulfed the old Yugoslavia, said he expects 
the West will respond with economic aid and investment. The extreme 
nationalist party is now convinced it must be more moderate, he added. 
``They realized perfectly well they could never have won with the 
radical positions they used to hold,'' Tupurkovski said, ``and they 
really wanted to win, and to have power.'' 
</TEXT>
</DOC>