<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981129.0070 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
In winters past, Molly Prescott recalled, when her daughters came 
in from sledding, cherry-cheeked and snow-crusted and clamoring for 
hot chocolate, they would bake their mittens dry next to the wood 
stove that had long heated the family house in the rural Vermont hamlet 
of Fletcher. Once, when her younger daughter sledded right into a 
brook, Mrs. Prescott even had the frozen child strip off her wet clothes 
and stand next to the old black Defiant stove until the shivers subsided. 
The heat the squat thing threw off penetrated right to the bone. But 
the Prescott girls are grown now, and no longer at home to do the 
log-stacking and stove-feeding and gathering 'round. And for Mrs. 
Prescott, a native Vermonter, ``The romance of the stove kind of faded,'' 
she said. ``I went to work, our life became faster'' _ and she and 
her husband, Seymour, broke down and bought an oil furnace. The Prescotts 
are far from alone. National and regional statistics show wood heating 
at its lowest ebb since the numbers started to be tracked 20 years 
ago, out-run by other cheap fuels and increasingly abandoned by older, 
busier householders who just do not want to cut, chop, split, stack, 
carry in, load and sweep up anymore. The nadir follows a decade of 
decline in the popularity of the potbellied radiance that, to many, 
once meant more than just cheap heat. It meant doing things the good, 
old way, and using renewable resources back when the Arab oil embargo 
was still fresh in memory, and leading a life slow and close to home 
and hearth. That was especially true here in Vermont, ground zero 
of the back-to-the-land movement of hippie times. But these are sport 
utility vehicle times now. Oil and natural gas are cheap. Newfangled 
gas stoves and fireplaces can provide the hypnotic flames and the 
radiating heat without the labor (though also without the crackle 
_ until someone comes up with a speaker attachment). And wood turned 
out to be environmentally problematic, with its nasty particulates. 
In addition, many ponytails have gone gray now, or white. ``The theory 
runs that we've got an aging population and people find it physically 
more difficult even just moving the firewood,'' said Bob De Geus, 
a wood utilization specialist for the state of Vermont who recently 
stopped using his own wood stove for fear his young children would 
burn themselves. ``It's something they don't find pleasure in doing 
anymore. Also, people's lives are busier and they don't have time 
to spend tending the fire.'' The recent heyday of wood heat _ leaving 
aside that humankind has warmed itself at fires since its cave days 
_ was in the mid-1980s, according to surveys by the Federal Energy 
Information Administration. In 1987, 6 percent of households used 
wood for their main heat and 21 percent used it as secondary heating. 
But by last year, only 2 percent of U.S. households used wood as their 
main heat, and supplemental use had dropped to 13 percent, one percentage 
point lower than in 1978. Of course, here in a state that is nearly 
80 percent forested, home to the famed and still-existent Vermont 
Castings stove company before it was bought by an Indiana company, 
wood heating will always play a strong role, experts say. In particular, 
said Peter L'Esperance, proprietor of the Chimney Sweep II store in 
Berlin, sales of wood stoves have picked up in the wake of last winter's 
devastating ice storm, which gave many Northeasterners a taste of 
life without heat and electricity for days. And there is word among 
suppliers that fear of the chaos that the year 2000 computer problem 
could wreak on the nation's power system is also fueling sales, he 
said _ though he has conscientiously resisted playing on that panic 
in his advertisements. In general, he and others said, any sane Vermonter 
makes sure there is some kind of backup for the home heating system, 
and few throw out their old wood stoves even after they stop using 
them. But one of his more typical customers these days, L'Esperance 
said, is a Vermonter who comes in and wants to shift from wood to 
gas. ``They've burned wood for 20 years, they're older, and they don't 
want the dust, they don't want the dirt, and the main thing is, they 
don't want to fool with the wood anymore,'' he said. L'Esperance's 
experience is borne out by national sales figures gathered by the 
industry group called The Hearth Products Association, formerly known 
as the Wood Heating Alliance. In 1997, sales of wood stoves and wood-burning 
fireplaces totaled 525,000, having dropped since 1991. They were easily 
outnumbered by sales of gas-fueled fireplaces and stoves, which rose 
steadily to 680,000 in 1997 from 149,000 in 1992, and have helped 
keep many a wood-stove company alive. Chroniclers of Vermont life 
see not only a decline in wood-burning, but also a decided sociological 
shift. ``The population is more and more brainy and less and less 
brawny,'' said Joe Sherman, author of ``Fast Lane on a Dirt Road: 
Vermont Transformed, 1945-1990'' (Countryman Press, 1991), in an e-mail 
interview. ``Firewood burning is a class thing,'' Sherman said. ``Poor 
people now burn firewood. The upscale nouveau Vermonters used to burn 
wood when it was chic, but no longer. I know several couples who moved 
to Montgomery, my town, who took on wood for a year, then abandoned 
it because it was too much work.'' And Peter Miller, whose ``Vermont 
People'' is being re-issued this fall by his own Silver Print Press, 
noted that these days, ``More and more people who move up here are 
connected to the computer for business, and I don't think they want 
to have the problem of ashes in their offices.'' In fact, Miller said, 
he is starting an online photographic agency out of his sprawling 
old farmhouse in Waterbury, Vt., and though he has wood stoves elsewhere 
in the house, and happily splits the logs that he gets dumped in his 
driveway at $70 a cord, he heats the computer-scanner-photo room with 
gas. The ironic thing about the decline in wood stove use, he and 
others pointed out, is that it comes at a time when wood works better 
than ever before. Houses are better insulated to hold in the heat, 
and the stoves are crafted to be much more efficient and cleaner burning 
_ in part because they must now meet tough air-pollution requirements. 
Some new stove models advertise such efficiency that one load of wood 
can burn almost all day. Energy experts also see added heating promise 
in systems that use wood chips and waste; homeowners can buy stoves 
that burn wood pellets _ 40,000 were sold last year nationwide _ and 
for larger buildings, wood-chip systems are gaining ground. Two dozen 
Vermont schools have converted to wood-chip systems, state officials 
said, and each saved about one annual teacher's salary by doing so. 
A power plant in Burlington is experimenting with a ``biomass gasification 
process'' that would convert wood chips into high-energy fuel. Fireplaces 
for what experts call ``pleasure burners'' _ the upscale kind who 
enjoy a snifter of brandy as they regard the flames from their wing 
chairs _ remain as popular as ever, according to official figures 
and sales statistics. Of Vermont's 90,000 households using wood heat, 
about 10,000 are ``pleasure burners.'' And of course, there will always 
be hard-core wood-heat-lovers like Sherman, who described the joy 
of chopping wood with the even rhythm of a metronome: ``I can do it 
with a rhythm that joins muscles and the music of steel against grain, 
of wood falling to the side in growing piles,'' he wrote. ``You become 
a pendulum of time.'' No matter the decline, ``You should be able 
to find a few blue scarves crawling out of chimneys and into the sky 
here and there for a long time to come,'' he averred. ``You sure as 
to hell will wherever I live.'' And most likely anywhere, Federal 
tracking shows. Though associated in many minds with northern New 
England winters, dependence on wood heat is spread fairly evenly around 
the country, and is even somewhat heavier in the South and Pacific 
regions, where less heat is needed over all and a bit of wood will 
often suffice, than in the East. But the less hard-core wood heaters, 
it seems, are increasingly going the way of Ben and Barbara Scotch, 
who moved to a storybook Victorian brick house in Montpelier in 1972 
and soon installed a wood stove in their living room because back 
then, Mrs. Scotch said, ``It was the thing to do.'' The stove served 
as the glowing center of the living room as their children grew, toasting 
the room nicely. It also so dried out the air that it caused cracks 
in the cherished Biedermeier furniture that Mrs. Scotch, an artist, 
had brought over from her native Switzerland to fight homesickness. 
And the Scotches had a child with asthma, and cats that ended up smelling 
smoked; and their neighborhood, located in a hollow, would sometimes 
be shadowed by a pall of wood smoke. Recently, the Scotches took out 
the wood stove, choosing to heat the living room using the oil furnace 
that already warmed the rest of the house. It was not without a pang, 
said Ben Scotch, who is chief staff lawyer for the Vermont Supreme 
Court and a former New Yorker. But they had faced reality, he said: 
``It dried out our skin, our lungs and our furniture. And since everyone 
else was doing it, it was the equivalent of smoking about two packs 
a day.'' Ultimately, Ben Scotch said, the wood stove ``came with the 
large starry eyes of flatland immigrants, and life turned out to be 
much more complicated. Everyone who came here to simplify their lives 
quickly found out they'd been watching too many sitcoms. Everything 
is a trade-off.'' 
</TEXT>
</DOC>