<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981129.0110 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
The United States will pledge hundreds of millions of dollars in aid 
to the Palestinians this week and is pressing other wealthy nations 
to dramatically increase economic assistance to encourage the Palestinians 
to stick to the peace process with Israel, senior Clinton administration 
officials said. The new American aid package, to be announced Monday 
at a one-day international donors' conference here, could total as 
much as $900 million over the next five years, officials said. In 
all, they hope the conference will raise $2.3 billion for the Palestinians, 
the amount pledged at the last major donors' conference in October 
1993, shortly after the Oslo peace accords. ``I'm not going to tell 
you precisely what we'll pledge because we're still in consultations 
with Congress,'' a senior State Department official, speaking on condition 
of anonymity, said last week. ``But I can tell you that we do plan 
to substantially increase the amount of assistance that we will provide 
for this next five-year period.'' The conference will be hosted by 
Secretary of State Madeleine Albright, and will be attended by President 
Clinton; Yasser Arafat, the Palestinian leader, and the foreign ministers 
of Saudi Arabia, Egypt and other Arab nations. ``We'd like to see 
if we can do better'' than in 1993, the State Department official 
said. ``One way to underpin peace and to build a constituency of peace 
is to make certain that people are better off.'' The Israeli foreign 
minister, Ariel Sharon, will not attend the conference because of 
what American officials described as domestic political turmoil. The 
Israeli team will be led instead by the director general of the foreign 
ministry, Eytan Bentsur. Arafat arrived in Washington on Saturday 
and had lunch Sunday with Secretary of Commerce William Daley and 
a group of 15 American business leaders. He also met groups of Arab 
Americans. In past years, much of the American aid money for the Palestinians 
has been used for infrastructure, including the paving of more than 
400 miles of roads that knit together scattered towns and villages 
in the West Bank and Gaza. American aid to the Palestinians is expected 
to increase, in part because of promises that President Clinton made 
to Arafat's Palestinian Authority and to Israel that Washington would 
pick up much of the bill for the land-for-security plan that was hammered 
out in negotiations last month in Wye, Md. The Israelis are expected 
to seek up to $1.2 billion in additional aid as a result of the Wye 
agreement, while Palestinian officials have suggested that they will 
solicit as much as $400 million in new aid. The United States also 
hopes that an expanded aid package to the Palestinians will allow 
Arafat to blunt the influence of the radical Islamic militant organization 
Hamas, which has built public support by sponsoring medical clinics, 
schools and sport clubs. State Department officials said that only 
two Arab nations _ Syria and Lebanon _ turned down invitations to 
Monday's meeting, just as they did when invited to the 1993 conference. 
Syria and the Syrian-controlled government of Lebanon have been harsh 
critics of the Israeli-Palestinian peace process. Even as they spoke 
optimistically about the chances of increasing aid to the Palestinians, 
State Department officials acknowledged that they had effectively 
suspended plans to open a Middle Eastern development bank, an institution 
that they had once billed as a symbol of economic cooperation among 
Israel, the Palestinians and their neighbors. Plans for the Middle 
East and North Africa Development Bank were announced in 1994. The 
bank, with the United States as its largest shareholder, was supposed 
to encourage Israelis and Arabs to work together with private investors 
on regional development projects. But the United States was unable 
to get the main Middle Eastern partners in the project _ Israel, Egypt, 
Jordan and the Palestinians _ to agree on a charter for the bank. 
And without their support, State Department officials said, Congress 
refused to make a contribution to capitalize the bank. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>