<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981129.0059 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Metropolitan Life Insurance Co., one of the country's biggest insurers, 
said Sunday that it was taking the first steps toward reorganizing 
in a way that would turn it into a stock-based corporation and provide 
a windfall of as much as $14 billion for its policy-holders. The money 
_ profits that have accumulated for decades _ will be shared, according 
to a complex formula, by the mutual company's 12 million life insurance 
policy-holders, who are its formal owners. Mathematically, the average 
payment to each policy-holder works out to $1,166, based on the company's 
latest report of its accumulated profits or equity at the end of last 
year. But most policy-holders of Met Life, as the company is often 
called, are likely to receive somewhat more or less, depending upon 
such factors as the size of the policy, how long it has been in effect 
and the amount of the premiums. Some policy-holders may receive as 
little as a few hundred dollars, said Robert Benmosche, Met Life's 
chief executive, while payments to some of the 60,000 holders of corporate 
group life and disability policies may run into the thousands. The 
reorganization, which will permit the company to issue stock for the 
first time, follows similar decisions by several other mutual life 
insurers, including Prudential Life Insurance Co. of America, which 
competes with Met Life for the title of the nation's largest life 
insurer, and John Hancock Mutual Life Insurance Co. Only a few weeks 
ago, Mutual of New York completed a reorganization and issued its 
first stock. ``The reorganization of Met Life and the others is emblematic 
of a much larger issue which is that the life insurance industry is 
in a very sorry state,'' said Eric Berg, an analyst for CIBC Oppenheimer. 
``Fewer Americans than ever are worried about dying young. Agent productivity 
is declining and the number of agents is also on the wane.'' Executives 
of Met Life, like those of other reorganizing insurers, say the company 
needs to become a publicly traded stock corporation to raise capital 
for expansion in an industry that has been steadily consolidating. 
As a stock company, Met Life and the others would, of course, also 
be able to use their own shares as currency in acquisitions. ``Changing 
the structure gives you stock you can place in the hands of managers 
and agents, giving them an incentive to work harder,'' Berg said. 
Benmosche acknowledged that ``dramatic changes'' and consolidation 
were taking place in the life insurance industry and said he believed 
the reorganization would position Met Life ``to deliver value to its 
policy-holders and to be competitive in the pursuit of new growth 
opportunities.'' Another factor pushing Met Life to change its structure, 
Benmosche said, was the expectation that Congress would eventually 
eliminate Depression-era barriers that prevent insurers, banks and 
brokerages from doing business in each other's fields. While some 
mutual insurers have started moving into banking by acquiring savings 
and loan charters, Benmosche said he believed that to provide full 
banking services _ should Met Life eventually choose to do so if federal 
barriers fall _ Met Life needed to embrace a holding company structure, 
which it is now doing. Met Life, which was founded 130 years ago, 
had struggled mightily to avoid sharing its profits with policy-holders. 
It had spent millions of dollars leading a campaign to lobby the New 
York state Legislature to change the law that requires mutual insurers 
to distribute their accumulated profits to policy-holders. Gov. George 
Pataki had supported the insurers' effort to create a hybrid company 
structure that would permit them to reorganize without sharing their 
accumulated profits with policy-holders. But Alexander Grannis, the 
New York City Democrat who is chairman of the state Assembly's Insurance 
Committee, contended that policy-holders at Met Life and other New 
York insurers would be short-changed. The measure was defeated despite 
heated negotiations in the final hours of the legislative session 
last summer. Met Life was so strongly committed to the hybrid form 
of company structure that the company even considered moving its headquarters 
to one of the more than 20 states that have recently pass accommodating 
legislation. But the company abandoned that idea, too, when Congress 
cut a part of federal financial-services legislation that would have 
facilitated such a move. ``The debate is over,'' Benmosche said Sunday. 
``This is a cleaner approach and it makes more sense. We are clearly 
going to give all the value of the company to policy-holders from 
day one.'' Benmosche said Met Life had sought the hybrid structure 
as an interim step toward a full restructuring that would have eventually 
compensated policy-holders. The main issue for Met Life, he said, 
had been speed; under the hybrid structure, Met Life could have reorganized 
in six months. Under its current plans, he said, the company hopes 
to make the transition in about 15 months or toward the end of 1999. 
The board gave its approval last week for Benmosche to develop a conversion 
plan for the changes, and he is to report back in three or four months 
to get its final approval. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>