<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981129.0050 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
The Royal Academy of Arts can hardly claim to have discovered a new 
artist with its current show, ``Life? or Theater? The Work of Charlotte 
Salomon.'' Salomon's paintings were first exhibited in Amsterdam in 
1961, and they have since traveled to Germany, France, Japan, Israel 
and the United States. The Jewish Historical Museum in Amsterdam, 
which owns all her surviving works, has 60 of her paintings on permanent 
display. Yet if the Berlin-born Jewish artist is not better known, 
it may be because the tragic nature of her death (she was 26 when 
she was deported from France and murdered at Auschwitz) had the effect 
of turning her work into what Norman Rosenthal, exhibitions secretary 
at the Royal Academy, calls ``special circumstance'' art: it was thought 
significant in the context of the Holocaust, but not for its own sake. 
The Royal Academy's show, which runs through Jan. 17, has now set 
out to change this perception, hoping to re-discover her work for 
a larger public. ``I see it as part of the story of art, rather than 
outsider art,'' said Rosenthal, himself of German-Jewish descent. 
``I see it as a work of high art, of great culture and great sophistication 
and complexity and skill. It's an act of great artistic will at the 
highest level.'' At the center of Salomon's life's work is the vast 
autobiographical series that she entitled ``Life? or Theater?'' and 
described as a ``dreifarben singspiel,'' or a three-colored play with 
music. From an original 1,300 gouaches, all on identically sized paper 
of 10 inches by 13 inches, she selected 780 illustrations, most accompanied 
by texts, to form ``a great opera of the mind and eye,'' as Rosenthal 
put it. Some 400 of these are on display at the Royal Academy. It 
is easy to see why, at first sight, the work could be termed Holocaust 
art: the Nazis' rise to power in 1933 convulsed Salomon's life, and 
the German occupation of France led to her death a decade later. Perhaps 
inevitably, ``Life? or Theater?'' has also been compared with the 
diary of Anne Frank, who recorded her thoughts and feelings while 
hiding in an attic in Nazi-occupied Amsterdam. Yet Salomon evidently 
saw herself as more than a witness to the Nazi nightmare. Indeed, 
it is as if she felt she could dispel this nightmare through her painting 
and texts, which include titles of music like Schubert's ``Death and 
the Maiden'' that should accompany the work. She does not ignore the 
escalating Nazi horrors, but her art becomes the key to her sanity. 
She controls her life by turning it into a theatrical work of art, 
even to the point of presenting a cast of characters: relatives, friends 
and acquaintances who are given different names in her drama. Salomon 
herself becomes Charlotte Kann and is referred to in the third person, 
which enables her to be both frank and ironic about her feelings. 
In the epilogue, when the narrative has caught up with her daily process 
of creation, she explains with disarming simplicity why her alter 
ego embarked on the project: ``And she found herself facing the question 
of whether to commit suicide or to undertake something wildly eccentric.'' 
The remarkable maturity of ``Life? or Theater?,'' not only its visual 
complexity but also its frequent references to music, philosophy and 
psychology, reflects Salomon's upbringing in an educated and assimilated 
middle-class Berlin family. Her mother died when she was 8, but five 
years later her physician father, Albert Salomon, married a singer, 
Paula Lindberg, who soon became both surrogate mother and close friend 
to young Charlotte. In 1933, after Hitler seized power, Dr. Salomon 
lost his right to practice as a doctor, while Paula was forbidden 
from performing in public, although both were able to work among Jews. 
Their home became a gathering point for Jewish intellectuals, including 
Alfred Wolfsohn, Paula's music teacher, who was said to be Charlotte's 
first lover. Charlotte, meanwhile, was the only Jewish student at 
a local art college. On Nov. 9, 1938, Kristallnacht, when Nazi mobs 
attacked synagogues and Jewish properties across Germany, Dr. Salomon 
was briefly detained. After his release, he sent Charlotte to join 
her maternal grandparents in the south of France, where they were 
living in a cottage on the estate of a wealthy American woman, Otillie 
Moore. Dr. Salomon imagined he was saving Charlotte's life; in fact 
he and Paula fled Germany soon afterward and survived the war in hiding 
in the Netherlands. In Villefranche-sur-Mer, Moore encouraged Charlotte 
to paint and bought some of her portraits and still-life oils (which 
have all disappeared). But the young artist was troubled. When her 
grandmother killed herself in May 1940, Charlotte learned for the 
first time that not only her mother but also her aunt and numerous 
other family members had committed suicide. Struggling to make sense 
of the emotional and political turmoil surrounding her, she embarked 
on ``Life? or Theater?'' some time in 1941, again encouraged by Moore, 
to whom it is dedicated. By the time she finished it, Moore had left 
for the United States, while Moore's former lover, Alexander Nagler, 
had become Salomon's lover. She gave the collection of gouaches to 
a French doctor for safekeeping with the words, ``Take good care of 
it, it is my whole life.'' In September 1943, soon after their marriage, 
Salomon and Nagler were arrested by the Gestapo and within weeks were 
sent to Auschwitz, where both died. After the war, ``Life? or Theater'' 
was recovered by Salomon's father and stepmother. Seen in isolation, 
many of the paintings stand out as interesting works, some strongly 
evocative of Chagall. Using just red, blue and yellow, Salomon captures 
the changing mood of the narrative by darkening and lightening her 
colors. Sometimes her technique is that of a cartoonist, presenting 
for instance a dozen or more images of the same face as it changes 
expression to conform to the narrative. Other times, the images set 
the pace, almost like a storyboard for a movie. The emotional tone 
of the gouaches also swings as she goes from recounting her mother's 
suicide to dwelling on her fascination with Wolfsohn, or rather Amadeus 
Daberlohn as he is called in the ``singspiel.'' Approaching the end, 
her urgency is such that she abandons images for full pages of multicolored 
text. Yet her final sentences suggest she had finally emerged from 
her own dark tunnel: ``And with dream-awakened eyes, she saw all the 
beauty around her, saw the sea, felt the sun and knew: she had to 
vanish for a while from the human plane and make every sacrifice in 
order to create her world anew out of the depths. And from this came: 
Life or Theater?'' Rosenthal, who organized the show along with Monica 
Bohm-Duchen, said that Salomon's collection was ``clearly intended 
as a `Gesamtkunstwerk,' a `total work of art' in the tradition of 
the ambitious fusion of music, poetry and the visual arts that had 
been created in Germany in the 19th century.'' And yet, he added, 
it also seems vividly contemporary. ``I can't quite believe it,'' 
he went on. ``When I was putting it up, I thought, if someone had 
made it 10 years ago or 5 years ago as an act of imagination, I would 
more readily believe it.'' Now, having given Charlotte Salomon a place 
at the Royal Academy beside a show of Picasso's pottery and ceramics, 
Rosenthal is hopeful that ``Life? or Theater?'' can shake off its 
tag of ``special circumstance'' art. ``The Jewish Museum in New York 
wants to do the show,'' he said, ``but I'd much rather it were shown 
at the Guggenheim or the Met or the MOMA because I don't think it 
needs to be ghettoized in the Jewish Museum. I think it is bad for 
it myself, though it's not up to me, of course.'' 
</TEXT>
</DOC>