<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981129.0057 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
As vote tallies piled up here Sunday in a series of important state 
elections, the humiliating defeat of the Hindu nationalists and the 
stunning resurrection of India's once-dominant political force, the 
Congress Party, became ever more starkly apparent. Voters outraged 
by the spiraling prices of onions, tomatoes and potatoes _ essentials 
of the Indian diet _ swept the Hindu nationalist Bharatiya Janata 
Party from office by landslide margins where it had been deeply entrenched. 
The party lost in Delhi, the district that includes the nation's capital, 
and in the Hindi heartland state of Rajasthan. Even more surprising 
in a year marked by an anti-incumbent mood among voters, the Congress 
Party managed to hold on firmly to power in the central Indian state 
of Madhya Pradesh, the country's largest. Political analysts said 
it was likely that voters there blamed the national government, led 
by the Hindu nationalists, for price increases, not the state government. 
Two regional parties beat out Congress in the small northeastern state 
of Mizoram, the other state where elections were held, but its results 
were not considered important to national politics. While the Hindu 
nationalists alienated leaders all over the world in May when the 
government conducted secret underground nuclear tests, polls indicated 
that it was rising vegetable prices that cost them dearly with voters 
at home. The repudiation of the Hindu nationalists in the state elections, 
which were held Wednesday and the votes counted over the weekend, 
will further undermine the 18-party coalition government they lead 
at the national level. The eight-month-old government is already plagued 
by squabbles that range from the farcical to the serious. While some 
of the Bharatiya Janata Party's partners openly criticized it over 
the weekend for its failure in the state elections, none have yet 
withdrawn from the coalition, which has a narrow majority in Parliament. 
But one political commentator quoted a saying by Chanakya, the Indian 
political sage from ancient times, to question how long the party's 
allies will remain loyal: When a tree falls, the birds won't sit on 
it. Still, the arithmetic of the Hindu nationalists' hold on national 
power is unchanged for now. Prime Minister Atal Behari Vajpayee admitted 
Saturday that he was taken aback by the depth of his party's loss, 
but he said the coalition would prove it still has a majority when 
Parliament convenes for its winter session on Monday. He has also 
begun owning up to his mistakes, a party-wide process that was in 
full swing by Sunday. At a meeting of state officials Friday, Vajpayee 
acknowledged that his government should have moved more quickly to 
import onions when a shortage caused the prices to rise and to remove 
all duties on them. Before the elections, he had blamed Mother Nature 
and vegetable crop failures for surging prices. ``The BJP had an image 
as a cohesive, disciplined, well-led party _ and all that fell away,'' 
said Pran Chopra, a political analyst at the Center for Policy Research 
in New Delhi. ``Prices became the crystallized image of the incompetence 
of the BJP government.'' Jubilant Congress Party workers celebrated 
in the streets Saturday night, but the party's president, Sonia Gandhi, 
had a more sober reaction to victory Sunday morning. Yes, she said, 
the results are a gain, but she told a television reporter that she 
was still in no rush to topple the Hindu-nationalist-led coalition. 
Congress Party leaders and political analysts said her caution was 
wise. Congress has even fewer votes in Parliament than the Hindu Nationalists 
_ only 141 of the 272 it would need to form a majority. It would have 
to join with a number of other political parties that are unified 
mainly by their opposition to the Bharatiya Janata Party and what 
they see as its attempt to impose a narrow vision of Hinduism on the 
rich religious diversity of India. For example, the Communists, who 
have governed the state of West Bengal for two decades, are eager 
to join with Congress in what they call a secular front, but the Communists 
and the Congress Party have long been divided on economic issues. 
The Congress Party _ like the Hindu-nationalist-led government _ favors 
a gradual opening of Indian markets to foreign investment, while the 
Communists favor more protectionist policies. Murli Deora, a Congress 
Party leader from Bombay who is chairman of the finance committee 
in Parliament, said the Congress Party, just like the Hindu nationalists, 
would find it almost impossible to govern effectively and difficult 
to survive politically if it assumed power now. ``The Congress is 
not up to power just now,'' he said. He and others said the party 
should wait on the assumption that the Hindu nationalists' coalition 
will fall apart, then press for new elections that might return a 
strengthened Congress Party to govern with a clearer public mandate. 
``There's no way to form a majority in the present Parliament without 
facing the same problems as the BJP,'' said Yogendra Yadav, a political 
scientist with the Center for the Study of Developing Societies. ``It 
would be foolish of the Congress to form a government now.'' It is 
not yet clear just how much this election was a rejection of the Hindu 
nationalists and how much a victory for Congress, the party whose 
founders led India to independence in 1947. Mrs. Gandhi is the unlikely 
inheritor of the Congress Party mantle. An Italian-born Roman Catholic 
in majority-Hindu India, she is the surviving member of the Nehru-Gandhi 
dynasty. Her husband's grandfather, Jawaharlal Nehru, was India's 
first prime minister. Her mother-in-law, Prime Minister Indira Gandhi, 
died in her arms after being shot by Sikh bodyguards. And her husband, 
Rajiv, was assassinated in 1991 by a Sri Lankan suicide bomber while 
he was campaigning to win back the post of prime minister. Mrs. Gandhi, 
who lived a private life after her husband's death until she emerged 
this year as an aggressive, confident campaigner, has read her speeches 
in Hindi to huge throngs in recent weeks but has granted no sit-down 
interviews to reporters. With her shoulder-length flip of dark hair, 
she is the public face of the Congress Party, but she has yet to expose 
herself to searching questions. Nonetheless, she led Congress to its 
biggest victory since 1985, the year after her mother-in-law's assassination. 
And political commentators here say she has asserted control over 
the party hierarchy and may yet become prime minister of India in 
her own right. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>