<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981129.0084 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Deutsche Bank AG is expected to provide multimillion-dollar incentives 
to a handful of top Bankers Trust and Deutsche executives to secure 
their services once the German banking giant completes its $9.67 billion 
purchase of Bankers Trust. The deal is expected to be announced formally 
in Frankfurt on Monday. Executives involved in the merger talks said 
bankers in this select group would receive at least $10 million each 
to stay with the merged company for an undisclosed period of time, 
to help insure that managers crucial to the merger's success are in 
place. Hundreds of other employees of the investment banking unit 
will receive smaller incentives. Although fat bonuses have never been 
known to be guarantors of long-term loyalty on Wall Street, those 
who will receive the largest financial incentives include at least 
six Bankers Trust executives and three Deutsche executives, all of 
whom will be overseeing the enlarged investment banking business created 
by Deutsche's purchase. From the Bankers Trust side, the executives 
include the bank's chairman, Frank Newman; Mary Cirillo, who will 
run the new unit's global custody business; Yves de Balmann and Mayo 
Shattuck, who will jointly manage the new investment banking business; 
Ted Virtue, who will run corporate finance; and Robert Ferguson, who 
will supervise retail brokerage activities. From the Deutsche side, 
the executives include Josef Ackermann, who oversaw Deutsche's investment 
banking business; Edson Mitchell, who will oversee global debt trading 
in the new business; and Michael Phillip, who will oversee the equities 
business of the merged company. All of these executives will be members 
of the merged company's investment banking committee, which will be 
supervised by Ackermann and Newman. The boards of both companies appeared 
ready late Sunday to give final approval to the Bankers Trust acquisition. 
The big payouts are being offered although Deutsche has been badly 
burned in the past when it gave lucrative pay packages in an effort 
to secure what it believed to be top investment banking talent. Most 
notably, Deutsche went on an expensive shopping spree to build up 
its Deutsche Morgan Grenfell investment banking unit with very little 
impact on the bank's bottom line. Nonetheless, Deutsche has to do 
something to make sure that the acquisition goes as smoothly as possible, 
given the potential for client defections or a late start in snaring 
new business if the investment banking unit lacks direction and stability. 
Deutsche already lost dozens of investment bankers earlier this year 
who specialized in making deals in the high-technology business. The 
bank is expected to retreat from its policy of awarding bonuses in 
the form of Deutsche Bank shares. The senior ranks of Bankers Trust 
have been badly divided in recent months both because of the heavy 
trading losses the bank suffered in Russia and other emerging markets 
and by disagreement about how the bank was managing its risky junk 
bond business. Much of the ill will growing from these problems has 
been directed internally at Newman, even though the economic downturn 
overseas affected a broad array of financial services companies. Bankers 
Trust has also struggled to integrate the Baltimore brokerage firm 
Alex. Brown into its ranks. It acquired Alex. Brown last year, but 
a number of senior executives left the firm over concerns about how 
it was being managed, and the unit has continuing morale problems. 
If Newman faces a challenge in carving out a role for himself as a 
co-director of Deutsche's new investment banking unit, he can still 
play a valuable role helping to overcome regulatory hurdles in Washington. 
Newman, a former Treasury Department official, is well connected in 
Washington. Deutsche is likely to face tough regulatory scrutiny about 
some of its industrial and financial holdings in Germany, as well 
as its involvement with the Nazi regime during World War II and its 
handling of bank accounts owned by Jewish depositors. Deutsche plans 
to pay cash for Bankers Trust, and executives involved in the merger 
talks said that Deutsche would raise that money through a mixture 
of new stock and bond offerings. While it is still unclear how many 
layoffs will accompany the acquisition, executives involved in the 
transaction said cuts will fall most heavily on administrative staff 
in Europe and the United States as well as managers and employees 
in the fixed-income and equities businesses. The two banks jointly 
employ about 9,000 people in Britain, where a sizeable number of layoffs 
are likely to occur, and have overlapping investment banking operations 
in New York, another likely target of cutbacks. If Deutsche's acquisition 
of Bankers Trust is completed, it would be the biggest purchase of 
an American financial services firm by a foreign company and would 
create the largest financial services firm in the world, with about 
$850 billion in assets. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>