<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981129.0032 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
It's hard to get more than a few sentences out of Harry Sepulveda, 
though he would like to talk some more. When he's at work, perched 
behind the cash register at the Record Mart in the Times Square subway 
station, Sepulveda attracts a line of fans. Sometimes they are from 
Japan, video cameras in hand, hoping to take home some tape of a legend. 
Sometimes they're from France or Sweden, Latin music enthusiasts who 
have come to the heart of Latin recordings. They pick up hundreds 
of dollars' worth of CDs; the owner of the record store, the ever-patient 
Jesse Moskowitz, won't ring up their choices right away. ``Have you 
run them by Harry?'' he asks. ``Make sure you're getting the good 
stuff.'' It's the same in Sepulveda's other realm, the city's club 
scene. Musicians, critics, dancers and well wishers regularly line 
up to tell him about what's going on or to find things out. ``There's 
something about live music I love,'' Sepulveda said recently. ``I 
like to stand right in front and see my friends play, and when something 
happens that's special on the bandstand, we all look at each other, 
because we know it's happening. I live for those moments.'' Judged 
by the nature of his job, Sepulveda is simply a record store clerk. 
But if his cultural importance and the respect accorded him are taken 
into account, then he clearly is important, for he is the living memory 
of Puerto Rican and Cuban music, both in the United States and abroad. 
The singer Gilberto Santa Rosa, one of Puerto Rico's biggest salsa 
stars and a historian of the music, is quick to testify to Sepulveda's 
standing. ``Harry is so important to who we are as a people,'' he 
said. ``On the simplest level, he has an apartment filled with records, 
so when musicians need music, they go to him. But he knows everything. 
He knows who played on what recording, who worked where, who was listening 
to whom, who was playing well when. He's our history.'' Latin music 
studies are in their infancy. Most Latin record companies care very 
little about documenting the music. Outside Cuba, few books are published 
on the subject, and to become an expert, one has to be privy to an 
oral heritage built upon many hours with people who were present at 
the music's creation or heard about it from those who were. Which 
is why Sepulveda, who has an astonishing memory and, even better, 
is profoundly generous with his information, tends to be surrounded 
wherever he goes. ``I call it the University of Harry,'' said Ned 
Sublette, the owner of Qbadisc Records, a Manhattan company specializing 
in Cuban music. Sublette started his apprenticeship with Sepulveda 
in 1985. ``At the time I was trying to learn everything I could about 
this music,'' Sublette said. ``We would hang out and talk about shoes 
and music and people, and we became friends through music. That's 
our great passion, and I would go to his house, and he'd play me things 
from his collection and really start to teach me the discography.'' 
Sepulveda's generosity is often repaid. This summer Santa Rosa paid 
for Sepulveda's flight to Puerto Rico to attend a concert for Santa 
Rosa's birthday. Sepulveda's presence was deemed essential. ``When 
I first came to New York, in the early 1980s, singing with Willie 
Rosario's band, one of the first things I did was go see Harry,'' 
Santa Rosa said. ``I'm a collector and historian, too. But Harry's 
much more disciplined than I am. Anyway, we became friends, and every 
time I'm in New York working, I hang out with him. So the least I 
could do, having learned so much from him, is invite him to Puerto 
Rico for the party.'' Some of Sepulveda's earliest memories are of 
Puerto Rico, where he was born. (He moved to New York in 1959.) He 
remembers the parties held in his neighborhood of Ensenada in the 
town of Guanica, P.R., where trios or small groups played for dancers. 
At an early age he was showing the signs of an infatuation with the 
music. When Sepulveda's mother or older sisters needed to find him 
at the party, he said, they would go to the bandstand. He would be 
standing there, listening. A few weeks ago, he attended a show at 
the Copacabana by the Puerto Rican percussionist Roberto Roena and 
didn't leave until 5 a.m. When Sepulveda first moved to New York, 
settling in the Williamsburg section of Brooklyn (he now lives in 
the East Village), he was more interested in rhythm and blues. But 
Puerto Rican and Cuban music was on the record player at home, and 
he remembers swapping albums, borrowing them from friends and soaking 
it all in, reveling in the excitement of every new release. By the 
time he was a teen-ager, he was going to the Palladium, the legendary 
home of Latin music. ``I remember seeing the Cuban singer Vincentico 
Valdes there; what an experience!'' Sepulveda said. ``I was working 
in restaurants as a kid to support my two habits, which were music 
and clothes. So I'd finish school, run off to work, then go out at 
night.'' Sepulveda's family could not afford to send him to college, 
he said, so he went to work. He kept buying records, hanging around 
musicians, asking questions. He befriended an older man, Pepe Rodriguez, 
who worked at the Record Mart's precursor on West 14th Street in Manhattan. 
Rodriguez became like a father to him, and when he retired, he recommended 
Sepulveda for the job. Now 50, Sepulveda has spent half his life working 
for Record Mart. In the store, Sepulveda is authoritative and determined, 
and when a customer asks him about something, he'll bustle over to 
the CD bins, pulling out one or two or three CDs to demonstrate not 
only what the buyer had wanted but Sepulveda's own tangential, connective 
ideas. He works in a cramped space, and Sepulveda like the best athletes, 
makes navigating the terrain look easy. ``I still go see Pepe,'' Sepulveda 
said. ``He knew a lot of stuff. But he's just such a beautiful person, 
so nice to be around. He taught me the beginnings. But I was always 
going out, hanging with other collectors and musicians. And people 
in my neighborhood were really into the music, and we would get together 
with a crowd, listen to different things. I was doing that stuff when 
I was very young, and I learned lot about Arsenio Rodriguez, Benny 
More, Cortijo, Orquesta Aragon from older music fans in the area.'' 
It was the only way to learn. When Sepulveda was younger, there were 
even fewer sources of information about the music than there are now, 
with no magazines and virtually no scholarship. So he watched, and 
he listened, and he remembered everything. Sepulveda has parlayed 
that information into a lucrative sideline. He's the resident expert 
at several labels that have been reissuing the music for CDs. For 
Sublette, he has produced a five-volume set called ``Cuban Gold,'' 
regarded as one of the best compilations of Cuban music available. 
He has also produced some 40 reissues for West Side, a small label 
in New Jersey that has been reissuing some of the most important older 
Cuban and Puerto Rican music. ``Harry has really helped us, because 
he has ideas on what to reissue and what not to reissue; he really 
knows the catalog,'' said Hector Varona, a co-owner of West Side. 
``And Harry is aware of who is buying what in each part of the country: 
what will sell in California, what will sell in New York.'' Both projects 
strongly reflect Sepulveda's point of view, which is to find the best 
music recorded and issue it, even if it is known only to a few. As 
an example, there is Sepulveda's compilation for West Side of performances 
by the obscure but greatly talented Cuban singer Silvestre Mendez. 
And the whole of ``Cuban Gold'' represents Sepulveda's esthetic. ``Harry 
picked the tunes,'' Sublette said. ``He's very demanding. If something 
passes his muster, it is a good record. He tastes aren't predictable. 
His standards are high, but he's not close minded. Within the universe 
of music he likes, anything that's new has a chance.'' Is there a 
formula that Sepulveda uses to arrive at his choices? ``No, not really,'' 
he said. ``I do the compilations in 10 minutes or so. I walk around 
with the idea in my head; then it comes out. If I waited another 10 
minutes, the compilation would be completely different.'' And what 
are his criteria for what makes a good recording? ``Well, I like lyrics,'' 
he said. ``I like arrangements, too. But you know, sometimes a record 
won't have anything but a feeling, and you have to go with that. The 
person's really trying, and it just makes you feel good. That's what 
counts.'' 
</TEXT>
</DOC>