<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981129.0106 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
The marksmen gulped a hasty dinner of pasta and salad before preparing 
to spend a chilly night stalking their quarry. Their quarters had 
the look of a wilderness encampment for commandos, with heavy wool 
socks hung to dry and foam-lined cases for custom-made rifles stacked 
near a fireplace. Telescopic sights and night-vision gear sat on a 
bed. But this was no guerrilla hideout. It was a suite at a hotel, 
in the heart of the endless patchwork of malls and townhouse complexes 
ringing this city, less than 10 miles from downtown. The team of hunters, 
led by Anthony DeNicola, a Yale-educated wildlife biologist from Hamden, 
Conn., was here to methodically kill up to 150 deer, under a contract 
with the government of Eden Prairie, a suburb that is one of many 
municipalities trying to cull overgrown herds of white-tailed deer. 
The five-member team's next stop, depending on a decision by the New 
Jersey attorney general's office, could be Princeton Township, where 
Mayor Phyllis Marchand recently compared the deer problem to the avian 
invasion in the Hitchcock film ``The Birds.'' For more than a decade, 
as populations of white-tailed deer have exploded on the fringes of 
many Eastern and Midwestern cities, the overrun suburbs have tried 
all kinds of ways to reduce the attendant threats of deer-car crashes, 
Lyme disease (which is carried by deer ticks) and damage to gardens, 
shrubbery and forests. Sharpshooting is the newest tactic in the war. 
DeNicola, whose doctoral dissertation at Purdue University was on 
the use of contraceptives to control deer, said he considered every 
option before settling on shooting when he set up his team. The goal 
is stealth, precision and compassion, he said, and sniper rifles are 
used because the shooters can nearly guarantee an instantly fatal 
head shot with every squeeze of the trigger. In 1995, DeNicola set 
up a nonprofit group, White Buffalo Inc., which he runs out of his 
Hamden home, that in effect does contract killing of deer, at rates 
varying from $200 to $300 a head or more, depending on the situation. 
During recent contracted shoots in Long Island, N.H., and Dune Acres, 
Ind., DeNicola's team was dogged by protesters, some blasting air 
horns to scare the deer. Animal rights groups say shooting is just 
a temporary fix. But many elected officials and residents in these 
and other communities that have hired DeNicola have nothing but praise 
for him. ``He's professional, he's a scientist, he's a marksman,'' 
said Dusty Stemer, president of the Dune Acres Town Council. The two-square-mile 
community of 170 homes, on the southern tip of Lake Michigan, was 
so plagued by deer that one out of four drivers in town had hit one, 
she said. In February, White Buffalo killed 51 deer in five days. 
Similar sharpshooting programs employing local police officers or 
wildlife officials have been used for several years around Chicago, 
Milwaukee, and other areas. But DeNicola is the first person to establish 
a business operating across the country. He has undertaken wildlife-culling 
projects from a Catalina Island, Calif., effort to shoot feral goats 
and pigs, to the eradication of deer on Monhegan Island, Maine. He 
started White Buffalo as a nonprofit venture to help finance research 
in wildlife management. Eventually, he said, he plans to shift to 
a commercial business, but only if the deer-culling strategy gains 
more acceptance. ``If we look biased, it's by default,'' said DeNicola, 
32, a square-jawed technician who makes his own ammunition on a table 
in his living room and can fire a series of rifle bullets into a dime-size 
circle at 100 yards. White Buffalo has 11 rifles, many of which are 
custom-made by the same gunsmiths who make weapons for Navy Seals. 
``As much as people hate to see things die _ they spend $10,000 on 
vet bills to save a pet _ mortality has to occur,'' DeNicola said. 
Since deer have no predators and hunters in crowded suburban areas, 
he said, nothing keeps them in check. He and his team work mostly 
at night, often with an escort of local police officers to keep away 
protesters or explain the situation to suburbanites alarmed by the 
unfamiliar sound of gunfire. In states that allow silencers on rifles, 
the team uses them to prevent a herd from scattering as each deer 
falls, and to avoid disturbing residents. The marksmen prepare a site 
several weeks ahead of time, placing bait daily in safe locations, 
using infrared detectors on deer trails to record the hour when they 
pass, and then shooting from tree platforms or from trucks when they 
pull up to a baited site. They almost invariably kill each deer with 
a single shot in the head, said state wildlife officials who tracked 
the projects in New Hampshire and Maine. ``We live in a sanitized 
world, so that's what we try to bring to this operation,'' DeNicola 
said. ``You don't hear the gunshots, you don't see the bloody carcasses, 
but in the end the deer are gone.'' Early in the century, it it estimated 
that there were about 500,000 white-tailed deer in the United States, 
but their numbers were kept in check by widespread hunting and by 
coyotes and other predators. Now there are thought to be more than 
15 million deer. Each year, they cause 500,000 car accidents in which 
about 100 people die. In a recent case in New York, a 9-year-old boy 
in the town of Malta died on Nov. 20, the day after the family car 
struck a deer that then crashed through the windshield. A sharpshooters' 
rifle is not the only weapon being used to reduce herds. In North 
Haven, N.Y., New Canaan, Conn., , and many other municipalities, permits 
have been issued to hunters using bows or shotguns to kill more female 
deer. But so far, those efforts have had limited success but have 
caused ample controversy. In hopes of increasing sport hunters' kill 
this year, New Jersey temporarily lifted its ban on using bait to 
attract deer to a hunting spot. But some hunters condemn the practice, 
saying it has reduced the sport to a slaughter. Relying on hunters 
to cull deer can also create problems. The first arrow or shotgun 
blast does not always kill a deer, resulting in a significant percentage 
of wounded animals. ``When a deer runs off and then dies on Mrs. Smith's 
lawn, you have a problem,'' DeNicola said. At the Fire Island National 
Seashore off Long Island, and in Groton, Conn., the Humane Society 
and local wildlife officials have collaborated on projects testing 
deer contraceptives. But the operations are most effective on isolated 
groups of deer, and sterilized females have to be reinoculated every 
year, making the efforts costly and complicated. In many places some 
homeowners have simply chosen to embrace the big-eyed, big-eared grazing 
animals. In Princeton Township, which for years has been debating 
how to manage its deer population, estimated at 1,300, many residents 
continue to feed the animals, among them Tamara Gund, a professor 
of chemistry at the New Jersey Institute of Technology. Every week 
in the fall and winter, she said, her family puts out about 300 pounds 
of corn and deer food pellets. ``We love to see them,'' she said. 
But most township residents, where deer-car crashes are a daily event, 
appear to support the views of the mayor, Ms. Marchand, who has made 
culling the deer herd a key issue of her administration. Ms. Marchand 
said that the township was prepared to retain White Buffalo to shoot 
at least 200 deer this winter, at about $250 each, if the state attorney 
general rules that a state ban on high-powered rifles would not apply 
to a local deer-management project. A ruling is expected in early 
December. But a Princeton sharpshooting project, even if sanctioned 
by the state, could be opposed intensely by deer lovers and animal 
rights advocates. ``This sharpshooting idea is horrible, insane, barbaric,'' 
said Ms. Gund. ``It reminds me of the Final Solution. There has to 
be a better way.'' In the meantime, Princeton's animal control officer, 
Mark Johnson, is staying busy, since deer-car crashes are now a regular 
part of the rhythm of suburban life. Every day through the fall and 
early winter, he spends his mornings picking up the night's road kills. 
When the township bought him a new truck in August, it paid an extra 
$4,000 for a hydraulic lift on the back bumper. Its sole purpose is 
to make it easier for Johnson to deal with the heavy bodies. On a 
recent November morning, the platform dropped and rose seven times. 
Johnson piled the bodies in the woods, and later a state contractor 
was to come and cart them away. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>