<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981129.0126 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
In the first quarter of his 20th National Hockey League season, Wayne 
Gretzky's statistics weren't exactly Great Ones. He had only two goals, 
his shooting percentage was the worst among Ranger forwards, his plus-minus 
ratio was second-worst on the team and he led the league in turnovers. 
His foot speed, dwindling for many years, seemed about the same. But 
the deft hands that have created so many goals for so many others 
over so many seasons seemed to have lost some of their creative qualities. 
His name was nowhere near the top 10 scoring leaders. ``I just felt 
like I had a few bad games, and I probably started to get down on 
myself,'' Gretzky said Sunday after he helped the Rangers beat the 
Nashville Predators by 5-1 at Madison Square Garden. ``No matter what 
happens, confidence plays such a big part.'' In the last two games 
_ a tie in Pittsburgh on Friday and Sunday's victory _ the 37-year-old 
Gretzky has shown better form. After getting one assist against the 
Penguins, he got a goal and two assists against the expansion Predators. 
It was his first goal since Nov. 7 and his first 3-point game of the 
season. With Petr Nedved joining the Rangers in last week's trade 
with the Penguins, Gretzky now has less of a burden as the team's 
only accomplished center. And with John MacLean and Kevin Stevens 
on his wings, Gretzky may finally have found two veteran partners 
who can play at his deliberate pace and capitalize on his playmaking 
savvy. ``It's taken the pressure off me in the immediate sense that 
teams are aware of him,'' Gretzky said of Nedved. ``Teams understand 
that he's such a solid player. As time goes on here, matchups could 
prove to be a little different over the next little while.'' As for 
his linemates, Gretzky said, ``Kevin's so big and strong and MacLean's 
such a smart player that what you try to do is get them the puck.'' 
After Nedved and Gretzky gave the Rangers a 2-0 lead with even-strength 
goals in the first 10 minutes, Adam Graves made it 3-0 on the power 
play at 14 minutes 12 seconds before Darren Turcotte got one back 
for Nashville at 8:30 of the second. Gretzky then set up Brian Leetch 
on the power play at 11:38 of the second and Stevens at even strength 
at 6:57 of the third. Gretzky might have scored another late in the 
game, but he cracked a shot off the glass, wide of goalie Eric Fichaud, 
who replaced the starter Mike Dunham in the second period after Dunham 
left with a groin injury. MacLean had three assists, and most other 
Rangers played well against a chippy team that preferred to play a 
wide-open style and rarely bothered to cover Rangers, who were standing 
open in good position for shots or skating in full stride for passes. 
It was only the Rangers' second victory in eight games and it left 
them at 6-9-7, their 19 points in the standings even with the Predators 
after 22 games apiece. Mike Richter, the Ranger goalie, faced no Nashville 
shots in the first 15 minutes and then stopped 24 of the 25 that followed. 
Niklas Sundstrom, despite taking a pounding from various Predators, 
put five shots on net, set up Nedved's goal and showed signs of coming 
out of his seasonlong slump. The statistical report showed the visitors 
out-hitting the Rangers by 31-28. Many of those were gratuitous attempts 
to intimidate that were unanswered. With the fighting specialist P.J. 
Stock back on the Hartford farm club and his fellow ruffian Darren 
Langdon out of uniform, the Rangers again appeared vulnerable to bully 
tactics. It was the Rangers' first game at home after a 1-2-2 road 
trip, and they next play eight times in 16 nights, beginning Tuesday 
night at home against Florida. Behind the scenes, business deals are 
evolving. Neil Smith, the Rangers' president and general manager, 
said again Sunday that serious negotiations to sign Leetch to a long-term 
contract will begin this week. Leetch could become an unrestricted 
free agent on July 1. Smith also continues to seek a sharpshooting 
wing through a trade. With 11 defensemen with NHL experience either 
in New York or in Hartford, he has the depth at that position from 
which to deal. With Richter and Dan Cloutier guarding the net, one 
of them might also be available. With the four forward lines a mix-and-match 
collection, it is hard to know for sure who is expendable or coveted 
by other teams. John Muckler, the coach, has said the Rangers hope 
to be .500 by the end of December, in place to make a playoff run 
in the second half of the season. Since starting the season 0-4, his 
team has a respectable 6-5-7 record with its group personality and 
personnel still coming together. ``I think you can look for good things 
in the future,'' Muckler said. As for Gretzky, with most of his future 
behind him, there is still the hope that he is rounding into respectable 
midseason form. ``You get to a level of confidence that you get your 
second wind and your second energy,'' Gretzky said. ``The more you 
play, the better you play. I just feel good right now.'' 
</TEXT>
</DOC>