<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981129.0174 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
The New York Times said in an editorial for Monday, Nov. 30: New York 
City's economy is diverse, but no industry comes close to the financial 
business in its importance to the welfare of the city. The New York 
Stock Exchange, which has been on Wall Street for more than 200 years, 
is both the symbolic and actual center of that business. Now the exchange 
says it needs to expand its trading floor to make its operations more 
international and to remain competitive. The question that faces the 
Giuliani and Pataki administrations is whether a financial-aid package 
intended to keep the exchange in lower Manhattan is corporate welfare 
on a grand scale or a necessary investment to preserve the city's 
tax base. Keeping the exchange in its traditional location will require 
the largest subsidy package in city history, but the investment is 
justifiable, for the loss of the tax revenues generated by the exchange 
and related businesses would be devastating. The plan calls for the 
city and state to buy the block across Broad Street from the exchange's 
current facility _ between Broad and William Streets and between Wall 
Street and Exchange Place. The historic facade of the J.P. Morgan 
building at 23 Wall Street would be preserved as the buildings on 
the block were torn down. In their place would rise a large office 
tower, with the bottom floors containing the new trading area, and 
associated computer operations, while the upper floors would be rented 
out to corporate customers. The rent from the exchange and the payments 
in lieu of taxes from the developer of the office tower are expected 
to offset the $250 million to $300 million cost of acquiring the land. 
The city and state would pay up to $450 million to build the new trading 
area, with the exchange paying several hundred million dollars to 
outfit it. There would be $160 million in tax concessions. Such a 
generous package may seem excessive. But a decision by the exchange 
to leave lower Manhattan would damage the city's economy, and the 
exchange has threatened to move to New Jersey if a deal is not reached 
by Thursday. We understand why some oppose on principle any concession 
to the blackmailing tactics of businesses that threaten to move unless 
they get public assistance. But the reality is that if New York City 
refuses to play this game, other, hungrier cities and states will 
take advantage of that passivity. Then Manhattan, in particular, will 
see its prestige residents lured away like so many free agents. If 
the exchange did leave, the city and state would lose much of the 
income taxes now paid by those who work at the exchange. Many companies 
that need to be close to the exchange would also move, causing property 
values _ and property tax revenues _ to fall significantly. The New 
York Stock Exchange is the pre-eminent stock exchange in the world, 
but it faces challenges from Europe, where the new euro currency will 
encourage consolidation and major exchanges are trying to cooperate. 
The new trading floor will help the Big Board, and the taxes generated 
by its location in Manhattan will more than offset the high cost of 
this plan. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>