<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981129.0151 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
A new reading and writing test will be given to fourth graders across 
New York state early next year, and it is so different from traditional 
tests that teachers and parents can barely contain their panic. Like 
its predecessors, the test includes multiple-choice questions, with 
circles that must be filled in with a No. 2 pencil. But for the first 
time it also has pages of blank lines for children to take notes on 
a story read aloud, write literary criticism and craft a personal 
essay _ and it is given over three days. The test, called the English 
Language Arts test, is based on new standards that require fourth 
graders not only to read proficiently but also to write analytically 
about what they have read. Two-thirds of the test consists of writing 
about literature. Some teachers contend that not all 9-year-olds are 
ready for a test that requires so much abstract thinking and writing. 
``It's like a ride in an amusement park,'' said Nancy Baron, a teacher 
at the Chatsworth Avenue School, a public school in Larchmont. ``There 
are some children who shouldn't go on that ride right now because 
they are too short.'' The results of the test are sure to have major 
consequences. In New York City, for example, Schools Chancellor Rudy 
Crew has decreed that beginning in 2000, fourth-graders who flunk 
the test will not be promoted to fifth grade. And if the children 
fail, their schools will be judged as failues, too, subject to state 
monitoring and the possible removal of principals and teachers. In 
the suburbs, test scores help determine real estate values. The state 
is also introducing a new fourth-grade math test, and new English 
and math tests in the eighth grade, all subject to the new higher 
standards. Those tests are being given from June 1 to 4. But the anxiety 
over the English test is especially high because it will be given 
on the week of Jan. 11, an hour each day for three days. In the past, 
standardized tests were always given in the spring _ and always on 
a single day. Even teachers who believe that fourth graders can be 
trained to take the new English test are looking up and realizing 
that there are only six weeks to go _ just enough time to cram, at 
best. Mrs. Baron, the teacher from Larchmont, gave the pilot test 
in February and said that many children had trouble going beyond repetition 
of the facts in the story to inferential leaps. For instance, she 
said, after reading a story about a plague of toads, most children 
could describe how the toads had infested gardens and slept inside 
boots. But it was beyond them to connect those details to an essay 
question about ``how life had changed'' for the people of Australia. 
Many children complained, Mrs. Baron said, that the story did not 
describe life before the toads came. The demand for correct spelling, 
grammar and punctuation was also daunting, said Mrs. Baron, a teacher 
for 31 years. ``Children usually come in, they're big on run-on sentences,'' 
she said. ``They ignore punctuation, they're so interested in getting 
everything down. They love writing. They love reading. But the writing 
they do is mostly conversation, punctuated incorrectly, with every 
detail of somebody's life in it.'' Writing is such a personal act 
for young children, Mrs. Baron added, that failure could be devastating. 
``Let me give a short-answer test that doesn't take a child's soul 
and put it on paper,'' she said. In what many teachers agree is the 
hardest part of the test, on day two, the teacher must read a story 
out loud, twice. During the second reading, children must take notes 
in a given page in their test booklets. They are not allowed to see 
the text. Then they have 50 minutes to answer some short questions 
and draft two essays _ paying attention to grammar, spelling, punctuation 
and paragraph structure _ based on the reading they have heard. In 
an intensely visual culture, dominated by video, TV and computer games, 
many children have never developed the ability to retain what they 
hear, many educators warned. The State Board of Regents authorized 
development of the test in April 1994, before the current class of 
fourth-graders started school. It was developed by a statewide committee 
of teachers, in partnership with CTB/McGraw-Hill, a standardized-testing 
company. The new test puts New York among a handful of states, including 
Kentucky, Massachusetts and South Carolina, that have tried to rank 
students and schools by how well they meet a written standard of performance, 
rather than along a national curve that determines what is average, 
above and below average. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>