<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981129.0112 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
While unexpectedly warm weather brought hordes of shoppers to malls 
during the Thanksgiving weekend, most department store executives 
were expressing just cautious optimism about sales for the holiday 
season. ``It was an OK two days,'' said Michael Gould, chairman and 
chief executive of Bloomingdale's, a unit of Federated Department 
Stores. Referring to the percentile rise in sales over the comparable 
period a year ago, Gould added that Bloomingdale's saw a ``solid single-digit 
improvement'' over the weekend, led primarily by sales of armoires 
and other furniture, food, and housewares such as crystal. ``They're 
big days,'' he added, ``but they're only two of the top 20 days of 
the year.'' Burton Tansky, executive vice president of Neiman Marcus 
Group, expressed similar sentiments. ``We did fine,'' Tansky said, 
adding that popular items during the weekend were cashmere sweaters, 
fine jewelry and accessories like evening scarves and shawls. ``It 
was a good weekend.'' Noting that company executives were cautiously 
optimistic about the season, he added, ``but you never know in December.'' 
One thing analysts and most retailers agree on: Consumers stepped 
into this holiday shopping season feeling much more upbeat than they 
did even a month ago, aided in part by the recent resurgence of the 
stock market. But whether consumer confidence will translate into 
strong sales remains an unanswered question. Retailers would not even 
offer Thanksgiving weekend sales numbers or precise forecasts for 
the rest of the holiday season; perhaps they have learned a lesson 
from previous disappointments. After two years of sales that began 
strong during the Thanksgiving weekend but then fizzled by the end 
of December, even the brightest Thanksgiving forecast may not hold 
up. Thus far, the overall picture is good. General forecasts are for 
about a 6 percent increase in retail sales this season. Telecheck 
Services Inc., which tracks personal check use at more than 20,000 
stores each month, said that check use at department stores nationwide 
increased by 4.4 percent for the day after Thanksgiving, known as 
Black Friday because of its positive impact on retail profits. That 
gain was stronger than either last year's 2.2 percent increase or 
the 3.6 percent gain in 1996. The company expects a 3 percent to 5 
percent increase in check use in the holiday season, said William 
Ford, its senior economic adviser. While checks are not a preferred 
method of payment for most shoppers, Telecheck's numbers are often 
consistent with industry trends. But shoppers seem content to let 
retailers, especially those at larger department store chains, wait 
for any windfalls. Despite the excitement and promotions that Black 
Friday conjure up, the day after Thanksgiving is no longer the busiest 
shopping day of the year. The International Council of Shopping Centers 
said the biggest sales day last year was Dec. 20, and 44 percent of 
holiday sales took place from Dec. 15 to 24. The Friday after Thanksgiving 
usually ranks as the sixth to eighth busiest shopping day of the year, 
said John Konarski, the association's head of research. Last year, 
it was seventh and the Thanksgiving week accounted for only about 
9 percent of department stores' holiday sales, he said. America's 
Research Group, which tracks shopping trends, forecast a 20 percent 
increase in mall traffic compared with the weekend a year earlier, 
but by some accounts, more shoppers were still finishing their gift 
lists rather than picking up items. ``The weekend brings a lot of 
lookers and more bargain-oriented customers driven by sales'' promotions, 
said Michael Anthony, president and chief executive of Brookstone, 
a specialty retailer. Even though the company expects high single-digit 
percentile increases in the Christmas season and saw good sales rises 
during the weekend, most popular items like hammocks, croquet games, 
home office and gardening items will not be sold until the third week 
of December, he said. ``Thanksgiving weekend does not make Christmas,'' 
said Larry Mondry, executive vice president of CompUSA. Strong sellers 
for the company were computers priced less than $1,000, digital cameras 
and new video-game software, he said. Toy stores, discounters and 
online retailers seemed to buck the trend, with many reporting strong 
sales over the weekend. ``People were buying a lot of toys,'' said 
Stanley Greenman, chief executive at Noodle Kidoodle, a toy store 
chain based in Syosset, N.Y. The company awaits a new shipment of 
the popular Furby dolls but saw strong sales of educational computer 
software, Legos and classic board games, Greenman said. Amazon.com, 
the online retailer, saw a fourfold increase in sales over the weekend, 
compared with those in the period a year earlier, a company spokesman 
said. The company, which began by selling books, now offers compact 
discs, videos, personal electronics, gadgets and toys. During the 
weekend, ``Gone with the Wind'' and ``Casablanca'' sold well in the 
digital video-disk format. Children's boooks and portable CD players 
were also popular. Customers began lining up about 4 a.m. Friday for 
a chance to win shopping certificates and a new car at Target stores, 
said Susan Eich, a spokeswoman for Dayton Hudson, Target's parent 
corporation. Once inside, they scooped up toys like Teletubbies, handheld 
electronic games and lava lamps. At Dayton Hudson's other department 
stores, tastes ran toward items for the home like electric grills, 
breadmakers and apparel such as sweaters, holiday dresses and men's 
designer sportswear. Promotions, such as a year without interest payments, 
brought customers into jewelry stores, executives at Zale Corp. and 
Marks Brothers Jewelers said. Popular items in both chains included 
diamond bracelets and earrings and jewelry made with the blue stone 
tanzanite. Wellspark Group, which owns and operates 22 malls, primarily 
in New England, said it saw sales jumps of 2 percent to 10 percent 
during the weekend. This year, the malls offer an incentive program: 
Shoppers can receive gift certificates, discounts or free products 
depending on how much they spend. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>