<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981129.0091 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
In the scattered cities of Niger, they have talk radio of a different 
kind. It's more like walk-in radio. On Saturday and Sunday mornings, 
farmers and merchants and homemakers gather outside the independent 
stations run by Radio Anfani in Niamey, Maradi and Zinder to await 
the start of a two-hour program. They want to talk about their children's 
health or the price of tomatoes or the latest decree of the military 
government of Ibrahim Bare Mainassara. They want to talk about some 
of the news broadcast by Radio Anfani, like reports translated from 
Voice of America or the German service Deutsche Welle. ``We don't 
take telephone callers and put them on the air,'' explained Gremah 
Boucar, director general of Radio Anfani. Those who own telephones, 
he explained, are automatically considered rich, and ``it shouldn't 
be such a small circle'' of people doing the talking. For a fee equivalent 
to about $1 a year _ not so small in a country where per capita share 
of the gross domestic product is $200 a year _ listeners can join 
Radio Anfani's club, which has 36,000 members. Membership lets them 
talk to listeners and suggest programming changes or otherwise object 
to the material the stations broadcast. ``The only way to really be 
free is to accept criticism,'' Boucar said. In Niger, a landlocked 
country of 10 million people without Don Imus, Rush Limbaugh, Howard 
Stern, Arbitron ratings or democracy, radio is a truly intimate medium. 
When people want to talk, they walk in and talk. When the military 
_ sorry, maybe it was just people in stolen military uniforms _ wants 
to close down a station, it storms in and smashes the equipment. When 
people who control the military or police want to lodge a complaint 
about his news broadcasts, they take Gremah Boucar from home, stuff 
him in a bag, throw him on a flatbed truck and spend hours discussing 
how to kill him. Boucar, a 39-year-old who saw a journalist for the 
first time when Niger's president came to his village of Maine-Soroa 
30 years ago, is about as distant from New York's and Washington's 
brand of journalism as possible. His country is remote and obscure, 
often confused with its richer and more populous neighbor, Nigeria. 
His medium is radio. In the archipelago of settled communities in 
Africa, it is more ubiquitous and influential than any newspaper. 
He and his editorial committee create their 20-hour-a-day schedule 
with a practical eye. They produce programs on health (ways to prevent 
AIDS or diarrheal illness in infants), the economy (the price of food) 
and politics (including pronouncements of Mainassara's political opponents). 
Boucar's attitude toward his profession carries none of the overt 
cynicism about the business that tends to permeate discussions in 
this country. ``It seems to me that journalism goes with democracy,'' 
he said. To practice journalism, therefore, is to give life to democracy. 
``My moral obligation,'' he calls it. Such earnest simplicity can 
veer into the dreaded realm of platitude. But that is a risk the Committee 
to Protect Journalists is willing to take when it gives out its International 
Press Freedom awards. At its annual dinner last week, the group honored 
Boucar and four other journalists, from Indonesia, Peru, Belarus and 
Eritrea, who have been persecuted, arrested, tried and otherwise hindered 
by governments that have little history of _ or tolerance for _ a 
free press. It was an occasion for some of the profession's most accomplished 
or just plain famous members to take a quick refresher course in the 
underpinnings of the business. Sure, like any occasion that mixes 
professional pride with expensive food, tuxedos and celebrity, it 
had its Tom Wolfish moments. (What to do? Listen to Boucar's paean 
to democracy and a free press, or try to spot the actress Sharon Stone?) 
Still, celebrity watching and financial prodding aside, the persecuted 
foreign journalists and their pampered domestic counterparts have 
something to offer each other. When Boucar was arrested, the outcry 
of groups like the Committee to Protect Journalists, and the accompanying 
protests by American diplomats, helped free him, or so he tells it. 
When Anna Zarkova, a Bulgarian journalist who covers her country's 
mafia, had acid thrown on her face, blinding one eye, as she walked 
down a Sofia street six months ago, it was the material and psychic 
support of groups like Committee to Protect Journalists and the International 
Women's Media Foundation that helped lift her from a profound depression, 
or so she told friends. In return, Boucar offers a reminder that simple 
news broadcasts and open-mike programs and a willingness to reflect 
diverse political viewpoints can be a precious commodity in countries 
where the life expectancy of a person is less than 50 years and the 
life expectancy of a democracy is less than three. After nearly 20 
years, the event ``still maintains its power,'' said Gene Roberts, 
the committee's chairman and a former managing editor of The New York 
Times. ``If anything, it seems to increase each year. The dinner always 
runs an hour and a half too long. There's only one way to make it 
stay within space limitations _ severely limit the time that the awardees 
have.'' That, the group is unwilling to do _ it would be like editing 
the apostles. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>