<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981129.0067 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Vadim Voloboyev's day begins before sunrise, when he scurries over 
to a weather-beaten barn to supervise the morning milking. It is not 
the easiest job. Two hundred cows are crammed together in a stockade 
originally built for pigs. The farm cannot afford new conveyor belts 
to dispense the cheap feed or remove the pungent manure. It might 
all be worth it if milk production helped keep the farm solvent. But 
milk is turning out to be a money-losing proposition. ``We work hard,'' 
said Viktor Remizov, director of the Savino farm. ``But we have no 
money to invest in production. There is no way to get credit. Taxes 
are high. There is simply no easy way out of our situation.'' For 
all of the vaunted talk of building a free market, agriculture is 
the least reformed sector of the Russian economy. The Communist-led 
parliament has refused to approve the sale of farmland. The nation's 
chronically inefficient collective farms have been relabeled, not 
reorganized. The Kremlin has done little to help the fiercely conservative 
farmers cope with the brave new world of capitalism. Their distress 
has only been compounded by the virtual collapse of the banking system 
and a ruinous summer drought. As winter begins to grip the heartland, 
the results have been distressingly clear: Russia's grain harvest 
is at its lowest point in 45 years. Milk and meat production has continued 
to plummet. Russia remains heavily dependent on imports of food _ 
so dependent that the Kremlin has put aside its pride and sought almost 
5 million tons of food aid from the United States and Europe. It is 
a bitter legacy for a nation where ties to the land seem almost primordial 
and where 100 million citizens tend their own modest plots to grow 
fruit and vegetables. ``Farming requires good management and capital,'' 
said Viktor Lishchenko, a leading agricultural specialist at a government 
academy of economics. ``Unfortunately, Russia does not have either. 
Food security is a big, big issue.'' Nestled on 4,000 acres near the 
storied city of Novgorod in the northwest, Savino is a textbook case 
of Russia's neglect of agricultural reform. During the heyday of Soviet 
power, this was a state-owned collective, grandly called the 50th 
Anniversary of the Soviet Union Farm. It had a bloated work force 
and fought a daily battle against pilferage. But its production of 
wheat, meat and milk was buoyed by state-subsidized feed, fertilizer 
and tractors. The demise of the Soviet Union gave workers an opportunity 
to break free of the collective. No one did. Each worker received 
a handsome certificate allowing them to take about 10 acres of tilled 
land and five acres of pasture and farm it for themselves. Instead, 
the workers leased their land back to the farm, keeping only tiny 
plots for themselves to grow vegetables and perhaps raise a pig or 
a calf. ``Nobody wanted to leave,'' recalled Remizov, who also was 
the director of the Savino farm in Soviet times. ``People seem to 
be afraid of the uncertainty and financial difficulties.'' It is a 
common story. Few of Russia's 27,000 former collective farms have 
been broken up or restructured. Russia has some 275,000 private farms, 
but they are generally far smaller than collective farms and account 
for a mere 5 percent of farmland. Nor is the number of private farms 
increasing. Without the right to buy and sell land, many investors 
are reluctant to pour their money into Russian agriculture. Cash-poor 
farmers cannot use their land as collateral to obtain loans. Programs 
to teach farmers accounting and other management skills are rare. 
And Russia lacks the infrastructure to develop a market that would 
distribute domestic produce across the vast land. ``If you gave the 
Russian farmers all the modern equipment in the world, it would not 
solve their problem,'' said Christian Foster, an expert on Russian 
farming at the U.N. Department of Agriculture. ``They need to operate 
their farms like a real business.'' Banding together, certainly, has 
not brought Savino's farmers prosperity. Officially Savino is now 
a joint stock company; in reality it operates much as it did when 
it was state owned, but without the government handouts it used to 
count on to stay afloat. Savino's work force remains swollen, if underpaid. 
Some 500 people live here, but since many are pensioners, only about 
200 work the farm. A comparable farm in the United States would be 
run by a handful of workers. Seed, feed, fertilizer and tractors now 
must be bought in the marketplace at sky-high prices. Big dairies, 
meat factories and grain elevators have become regional monopolies, 
pushing down farm revenues by paying less for raw milk, livestock 
and wheat. Loans are hard to come by. The regional government in Novgorod 
offered the farm a two-month loan at 25 percent, but the farm cannot 
afford to pay it back over such a short period and turned it down. 
So instead of the 1,500 tons of fertilizer a year it used in Soviet 
times, Savino is making do this year with 120 tons. And instead of 
buying new tractors and harvesters, old ones are lined up in a muddy 
lot awaiting the spare parts that the farm scrambles to buy. ``We 
don't have a chance to buy basic equipment,'' Remizov said. ``If I 
could get a loan for four years, I might take it.'' Savino lost a 
million rubles (about $59,000) over the past two years. That's normal; 
about 80 percent of Russian farms are unprofitable. They survive through 
barter, delaying tax payments, paying their workers with food instead 
of money or squeezing tax breaks and other concessions from regional 
authorities. What most farms have not done is reorganize by laying 
off unneeded workers, concentrating on crops that are most profitable 
or introducing modern business techniques. At Savino the old ways 
are apparent at the fetid paddock where Voloboyev oversees the dairy 
cows. The feed is short on the nutrients needed to raise milk production. 
The conveyor belts that distribute feed are old and rickety. The milking 
is labor intensive. Each row of 40 cows is assigned to a milkmaid, 
who tends to them one-by-one and then carries away the steaming pails. 
A milkmaid receives 400 to 600 rubles a month (about $24 to $35) for 
her efforts. The animals themselves are filthy. A milkmaid is paid 
a 10-kopek bonus for keeping each of the cows clean for a month _ 
less than one cent a cow. Most simply refuse. ``I ask them to clean 
the cows,'' said Voloboyev, ``but they say, `Why don't you do it yourself?''' 
The faltering state of agriculture has powerful political implications. 
Many farm regions are already Communist strongholds, and without reform 
they are likely to stay that way. Farms and teetering military plants 
make up much of the ``Red Belt,'' a swath of territory across southern 
and central Russia. The grinding inefficiencies have also made Russia 
increasingly dependent on foreign supplies of food. Because of poor 
feed and other shortages, it takes the Russians about 65 days to raise 
a chicken to market weight, compared with 40 days in the United States. 
Livestock herds have also shrunk. Before the ruble collapsed in August, 
Russia imported more than a third of its food. In major cities like 
Moscow and St. Petersburg, the percentage was far higher. ``In most 
of the farms of northwest Russia, veterinary work has deteriorated,'' 
said Andrei Katargin, manager of Novgorod's leading meat-packaging 
plant. ``The selection of forage is bad. The meat we bought from Australia, 
Canada and Europe before the crisis was not only of high quality; 
it was cheaper than the meat from the St. Petersburg area, two hours 
away.'' To a considerable extent, the failures have been cushioned 
by the small garden plots most Russians maintain, which yield most 
of the nation's potatoes and vegetables. Still, even before the latest 
financial crisis, Russians were cutting back on meat, instead eating 
potatoes, pasta and other cheaper foods. Then this year, bad luck 
came in threes. Drought swept across the heartland. Garden plots were 
hit by potato blight. The collapse of the ruble and the paralysis 
of Russia's banking system took a brutal toll on imports. Russia's 
harvest may recover somewhat next year if the weather improves. But 
its land will still not be nearly as productive as it could be. And 
while the government talks about reforming the farm sector, it has 
yet to present a cogent plan. ``To succeed in modern farming today, 
you need to be an agronomist, an expert in cattle breeding, a specialist 
on market research, a financier and a computer programmer,'' said 
Sergei Saidov, one of the handful of successful private farmers in 
the region. ``But in Russia they simply took the old collective farms 
and left them to their own devices. Now the food security of the country 
is at risk.'' 
</TEXT>
</DOC>