<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981129.0077 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
It has been carefully preserved in the archives for more than 50 years, 
a handwritten receipt from the French Internal Police for 51,135 francs 
_ worth about $13,000 today _ and $450 seized from Henri Israel of 
Limoges on his arrival in the French concentration camp in Drancy, 
north of Paris, on Oct. 30, 1943. Where he went, he and 11,000 others 
for whom similar receipts were made and kept during the German occupation 
in World War II, is known: the Nazi death camps at Auschwitz, where 
nearly 75,000 French Jews were sent. Few returned. But what happened 
to the money? Has Germany, has France made restitution? Has some French 
bank been using the money all this time (if it was not seized by the 
Nazis)? If so, what kind of compensation should be made, and who should 
get it? These are among the questions that France now appears to be 
ready to answer, according to Jacques Fredj, director of the Center 
for Contemporary Jewish Documentation and the Memorial to the Unknown 
Jewish Martyr, where many records are kept. After 50 years of suppressing 
memories of what the collaborationist Vichy government did to the 
Jews under the Nazi occupation, French authorities have been trying 
harder since 1995 to do justice to their survivors. Government commissions 
are poring over long-closed files like the ones in the Jewish archive, 
in the once heavily Jewish district of the Marais in the heart of 
Paris. But for French Jews, the question of how hard to push for restitution 
or compensation remains difficult. France did make a major effort 
to restore seized assets after the war, but then swept the loose ends 
under the carpet and mostly forgot about them. ``With Switzerland, 
everything was done wrong,'' said Fredj, referring to Swiss indignation 
over $2 billion in claims that Holocaust survivors are pressing against 
Swiss banks for handling gold seized by the Nazis. But the Swiss, 
unlike the French, had not previously been confronted with charges 
of collaborating, wittingly or unwittingly, with the Germans during 
the war. ``Political pressure was put on the Swiss authorities before 
experts had done the necessary work to establish the validity and 
extent of claims,'' Fredj said. ``Here it is much better to wait and 
find out what the experts determine before pressing any demands.'' 
After the war, France did its best to find heirs of death camp victims 
and to restore property, cash and bank accounts that the Nazis and 
their collaborators had seized from them and from the 225,000 to 250,000 
other Jews living in France in 1940 when the Nazis marched in. But 
many deported Jews never returned and had no survivors to claim their 
property. According to Henri Hajdenberg, president of the Representative 
Council of Jewish Institutions in France, 15,000 to 20,000 safe-deposit 
boxes and accounts seized from Jews went unclaimed after the war and 
stayed with the French banks holding them. ``Probably 70 percent of 
the bank assets were returned,'' Hajdenberg said. ``But we don't know 
what the banks have been doing with the rest. Morally, there can be 
no question of leaving money that belonged to victims of the Holocaust 
in the hands of private or nationalized companies.'' One group of 
survivors living in the United States brought a class action suit 
last year in federal court in Brooklyn, N.Y., against large French 
banks to recover assets like these. With an international conference 
on Holocaust-era assets starting in Washington on Monday to discuss 
issues that museums, art dealers and collectors face in dealing with 
looted artwork, French officials have become more willing to consider 
new claims. Last year, the government set up a blue-ribbon panel under 
Jean Matteoli, a prominent banker and politician, to try to inventory 
every artwork, building and bank note illegally confiscated during 
the occupation, and determine what to do about those that could not 
be restored to their owners. ``We've made a lot of progress,'' said 
Adolphe Steg, a surgeon and Jewish civic leader who is a member of 
the Matteoli commission. ``There are hundreds of thousands of documents 
and other records that we have had to go through, but insurance companies 
and banks have studied their archives, too, and we are getting there. 
We expect to publish an interim report at the end of the year.'' Prime 
Minister Lionel Jospin has announced an increase of nearly $2 million 
in the commission's budget next year. He also said the government 
would create a new official body to examine individual claims by victims 
of anti-Semitic occupation laws and their heirs. But Hajdenberg, a 
prominent lawyer, said the real question was what France should do 
to compensate for actions that are irreparable. ``The essential, fundamental 
aspect of the restitution question is historical knowledge and its 
dissemination,'' he said. ``This question should not be obscured by 
demands for money.'' With Jospin in the audience, Hajdenberg proposed 
at a dinner Saturday night that the French government create a national 
Holocaust memorial. Jospin pledged $8.8 million in government money 
to expand the center in the Marais, run by a foundation led by Eric 
de Rothschild, and said that perhaps this would make a start. ``A 
foundation to teach the history of totalitarian movements would help 
make sure something like the Holocaust could never happen again,'' 
Hajdenberg said. ``Its endowment should be on the scale of the economic 
depredations committed against the Jews of France.'' 
</TEXT>
</DOC>