<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981129.0188 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Even the great teams, every now and then, play a game so bad that 
they want to burn the game film. The Denver Broncos are a great team, 
but they played in one of the ugliest games of the season against 
the San Diego Chargers on Sunday night. After a first half that included 
eight turnovers by the teams, the Broncos settled down thanks to the 
steady influence of their offensive stars: rushes by running back 
Terrell Davis as well as quarterback John Elway's passes to Ed McCaffrey, 
Rod Smith and Shannon Sharpe. Denver's first drive in the third quarter 
went 95 yards in 8 minutes 20 seconds and ended with Elway making 
a great 18-yard throw to Sharpe in the end zone. It was the Broncos' 
best drive of the game, and it gave Denver a commanding 28-10 lead. 
More important, the Broncos' 31-16 victory at Qualcomm Stadium keeps 
alive the most-watched streak in sports. The Broncos improved to 12-0 
with four games remaining. The Super Bowl champions are trying to 
win not just 16 games, but 19, which would give them another Super 
Bowl title. Denver is only the fourth team in National Football League 
history to go undefeated in 12 games, joining the 1934 Chicago Bears, 
the 1972 Miami Dolphins and the 1985 Bears. The Broncos' dreams almost 
came to an end on Sunday night. Elway threw four touchdown passes, 
but also three interceptions, and the Denver offense was sluggish 
and sloppy in the second quarter. Then came the third quarter, and 
Bronco receivers were wide open. Davis, who had only 32 yards in the 
first half, squeaked through tight holes in the second half. While 
Davis was not a huge factor, he still passed the 1,500-yard mark for 
the season, making him only the second player in league history to 
rush for at least 1,500 yards in three consecutive seasons. The Detroit 
Lions' Barry Sanders did it from 1994-97. This game could have been 
one of the possible roadblocks in Denver's quest for an undefeated 
season. First, the Broncos might have lost some incentive because 
they knew coming in that, hours earlier, Oakland had lost to Washington, 
which meant the Broncos had captured the American Football Conference 
West before they even took the field. Second, the Chargers had not 
allowed a 100-yard game by an opposing rusher all year. They had shut 
down good running backs like Buffalo's Antowain Smith, Tennessee's 
Eddie George, Indianapolis's Marshall Faulk, Oakland's Napoleon Kaufman 
and, yes, even Davis. Earlier this year, Davis was held to a season-low 
69 yards on 20 carries by the San Diego defense. The Broncos still 
won easily, but that game left a bad taste in the mouth of Davis, 
who is from the San Diego area and likes to do well against the Chargers 
no matter where the game is played. The Chargers knew that the only 
chance they had to beat Denver was to jump on the Broncos early and 
keep the score close. That was because Denver had outscored its opponents 
this season by 131-23 in the first quarter. And San Diego scored first. 
When Denver made a rare mistake _ Elway bobbled a snap and the ball 
was recovered by linebacker Junior Seau at the Broncos' 25 _the Chargers 
scored, although they managed only a 27-yard field goal by John Carney. 
That seemed like a bad omen, because a turnover like that should produce 
more than 3 points. Sure enough, Denver got two quick touchdowns, 
on passes to McCaffrey of 15 and 37 yards, for an early 14-3 lead. 
But San Diego was not ready to capitulate. Finding inspiration in 
the sometimes good play of the backup quarterback Craig Whelihan, 
who was starting in place of the benched Ryan Leaf, and the great 
play of Seau, the Chargers cut the lead to 4 points after a 13-yard 
touchdown on a draw play by running back Terrell Fletcher. The teams 
then went through a period of sloppy play. Elway was sacked by Seau, 
and Chargers running back Kenny Bynum fumbled at the Denver 5-yard 
line when San Diego could have taken the lead. That was followed by 
an interception of Elway by Charles Dimry, who made an over-the-shoulder 
catch of a pass intended for McCaffrey. More sloppiness: Whelihan 
was intercepted by cornerback Darrius Johnson. Then Dimry picked off 
Elway again. During one stretch in the second quarter, there was almost 
a turnover a minute. At this point, the Broncos were playing down 
to the level of their opponent. That continued when, with less than 
two minutes to go in the half, Elway was picked off by Greg Jackson 
for the Denver quarterback's third interception of the game. Then 
Whelihan was intercepted again, this time by linebacker John Mobley. 
The Broncos capitalized on the last interception when wide receiver 
Rod Smith caught a 13-yard touchdown pass. Denver finally began to 
pull away, gaining a 21-10 lead at halftime. But it had been ugly. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>