<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981129.0100 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Just last month, Japan had seemed to be making major progress in laying 
World War II to rest, forthrightly apologizing to South Koreans for 
its behavior and receiving something of an absolution from the visiting 
Korean president. Then President Jiang Zemin of China arrived on the 
first visit ever by a Chinese head of state and asked for a similar 
apology. And suddenly, like a forgotten old jack-in-the-box, history 
leaped out of the past to roil the present and future. Japanese Prime 
Minister Keizo Obuchi offered Jiang the traditional welcome gift _ 
a statement of ``deep remorse'' for Japan's war-time conduct _ but 
Jiang wanted an actual formal written apology. And Japan refused. 
The grim shadowboxing these days as Jiang travels around Japan on 
a six-day visit, exhorting his hosts to confront their past while 
he is told to pipe down, underscores the degree to which East Asia's 
history dominates the present. Here, the most important tensions are 
not rooted in present-day disagreements but rather in 60-year-old 
wounds that have never healed. Jiang's visit, which ends Monday, has 
achieved progress in such areas as youth exchanges and environmental 
cooperation. But instead of easing the most important source of tensions 
between the two great powers of East Asia _ the common history that 
divides them _ the visit seems to have backfired and left the region 
quarreling as painfully as ever about responsibility for the past. 
To Chinese, Japan's reluctance to apologize formally suggests a dark 
ambivalence about one of the bloodiest invasions in human history. 
Many Chinese are honestly fearful of Japan's long-run intentions, 
and some passionately warn Americans not to be fooled by a Japan that 
they believe is itching to rise up in arms again. Chinese are outraged 
when Japanese officials periodically suggest that the Rape of Nanking 
_ in which Japanese troops massacred as many as 200,000 Chinese in 
1937 _ was much ado about nothing or that Japan was not an aggressor 
in the war. ``Some Japanese, even in high positions, have distorted 
history and tried to gloss over Japan's invasion of China,'' Jiang 
declared Saturday. ``The Chinese people have felt hurt because of 
this conduct.'' To Japanese, who often feel that half their diplomacy 
in Asia is spent bowing abjectly in regret for events that occurred 
before most of today's Japanese were born, Jiang's behavior has been 
impolite and calculating, simply an effort to push the guilt button 
and gain more concessions. Moreover, most Japanese see the most important 
threat to peace in the region in the long run coming from China, and 
there has been growing annoyance within Japan at the Chinese demands. 
``Isn't this a finished problem?'' asked Hiromu Nonaka, Japan's chief 
cabinet secretary and one of the country's most powerful politicians. 
``There is a school of thought that Japan has already reflected on 
its past and apologized to China any number of times already.'' Jiang 
was originally scheduled to visit in September, and if he had come 
then the summit might have gone much more smoothly. But then Jiang 
delayed the trip because of the floods at home. In the meantime, President 
Kim Dae Jung of South Korea visited Japan early last month, and the 
meeting went extraordinarily well. Never had Japan apologized so graciously 
to a neighboring country for war-time conduct, and never had another 
nation accepted the apology with such magnanimity. Obuchi, according 
to a written statement of his meeting with Kim, ``expressed remorseful 
repentance and heartfelt apology.'' Kim responded that it was time 
to move on and called for a ``future-oriented relationship.'' When 
Jiang's visit was rescheduled, he demanded the same kind of written 
apology that Kim had received. Japan refused, saying that its maximum 
offer was an oral apology by Obuchi and a standard written expression 
of deep remorse. Why the sharp distinction? The explanation is partly 
linguistic, because the term that is usually translated into English 
as remorse _ ``hansei'' _ is actually a bit vaguer than that. It can 
mean remorse, but it can also mean self-reflection about even minor 
matters. A child, for example, might be told to show ``hansei'' for 
some misdemeanor, and the term is far less weighty than the various 
words for apologies. Akitaka Saiki, Obuchi's spokesman, offered a 
couple of reasons why Japan was willing to apologize in writing to 
South Korea but not to China. First, he said, Japan had colonized 
Korea but not China, and so the circumstances were different. Second, 
he added, Japan's emperor had already gone to China and apologized 
for the war, while the emperor has not visited Korea yet. It is true 
that Japan annexed the Korean peninsula and forced Koreans to speak 
Japanese and take Japanese names, something that never happened in 
China. But Japan also did establish a puppet state in Manchuria after 
invading it in 1931, and it dropped plague germs over China to start 
epidemics and killed and tortured far more Chinese than Koreans. Moreover, 
although Emperor Akihito did go to China, he quite deliberately did 
not apologize for the war. He instead simply expressed deep sadness 
about ``an unfortunate period in which my country inflicted great 
suffering on the people of China.'' The real reason for the recent 
difference in apologies to Japan and Korea seems to go deeper. Under 
the previous South Korean president, Kim Young Sam, Japanese relations 
with South Korea were just as testy as relations with China. But Kim 
Dae Jung was perceived as genuinely eager to start a new chapter in 
relations. ``While President Kim made it clear that he would like 
to settle past history,'' Japanese Foreign Minister Masahiko Koumura 
told reporters, ``it was not necessarily the case'' with Jiang. Indeed, 
many diplomats and scholars say that China's leaders have been less 
interested in healing the wounds of history than in reminding everyone 
of their existence. The Communist Party derives its legitimacy in 
part from the spirited resistance it led against Japanese invaders, 
and whenever it wants something from Tokyo it thunders about Japanese 
war brutality. Perhaps for these reasons, there has been a remarkable 
inflation in the number of Chinese reported killed in the war with 
Japan. Immediately after the war, China announced that Japan had killed 
1.75 million of its people, although that figure included only soldiers; 
it was considered impossible to determine how many civilians had been 
killed. After it came to power, the Chinese Communist Party declared 
that 9.32 million Chinese had been killed, and that figure stood for 
many years. Finally, in a speech in 1995, Jiang raised the estimate 
to 35 million, and now that is the official Chinese figure. Jiang 
repeated the 35 million estimate in his speeches in Japan, and added: 
``I, as a witness of history, have the responsibility to convey the 
historical facts to the younger generation.'' But in most respects 
the Communist Party has done its best to cover up modern history. 
Far more Chinese were killed by the Communist Party _ 30 million in 
the man-made famine of the early 1960s alone _ than by the Japanese 
army. When Chinese scholars raise those issues, the Communist Party 
has emphasized the need to forget about past mistakes and move on. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>