<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981129.0055 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
In a changing world, it is reassuring to report that the majestic 
Christmas tree rose as expected on the stage of the New York State 
Theater on Friday night. The children at the Stahlbaum family's holiday 
party had near-exemplary manners and dancers small and grown filled 
the stage with the kind of delicate color that has brought generations 
of families back to ``The Nutcracker'' year after year. Yes, it is 
``Nutcracker'' time again. The New York City Ballet will present George 
Balanchine's magical production through Jan. 3 at the New York State 
Theater. And if this year's opening performance was not quite magical, 
it got the ``Nutcracker'' season off to a good enough start. As City 
Ballet celebrates its 50th year, all performances of ``The Nutcracker'' 
are dedicated to Maria Tallchief, for whom Balanchine created the 
role of the Sugarplum Fairy in 1954. It is Ms. Tallchief whom ballerinas 
today must blame for the understated but difficult choreography for 
the Sugarplum Fairy and the split-second timing and off-kilter partnering 
of the climactic second-act grand pas de deux. Her daring and control, 
her dazzling technical skill and her cool passion are all embodied 
by the Sugarplum Fairy. Kyra Nichols, Friday's Sugarplum Fairy, brought 
her own delicacy and slightly distant warmth to the role, particularly 
in the first moments of her entrance solo, recalling that one of Balanchine's 
missions was to make music visible. Ms. Nichols' feet, acutely nibbling 
up the stage at first, moved into gliding bourrees that suddenly seemed 
an object lesson for the gliding baby angels who proceeded her, demonstrating 
what they too might one day achieve as grown-up dancers. Lyrical and 
fluid, Ms. Nichols brought nuance to the pas de deux that balanced 
the sometimes too-reckless dancing of Damian Woetzel, her Cavalier. 
They began the duet like the pros they are, catching the musical and 
dance climaxes without overdoing them. Ms. Nichols continued to do 
so, especially in a chain of fast pique turns that were a model of 
ebullient restraint. But from his solo on, Woetzel often looked like 
a refugee from ``Le Corsaire'' rather than an inhabitant of the gentle 
``Nutcracker'' Land of Sweets. Wendy Whelan's Dewdrop paused in flight 
in several beautifully shaped arabesques, but her generally well-danced 
performance was diminished by the brittleness of her attack. One's 
eye kept straying to the richness and glamorous warmth of Jenifer 
Ringer's dancing in the much less demanding second lead roles performed 
with Pascale van Kipnis in this divertissement. Monique Meunier was 
much too energetic a Coffee. Benjamin Millepied turned in a refreshingly 
dry and witty performance as Tea, and Tom Gold brought an interestingly 
burnished quality to the hoop tricks as the lead Candy Cane. The Marzipan 
Shepherdesses, led by Samantha Allen, looked as if they had overdosed 
on adrenaline, however, and Jason Fowler was a bland Mother Ginger. 
Robert La Fosse continues to explore and deepen his characterization 
of Herr Drosselmeier, the mysterious honorary uncle whose gift of 
a nutcracker is central to the E.T.A. Hoffmann story. This Drosselmeier 
was a spidery, giddy old gent who was almost as excitable as the children. 
His billowing, white, wispy hair was the scariest image in the nightmare 
scene. Jan Burkhard and Zali Grinberg, who played little Marie and 
the little Nutcracker Prince, were models of elegant deportment. Zakary 
Yermolenko was almost too believably naughty, though adorable, as 
Marie's brother, Fritz. The children, students at the School of American 
Ballet rehearsed by Garielle Whittle, were all first rate, standing 
out in the Polichinelles section that is Balanchine's loveliest gift 
to child dancers. The cast also included Robert Lyon as the rambunctious 
Mouse King and Robert Wersinger, appropriately starchy in a first 
performance of the Soldier solo. Hugo Fiorato conducted the Tchaikovsky 
score. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>